
================================================================================
[Thus Spake Zarathustra (짜라투스트라는 이렇게 말했다)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Thus Spake Zarathustra: A Book for All and None
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Thus Spake Zarathustra: A Book for All and None

Author: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

Translator: Thomas Common


        
Release date: December 1, 1999 [eBook #1998]
                Most recently updated: April 10, 2023

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1998

Credits: Sue Asscher and David Widger
        Revised by Richard Tonsing.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA: A BOOK FOR ALL AND NONE ***




THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA

A BOOK FOR ALL AND NONE


By Friedrich Nietzsche


Translated By Thomas Common




CONTENTS.


     INTRODUCTION BY MRS FORSTER-NIETZSCHE.


     THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA.

     FIRST PART.

     Zarathustra’s Prologue.

     Zarathustra’s Discourses.

     I.  The Three Metamorphoses.

     II.  The Academic Chairs of Virtue.

     III.  Backworldsmen.

     IV.  The Despisers of the Body.

     V.  Joys and Passions.

     VI.  The Pale Criminal.

     VII.  Reading and Writing.

     VIII.  The Tree on the Hill.

     IX.  The Preachers of Death.

     X.  War and Warriors.

     XI.  The New Idol.

     XII.  The Flies in the Market-place.

     XIII.  Chastity.

     XIV.  The Friend.

     XV.  The Thousand and One Goals.

     XVI.  Neighbour-Love.

     XVII.  The Way of the Creating One.

     XVIII.  Old and Young Women.

     XIX.  The Bite of the Adder.

     XX.  Child and Marriage.

     XXI.  Voluntary Death.

     XXII.  The Bestowing Virtue.


     SECOND PART.

     XXIII.  The Child with the Mirror.

     XXIV.  In the Happy Isles.

     XXV.  The Pitiful.

     XXVI.  The Priests.

     XXVII.  The Virtuous.

     XXVIII.  The Rabble.

     XXIX.  The Tarantulas.

     XXX.  The Famous Wise Ones.

     XXXI.  The Night-Song.

     XXXII.  The Dance-Song.

     XXXIII.  The Grave-Song.

     XXXIV.  Self-Surpassing.

     XXXV.  The Sublime Ones.

     XXXVI.  The Land of Culture.

     XXXVII.  Immaculate Perception.

     XXXVIII.  Scholars.

     XXXIX.  Poets.

     XL.  Great Events.

     XLI.  The Soothsayer.

     XLII.  Redemption.

     XLIII.  Manly Prudence.

     XLIV.  The Stillest Hour.


     THIRD PART.

     XLV.  The Wanderer.

     XLVI.  The Vision and the Enigma.

     XLVII.  Involuntary Bliss.

     XLVIII.  Before Sunrise.

     XLIX.  The Bedwarfing Virtue.

     L.  On the Olive-Mount.

     LI.  On Passing-by.

     LII.  The Apostates.

     LIII.  The Return Home.

     LIV.  The Three Evil Things.

     LV.  The Spirit of Gravity.

     LVI.  Old and New Tables.

     LVII.  The Convalescent.

     LVIII.  The Great Longing.

     LIX.  The Second Dance-Song.

     LX.  The Seven Seals.


     FOURTH AND LAST PART.

     LXI.  The Honey Sacrifice.

     LXII.  The Cry of Distress.

     LXIII.  Talk with the Kings.

     LXIV.  The Leech.

     LXV.  The Magician.

     LXVI.  Out of Service.

     LXVII.  The Ugliest Man.

     LXVIII.  The Voluntary Beggar.

     LXIX.  The Shadow.

     LXX.  Noon-Tide.

     LXXI.  The Greeting.

     LXXII.  The Supper.

     LXXIII.  The Higher Man.

     LXXIV.  The Song of Melancholy.

     LXXV.  Science.

     LXXVI.  Among Daughters of the Desert.

     LXXVII.  The Awakening.

     LXXVIII.  The Ass-Festival.

     LXXIX.  The Drunken Song.

     LXXX.  The Sign.


     APPENDIX.

     Notes on “Thus Spake Zarathustra” by Anthony M. Ludovici.




INTRODUCTION BY MRS FORSTER-NIETZSCHE.

HOW ZARATHUSTRA CAME INTO BEING.


“Zarathustra” is my brother’s most personal work; it is the history of
his most individual experiences, of his friendships, ideals, raptures,
bitterest disappointments and sorrows. Above it all, however, there
soars, transfiguring it, the image of his greatest hopes and remotest
aims. My brother had the figure of Zarathustra in his mind from his very
earliest youth: he once told me that even as a child he had dreamt of
him. At different periods in his life, he would call this haunter of his
dreams by different names; “but in the end,” he declares in a note on
the subject, “I had to do a PERSIAN the honour of identifying him with
this creature of my fancy. Persians were the first to take a broad and
comprehensive view of history. Every series of evolutions, according
to them, was presided over by a prophet; and every prophet had his
‘Hazar,’—his dynasty of a thousand years.”

All Zarathustra’s views, as also his personality, were early conceptions
of my brother’s mind. Whoever reads his posthumously published writings
for the years 1869–82 with care, will constantly meet with passages
suggestive of Zarathustra’s thoughts and doctrines. For instance, the
ideal of the Superman is put forth quite clearly in all his writings
during the years 1873–75; and in “We Philologists”, the following
remarkable observations occur:—

“How can one praise and glorify a nation as a whole?—Even among the
Greeks, it was the INDIVIDUALS that counted.”

“The Greeks are interesting and extremely important because they reared
such a vast number of great individuals. How was this possible? The
question is one which ought to be studied.

“I am interested only in the relations of a people to the rearing of
the individual man, and among the Greeks the conditions were unusually
favourable for the development of the individual; not by any means owing
to the goodness of the people, but because of the struggles of their
evil instincts.

“WITH THE HELP OF FAVOURABLE MEASURES GREAT INDIVIDUALS MIGHT BE REARED
WHO WOULD BE BOTH DIFFERENT FROM AND HIGHER THAN THOSE WHO HERETOFORE
HAVE OWED THEIR EXISTENCE TO MERE CHANCE. Here we may still be hopeful:
in the rearing of exceptional men.”

The notion of rearing the Superman is only a new form of an ideal
Nietzsche already had in his youth, that “THE OBJECT OF MANKIND SHOULD
LIE IN ITS HIGHEST INDIVIDUALS” (or, as he writes in “Schopenhauer as
Educator”: “Mankind ought constantly to be striving to produce great
men—this and nothing else is its duty.”) But the ideals he most revered
in those days are no longer held to be the highest types of men. No,
around this future ideal of a coming humanity—the Superman—the poet
spread the veil of becoming. Who can tell to what glorious heights man
can still ascend? That is why, after having tested the worth of our
noblest ideal—that of the Saviour, in the light of the new valuations,
the poet cries with passionate emphasis in “Zarathustra”:

“Never yet hath there been a Superman. Naked have I seen both of them,
the greatest and the smallest man:—

All-too-similar are they still to each other. Verily even the greatest
found I—all-too-human!”—

The phrase “the rearing of the Superman,” has very often been
misunderstood. By the word “rearing,” in this case, is meant the act of
modifying by means of new and higher values—values which, as laws and
guides of conduct and opinion, are now to rule over mankind. In general
the doctrine of the Superman can only be understood correctly in
conjunction with other ideas of the author’s, such as:—the Order
of Rank, the Will to Power, and the Transvaluation of all Values. He
assumes that Christianity, as a product of the resentment of the botched
and the weak, has put in ban all that is beautiful, strong, proud, and
powerful, in fact all the qualities resulting from strength, and that,
in consequence, all forces which tend to promote or elevate life have
been seriously undermined. Now, however, a new table of valuations
must be placed over mankind—namely, that of the strong, mighty, and
magnificent man, overflowing with life and elevated to his zenith—the
Superman, who is now put before us with overpowering passion as the
aim of our life, hope, and will. And just as the old system of valuing,
which only extolled the qualities favourable to the weak, the suffering,
and the oppressed, has succeeded in producing a weak, suffering, and
“modern” race, so this new and reversed system of valuing ought to rear
a healthy, strong, lively, and courageous type, which would be a glory
to life itself. Stated briefly, the leading principle of this new system
of valuing would be: “All that proceeds from power is good, all that
springs from weakness is bad.”

This type must not be regarded as a fanciful figure: it is not a
nebulous hope which is to be realised at some indefinitely remote
period, thousands of years hence; nor is it a new species (in the
Darwinian sense) of which we can know nothing, and which it would
therefore be somewhat absurd to strive after. But it is meant to be
a possibility which men of the present could realise with all their
spiritual and physical energies, provided they adopted the new values.

The author of “Zarathustra” never lost sight of that egregious example
of a transvaluation of all values through Christianity, whereby the
whole of the deified mode of life and thought of the Greeks, as well as
strong Romedom, was almost annihilated or transvalued in a comparatively
short time. Could not a rejuvenated Graeco-Roman system of valuing (once
it had been refined and made more profound by the schooling which
two thousand years of Christianity had provided) effect another such
revolution within a calculable period of time, until that glorious type
of manhood shall finally appear which is to be our new faith and hope,
and in the creation of which Zarathustra exhorts us to participate?

In his private notes on the subject the author uses the expression
“Superman” (always in the singular, by-the-bye), as signifying “the most
thoroughly well-constituted type,” as opposed to “modern man”; above
all, however, he designates Zarathustra himself as an example of the
Superman. In “Ecco Homo” he is careful to enlighten us concerning the
precursors and prerequisites to the advent of this highest type, in
referring to a certain passage in the “Gay Science”:—

“In order to understand this type, we must first be quite clear in
regard to the leading physiological condition on which it depends: this
condition is what I call GREAT HEALTHINESS. I know not how to express my
meaning more plainly or more personally than I have done already in
one of the last chapters (Aphorism 382) of the fifth book of the ‘Gaya
Scienza’.”

“We, the new, the nameless, the hard-to-understand,”—it says
there,—“we firstlings of a yet untried future—we require for a new end
also a new means, namely, a new healthiness, stronger, sharper, tougher,
bolder and merrier than all healthiness hitherto. He whose soul
longeth to experience the whole range of hitherto recognised values
and desirabilities, and to circumnavigate all the coasts of this ideal
‘Mediterranean Sea’, who, from the adventures of his most personal
experience, wants to know how it feels to be a conqueror, and discoverer
of the ideal—as likewise how it is with the artist, the saint, the
legislator, the sage, the scholar, the devotee, the prophet, and the
godly non-conformist of the old style:—requires one thing above all
for that purpose, GREAT HEALTHINESS—such healthiness as one not only
possesses, but also constantly acquires and must acquire, because one
unceasingly sacrifices it again, and must sacrifice it!—And now, after
having been long on the way in this fashion, we Argonauts of the ideal,
more courageous perhaps than prudent, and often enough shipwrecked
and brought to grief, nevertheless dangerously healthy, always healthy
again,—it would seem as if, in recompense for it all, that we have a
still undiscovered country before us, the boundaries of which no one
has yet seen, a beyond to all countries and corners of the ideal known
hitherto, a world so over-rich in the beautiful, the strange, the
questionable, the frightful, and the divine, that our curiosity as well
as our thirst for possession thereof, have got out of hand—alas! that
nothing will now any longer satisfy us!—

“How could we still be content with THE MAN OF THE PRESENT DAY
after such outlooks, and with such a craving in our conscience and
consciousness? Sad enough; but it is unavoidable that we should look
on the worthiest aims and hopes of the man of the present-day with
ill-concealed amusement, and perhaps should no longer look at them.
Another ideal runs on before us, a strange, tempting ideal full of
danger, to which we should not like to persuade any one, because we
do not so readily acknowledge any one’s RIGHT THERETO: the ideal of
a spirit who plays naively (that is to say involuntarily and from
overflowing abundance and power) with everything that has hitherto
been called holy, good, intangible, or divine; to whom the loftiest
conception which the people have reasonably made their measure of value,
would already practically imply danger, ruin, abasement, or at least
relaxation, blindness, or temporary self-forgetfulness; the ideal of
a humanly superhuman welfare and benevolence, which will often enough
appear INHUMAN, for example, when put alongside of all past seriousness
on earth, and alongside of all past solemnities in bearing, word, tone,
look, morality, and pursuit, as their truest involuntary parody—and
WITH which, nevertheless, perhaps THE GREAT SERIOUSNESS only commences,
when the proper interrogative mark is set up, the fate of the soul
changes, the hour-hand moves, and tragedy begins...”

Although the figure of Zarathustra and a large number of the leading
thoughts in this work had appeared much earlier in the dreams and
writings of the author, “Thus Spake Zarathustra” did not actually come
into being until the month of August 1881 in Sils Maria; and it was the
idea of the Eternal Recurrence of all things which finally induced my
brother to set forth his new views in poetic language. In regard to his
first conception of this idea, his autobiographical sketch, “Ecce Homo”,
written in the autumn of 1888, contains the following passage:—

“The fundamental idea of my work—namely, the Eternal Recurrence of
all things—this highest of all possible formulae of a Yea-saying
philosophy, first occurred to me in August 1881. I made a note of the
thought on a sheet of paper, with the postscript: 6,000 feet beyond
men and time! That day I happened to be wandering through the woods
alongside of the lake of Silvaplana, and I halted beside a huge,
pyramidal and towering rock not far from Surlei. It was then that the
thought struck me. Looking back now, I find that exactly two months
previous to this inspiration, I had had an omen of its coming in the
form of a sudden and decisive alteration in my tastes—more particularly
in music. It would even be possible to consider all ‘Zarathustra’ as a
musical composition. At all events, a very necessary condition in its
production was a renaissance in myself of the art of hearing. In a small
mountain resort (Recoaro) near Vicenza, where I spent the spring of
1881, I and my friend and Maestro, Peter Gast—also one who had been
born again—discovered that the phoenix music that hovered over us, wore
lighter and brighter plumes than it had done theretofore.”

During the month of August 1881 my brother resolved to reveal the
teaching of the Eternal Recurrence, in dithyrambic and psalmodic form,
through the mouth of Zarathustra. Among the notes of this period, we
found a page on which is written the first definite plan of “Thus Spake
Zarathustra”:—

“MIDDAY AND ETERNITY.”

“GUIDE-POSTS TO A NEW WAY OF LIVING.”

Beneath this is written:—

“Zarathustra born on lake Urmi; left his home in his thirtieth year,
went into the province of Aria, and, during ten years of solitude in the
mountains, composed the Zend-Avesta.”

“The sun of knowledge stands once more at midday; and the serpent
of eternity lies coiled in its light—: It is YOUR time, ye midday
brethren.”

In that summer of 1881, my brother, after many years of steadily
declining health, began at last to rally, and it is to this first gush
of the recovery of his once splendid bodily condition that we owe not
only “The Gay Science”, which in its mood may be regarded as a prelude
to “Zarathustra”, but also “Zarathustra” itself. Just as he was
beginning to recuperate his health, however, an unkind destiny brought
him a number of most painful personal experiences. His friends caused
him many disappointments, which were the more bitter to him, inasmuch as
he regarded friendship as such a sacred institution; and for the first
time in his life he realised the whole horror of that loneliness to
which, perhaps, all greatness is condemned. But to be forsaken is
something very different from deliberately choosing blessed loneliness.
How he longed, in those days, for the ideal friend who would thoroughly
understand him, to whom he would be able to say all, and whom he
imagined he had found at various periods in his life from his earliest
youth onwards. Now, however, that the way he had chosen grew ever more
perilous and steep, he found nobody who could follow him: he therefore
created a perfect friend for himself in the ideal form of a majestic
philosopher, and made this creation the preacher of his gospel to the
world.

Whether my brother would ever have written “Thus Spake Zarathustra”
 according to the first plan sketched in the summer of 1881, if he
had not had the disappointments already referred to, is now an idle
question; but perhaps where “Zarathustra” is concerned, we may also say
with Master Eckhardt: “The fleetest beast to bear you to perfection is
suffering.”

My brother writes as follows about the origin of the first part of
“Zarathustra”:—“In the winter of 1882–83, I was living on the charming
little Gulf of Rapallo, not far from Genoa, and between Chiavari and
Cape Porto Fino. My health was not very good; the winter was cold and
exceptionally rainy; and the small inn in which I lived was so close
to the water that at night my sleep would be disturbed if the sea were
high. These circumstances were surely the very reverse of favourable;
and yet in spite of it all, and as if in demonstration of my belief that
everything decisive comes to life in spite of every obstacle, it was
precisely during this winter and in the midst of these unfavourable
circumstances that my ‘Zarathustra’ originated. In the morning I used to
start out in a southerly direction up the glorious road to Zoagli, which
rises aloft through a forest of pines and gives one a view far out into
the sea. In the afternoon, as often as my health permitted, I walked
round the whole bay from Santa Margherita to beyond Porto Fino. This
spot was all the more interesting to me, inasmuch as it was so dearly
loved by the Emperor Frederick III. In the autumn of 1886 I chanced to
be there again when he was revisiting this small, forgotten world
of happiness for the last time. It was on these two roads that all
‘Zarathustra’ came to me, above all Zarathustra himself as a type;—I
ought rather to say that it was on these walks that these ideas waylaid
me.”

The first part of “Zarathustra” was written in about ten days—that is
to say, from the beginning to about the middle of February 1883. “The
last lines were written precisely in the hallowed hour when Richard
Wagner gave up the ghost in Venice.”

With the exception of the ten days occupied in composing the first part
of this book, my brother often referred to this winter as the hardest
and sickliest he had ever experienced. He did not, however, mean thereby
that his former disorders were troubling him, but that he was suffering
from a severe attack of influenza which he had caught in Santa
Margherita, and which tormented him for several weeks after his arrival
in Genoa. As a matter of fact, however, what he complained of most was
his spiritual condition—that indescribable forsakenness—to which he
gives such heartrending expression in “Zarathustra”. Even the reception
which the first part met with at the hands of friends and acquaintances
was extremely disheartening: for almost all those to whom he presented
copies of the work misunderstood it. “I found no one ripe for many of my
thoughts; the case of ‘Zarathustra’ proves that one can speak with the
utmost clearness, and yet not be heard by any one.” My brother was very
much discouraged by the feebleness of the response he was given, and as
he was striving just then to give up the practice of taking hydrate
of chloral—a drug he had begun to take while ill with influenza,—the
following spring, spent in Rome, was a somewhat gloomy one for him.
He writes about it as follows:—“I spent a melancholy spring in Rome,
where I only just managed to live,—and this was no easy matter. This
city, which is absolutely unsuited to the poet-author of ‘Zarathustra’,
and for the choice of which I was not responsible, made me inordinately
miserable. I tried to leave it. I wanted to go to Aquila—the opposite
of Rome in every respect, and actually founded in a spirit of enmity
towards that city (just as I also shall found a city some day), as a
memento of an atheist and genuine enemy of the Church—a person very
closely related to me,—the great Hohenstaufen, the Emperor Frederick
II. But Fate lay behind it all: I had to return again to Rome. In the
end I was obliged to be satisfied with the Piazza Barberini, after I had
exerted myself in vain to find an anti-Christian quarter. I fear that
on one occasion, to avoid bad smells as much as possible, I actually
inquired at the Palazzo del Quirinale whether they could not provide a
quiet room for a philosopher. In a chamber high above the Piazza just
mentioned, from which one obtained a general view of Rome and could
hear the fountains plashing far below, the loneliest of all songs
was composed—‘The Night-Song’. About this time I was obsessed by an
unspeakably sad melody, the refrain of which I recognised in the words,
‘dead through immortality.’”

We remained somewhat too long in Rome that spring, and what with the
effect of the increasing heat and the discouraging circumstances already
described, my brother resolved not to write any more, or in any case,
not to proceed with “Zarathustra”, although I offered to relieve him
of all trouble in connection with the proofs and the publisher. When,
however, we returned to Switzerland towards the end of June, and he
found himself once more in the familiar and exhilarating air of the
mountains, all his joyous creative powers revived, and in a note to me
announcing the dispatch of some manuscript, he wrote as follows: “I have
engaged a place here for three months: forsooth, I am the greatest fool
to allow my courage to be sapped from me by the climate of Italy. Now
and again I am troubled by the thought: WHAT NEXT? My ‘future’ is the
darkest thing in the world to me, but as there still remains a great
deal for me to do, I suppose I ought rather to think of doing this than
of my future, and leave the rest to THEE and the gods.”

The second part of “Zarathustra” was written between the 26th of June
and the 6th July. “This summer, finding myself once more in the sacred
place where the first thought of ‘Zarathustra’ flashed across my mind,
I conceived the second part. Ten days sufficed. Neither for the second,
the first, nor the third part, have I required a day longer.”

He often used to speak of the ecstatic mood in which he wrote
“Zarathustra”; how in his walks over hill and dale the ideas would crowd
into his mind, and how he would note them down hastily in a note-book
from which he would transcribe them on his return, sometimes working
till midnight. He says in a letter to me: “You can have no idea of the
vehemence of such composition,” and in “Ecce Homo” (autumn 1888) he
describes as follows with passionate enthusiasm the incomparable mood in
which he created Zarathustra:—

“—Has any one at the end of the nineteenth century any distinct notion
of what poets of a stronger age understood by the word inspiration? If
not, I will describe it. If one had the smallest vestige of superstition
in one, it would hardly be possible to set aside completely the idea
that one is the mere incarnation, mouthpiece or medium of an almighty
power. The idea of revelation in the sense that something becomes
suddenly visible and audible with indescribable certainty and accuracy,
which profoundly convulses and upsets one—describes simply the matter
of fact. One hears—one does not seek; one takes—one does not ask
who gives: a thought suddenly flashes up like lightning, it comes with
necessity, unhesitatingly—I have never had any choice in the matter.
There is an ecstasy such that the immense strain of it is sometimes
relaxed by a flood of tears, along with which one’s steps either rush
or involuntarily lag, alternately. There is the feeling that one is
completely out of hand, with the very distinct consciousness of an
endless number of fine thrills and quiverings to the very toes;—there
is a depth of happiness in which the painfullest and gloomiest do not
operate as antitheses, but as conditioned, as demanded in the sense of
necessary shades of colour in such an overflow of light. There is an
instinct for rhythmic relations which embraces wide areas of forms
(length, the need of a wide-embracing rhythm, is almost the measure of
the force of an inspiration, a sort of counterpart to its pressure and
tension). Everything happens quite involuntarily, as if in a tempestuous
outburst of freedom, of absoluteness, of power and divinity. The
involuntariness of the figures and similes is the most remarkable
thing; one loses all perception of what constitutes the figure and
what constitutes the simile; everything seems to present itself as
the readiest, the correctest and the simplest means of expression.
It actually seems, to use one of Zarathustra’s own phrases, as if all
things came unto one, and would fain be similes: ‘Here do all things
come caressingly to thy talk and flatter thee, for they want to ride
upon thy back. On every simile dost thou here ride to every truth. Here
fly open unto thee all being’s words and word-cabinets; here all being
wanteth to become words, here all becoming wanteth to learn of thee how
to talk.’ This is MY experience of inspiration. I do not doubt but that
one would have to go back thousands of years in order to find some one
who could say to me: It is mine also!—”

In the autumn of 1883 my brother left the Engadine for Germany and
stayed there a few weeks. In the following winter, after wandering
somewhat erratically through Stresa, Genoa, and Spezia, he landed in
Nice, where the climate so happily promoted his creative powers that
he wrote the third part of “Zarathustra”. “In the winter, beneath the
halcyon sky of Nice, which then looked down upon me for the first time
in my life, I found the third ‘Zarathustra’—and came to the end of my
task; the whole having occupied me scarcely a year. Many hidden corners
and heights in the landscapes round about Nice are hallowed to me by
unforgettable moments. That decisive chapter entitled ‘Old and New
Tables’ was composed in the very difficult ascent from the station
to Eza—that wonderful Moorish village in the rocks. My most creative
moments were always accompanied by unusual muscular activity. The body
is inspired: let us waive the question of the ‘soul.’ I might often have
been seen dancing in those days. Without a suggestion of fatigue I could
then walk for seven or eight hours on end among the hills. I slept well
and laughed well—I was perfectly robust and patient.”

As we have seen, each of the three parts of “Zarathustra” was written,
after a more or less short period of preparation, in about ten days.
The composition of the fourth part alone was broken by occasional
interruptions. The first notes relating to this part were written while
he and I were staying together in Zurich in September 1884. In the
following November, while staying at Mentone, he began to elaborate
these notes, and after a long pause, finished the manuscript at Nice
between the end of January and the middle of February 1885. My brother
then called this part the fourth and last; but even before, and shortly
after it had been privately printed, he wrote to me saying that he still
intended writing a fifth and sixth part, and notes relating to these
parts are now in my possession. This fourth part (the original MS. of
which contains this note: “Only for my friends, not for the public”)
is written in a particularly personal spirit, and those few to whom he
presented a copy of it, he pledged to the strictest secrecy concerning
its contents. He often thought of making this fourth part public also,
but doubted whether he would ever be able to do so without considerably
altering certain portions of it. At all events he resolved to distribute
this manuscript production, of which only forty copies were printed,
only among those who had proved themselves worthy of it, and it speaks
eloquently of his utter loneliness and need of sympathy in those days,
that he had occasion to present only seven copies of his book according
to this resolution.

Already at the beginning of this history I hinted at the reasons which
led my brother to select a Persian as the incarnation of his ideal of
the majestic philosopher. His reasons, however, for choosing Zarathustra
of all others to be his mouthpiece, he gives us in the following
words:—“People have never asked me, as they should have done, what the
name Zarathustra precisely means in my mouth, in the mouth of the first
Immoralist; for what distinguishes that philosopher from all others
in the past is the very fact that he was exactly the reverse of an
immoralist. Zarathustra was the first to see in the struggle between
good and evil the essential wheel in the working of things. The
translation of morality into the metaphysical, as force, cause, end in
itself, was HIS work. But the very question suggests its own answer.
Zarathustra CREATED the most portentous error, MORALITY, consequently he
should also be the first to PERCEIVE that error, not only because he
has had longer and greater experience of the subject than any other
thinker—all history is the experimental refutation of the theory of
the so-called moral order of things:—the more important point is that
Zarathustra was more truthful than any other thinker. In his teaching
alone do we meet with truthfulness upheld as the highest virtue—i.e.:
the reverse of the COWARDICE of the ‘idealist’ who flees from reality.
Zarathustra had more courage in his body than any other thinker before
or after him. To tell the truth and TO AIM STRAIGHT: that is the first
Persian virtue. Am I understood?... The overcoming of morality through
itself—through truthfulness, the overcoming of the moralist through his
opposite—THROUGH ME—: that is what the name Zarathustra means in my
mouth.”

ELIZABETH FORSTER-NIETZSCHE.

Nietzsche Archives,

Weimar, December 1905.




THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA.




FIRST PART. ZARATHUSTRA’S DISCOURSES.




ZARATHUSTRA’S PROLOGUE.


1.

When Zarathustra was thirty years old, he left his home and the lake of
his home, and went into the mountains. There he enjoyed his spirit and
solitude, and for ten years did not weary of it. But at last his heart
changed,—and rising one morning with the rosy dawn, he went before the
sun, and spake thus unto it:

Thou great star! What would be thy happiness if thou hadst not those for
whom thou shinest!

For ten years hast thou climbed hither unto my cave: thou wouldst have
wearied of thy light and of the journey, had it not been for me, mine
eagle, and my serpent.

But we awaited thee every morning, took from thee thine overflow and
blessed thee for it.

Lo! I am weary of my wisdom, like the bee that hath gathered too much
honey; I need hands outstretched to take it.

I would fain bestow and distribute, until the wise have once more become
joyous in their folly, and the poor happy in their riches.

Therefore must I descend into the deep: as thou doest in the
evening, when thou goest behind the sea, and givest light also to the
nether-world, thou exuberant star!

Like thee must I GO DOWN, as men say, to whom I shall descend.

Bless me, then, thou tranquil eye, that canst behold even the greatest
happiness without envy!

Bless the cup that is about to overflow, that the water may flow golden
out of it, and carry everywhere the reflection of thy bliss!

Lo! This cup is again going to empty itself, and Zarathustra is again
going to be a man.

Thus began Zarathustra’s down-going.

2.

Zarathustra went down the mountain alone, no one meeting him. When he
entered the forest, however, there suddenly stood before him an old man,
who had left his holy cot to seek roots. And thus spake the old man to
Zarathustra:

“No stranger to me is this wanderer: many years ago passed he by.
Zarathustra he was called; but he hath altered.

Then thou carriedst thine ashes into the mountains: wilt thou now carry
thy fire into the valleys? Fearest thou not the incendiary’s doom?

Yea, I recognise Zarathustra. Pure is his eye, and no loathing lurketh
about his mouth. Goeth he not along like a dancer?

Altered is Zarathustra; a child hath Zarathustra become; an awakened one
is Zarathustra: what wilt thou do in the land of the sleepers?

As in the sea hast thou lived in solitude, and it hath borne thee up.
Alas, wilt thou now go ashore? Alas, wilt thou again drag thy body
thyself?”

Zarathustra answered: “I love mankind.”

“Why,” said the saint, “did I go into the forest and the desert? Was it
not because I loved men far too well?

Now I love God: men, I do not love. Man is a thing too imperfect for me.
Love to man would be fatal to me.”

Zarathustra answered: “What spake I of love! I am bringing gifts unto
men.”

“Give them nothing,” said the saint. “Take rather part of their load,
and carry it along with them—that will be most agreeable unto them: if
only it be agreeable unto thee!

If, however, thou wilt give unto them, give them no more than an alms,
and let them also beg for it!”

“No,” replied Zarathustra, “I give no alms. I am not poor enough for
that.”

The saint laughed at Zarathustra, and spake thus: “Then see to it that
they accept thy treasures! They are distrustful of anchorites, and do
not believe that we come with gifts.

The fall of our footsteps ringeth too hollow through their streets. And
just as at night, when they are in bed and hear a man abroad long before
sunrise, so they ask themselves concerning us: Where goeth the thief?

Go not to men, but stay in the forest! Go rather to the animals! Why not
be like me—a bear amongst bears, a bird amongst birds?”

“And what doeth the saint in the forest?” asked Zarathustra.

The saint answered: “I make hymns and sing them; and in making hymns I
laugh and weep and mumble: thus do I praise God.

With singing, weeping, laughing, and mumbling do I praise the God who is
my God. But what dost thou bring us as a gift?”

When Zarathustra had heard these words, he bowed to the saint and said:
“What should I have to give thee! Let me rather hurry hence lest I take
aught away from thee!”—And thus they parted from one another, the old
man and Zarathustra, laughing like schoolboys.

When Zarathustra was alone, however, he said to his heart: “Could it be
possible! This old saint in the forest hath not yet heard of it, that
GOD IS DEAD!”

3.

When Zarathustra arrived at the nearest town which adjoineth the forest,
he found many people assembled in the market-place; for it had been
announced that a rope-dancer would give a performance. And Zarathustra
spake thus unto the people:

I TEACH YOU THE SUPERMAN. Man is something that is to be surpassed. What
have ye done to surpass man?

All beings hitherto have created something beyond themselves: and ye
want to be the ebb of that great tide, and would rather go back to the
beast than surpass man?

What is the ape to man? A laughing-stock, a thing of shame. And just the
same shall man be to the Superman: a laughing-stock, a thing of shame.

Ye have made your way from the worm to man, and much within you is still
worm. Once were ye apes, and even yet man is more of an ape than any of
the apes.

Even the wisest among you is only a disharmony and hybrid of plant and
phantom. But do I bid you become phantoms or plants?

Lo, I teach you the Superman!

The Superman is the meaning of the earth. Let your will say: The
Superman SHALL BE the meaning of the earth!

I conjure you, my brethren, REMAIN TRUE TO THE EARTH, and believe not
those who speak unto you of superearthly hopes! Poisoners are they,
whether they know it or not.

Despisers of life are they, decaying ones and poisoned ones themselves,
of whom the earth is weary: so away with them!

Once blasphemy against God was the greatest blasphemy; but God died,
and therewith also those blasphemers. To blaspheme the earth is now the
dreadfulest sin, and to rate the heart of the unknowable higher than the
meaning of the earth!

Once the soul looked contemptuously on the body, and then that contempt
was the supreme thing:—the soul wished the body meagre, ghastly, and
famished. Thus it thought to escape from the body and the earth.

Oh, that soul was itself meagre, ghastly, and famished; and cruelty was
the delight of that soul!

But ye, also, my brethren, tell me: What doth your body say about
your soul? Is your soul not poverty and pollution and wretched
self-complacency?

Verily, a polluted stream is man. One must be a sea, to receive a
polluted stream without becoming impure.

Lo, I teach you the Superman: he is that sea; in him can your great
contempt be submerged.

What is the greatest thing ye can experience? It is the hour of great
contempt. The hour in which even your happiness becometh loathsome unto
you, and so also your reason and virtue.

The hour when ye say: “What good is my happiness! It is poverty and
pollution and wretched self-complacency. But my happiness should justify
existence itself!”

The hour when ye say: “What good is my reason! Doth it long for
knowledge as the lion for his food? It is poverty and pollution and
wretched self-complacency!”

The hour when ye say: “What good is my virtue! As yet it hath not made
me passionate. How weary I am of my good and my bad! It is all poverty
and pollution and wretched self-complacency!”

The hour when ye say: “What good is my justice! I do not see that I am
fervour and fuel. The just, however, are fervour and fuel!”

The hour when ye say: “What good is my pity! Is not pity the cross on
which he is nailed who loveth man? But my pity is not a crucifixion.”

Have ye ever spoken thus? Have ye ever cried thus? Ah! would that I had
heard you crying thus!

It is not your sin—it is your self-satisfaction that crieth unto
heaven; your very sparingness in sin crieth unto heaven!

Where is the lightning to lick you with its tongue? Where is the frenzy
with which ye should be inoculated?

Lo, I teach you the Superman: he is that lightning, he is that frenzy!—

When Zarathustra had thus spoken, one of the people called out: “We have
now heard enough of the rope-dancer; it is time now for us to see him!”
 And all the people laughed at Zarathustra. But the rope-dancer, who
thought the words applied to him, began his performance.

4.

Zarathustra, however, looked at the people and wondered. Then he spake
thus:

Man is a rope stretched between the animal and the Superman—a rope over
an abyss.

A dangerous crossing, a dangerous wayfaring, a dangerous looking-back, a
dangerous trembling and halting.

What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a goal: what is
lovable in man is that he is an OVER-GOING and a DOWN-GOING.

I love those that know not how to live except as down-goers, for they
are the over-goers.

I love the great despisers, because they are the great adorers, and
arrows of longing for the other shore.

I love those who do not first seek a reason beyond the stars for going
down and being sacrifices, but sacrifice themselves to the earth, that
the earth of the Superman may hereafter arrive.

I love him who liveth in order to know, and seeketh to know in
order that the Superman may hereafter live. Thus seeketh he his own
down-going.

I love him who laboureth and inventeth, that he may build the house for
the Superman, and prepare for him earth, animal, and plant: for thus
seeketh he his own down-going.

I love him who loveth his virtue: for virtue is the will to down-going,
and an arrow of longing.

I love him who reserveth no share of spirit for himself, but wanteth to
be wholly the spirit of his virtue: thus walketh he as spirit over the
bridge.

I love him who maketh his virtue his inclination and destiny: thus, for
the sake of his virtue, he is willing to live on, or live no more.

I love him who desireth not too many virtues. One virtue is more of a
virtue than two, because it is more of a knot for one’s destiny to cling
to.

I love him whose soul is lavish, who wanteth no thanks and doth not give
back: for he always bestoweth, and desireth not to keep for himself.

I love him who is ashamed when the dice fall in his favour, and who then
asketh: “Am I a dishonest player?”—for he is willing to succumb.

I love him who scattereth golden words in advance of his deeds, and
always doeth more than he promiseth: for he seeketh his own down-going.

I love him who justifieth the future ones, and redeemeth the past ones:
for he is willing to succumb through the present ones.

I love him who chasteneth his God, because he loveth his God: for he
must succumb through the wrath of his God.

I love him whose soul is deep even in the wounding, and may succumb
through a small matter: thus goeth he willingly over the bridge.

I love him whose soul is so overfull that he forgetteth himself, and all
things are in him: thus all things become his down-going.

I love him who is of a free spirit and a free heart: thus is his
head only the bowels of his heart; his heart, however, causeth his
down-going.

I love all who are like heavy drops falling one by one out of the dark
cloud that lowereth over man: they herald the coming of the lightning,
and succumb as heralds.

Lo, I am a herald of the lightning, and a heavy drop out of the cloud:
the lightning, however, is the SUPERMAN.—

5.

When Zarathustra had spoken these words, he again looked at the people,
and was silent. “There they stand,” said he to his heart; “there they
laugh: they understand me not; I am not the mouth for these ears.

Must one first batter their ears, that they may learn to hear with their
eyes? Must one clatter like kettledrums and penitential preachers? Or do
they only believe the stammerer?

They have something whereof they are proud. What do they call it, that
which maketh them proud? Culture, they call it; it distinguisheth them
from the goatherds.

They dislike, therefore, to hear of ‘contempt’ of themselves. So I will
appeal to their pride.

I will speak unto them of the most contemptible thing: that, however, is
THE LAST MAN!”

And thus spake Zarathustra unto the people:

It is time for man to fix his goal. It is time for man to plant the germ
of his highest hope.

Still is his soil rich enough for it. But that soil will one day be
poor and exhausted, and no lofty tree will any longer be able to grow
thereon.

Alas! there cometh the time when man will no longer launch the arrow of
his longing beyond man—and the string of his bow will have unlearned to
whizz!

I tell you: one must still have chaos in one, to give birth to a dancing
star. I tell you: ye have still chaos in you.

Alas! There cometh the time when man will no longer give birth to any
star. Alas! There cometh the time of the most despicable man, who can no
longer despise himself.

Lo! I show you THE LAST MAN.

“What is love? What is creation? What is longing? What is a star?”—so
asketh the last man and blinketh.

The earth hath then become small, and on it there hoppeth the last man
who maketh everything small. His species is ineradicable like that of
the ground-flea; the last man liveth longest.

“We have discovered happiness”—say the last men, and blink thereby.

They have left the regions where it is hard to live; for they need
warmth. One still loveth one’s neighbour and rubbeth against him; for
one needeth warmth.

Turning ill and being distrustful, they consider sinful: they walk
warily. He is a fool who still stumbleth over stones or men!

A little poison now and then: that maketh pleasant dreams. And much
poison at last for a pleasant death.

One still worketh, for work is a pastime. But one is careful lest the
pastime should hurt one.

One no longer becometh poor or rich; both are too burdensome. Who still
wanteth to rule? Who still wanteth to obey? Both are too burdensome.

No shepherd, and one herd! Every one wanteth the same; every one is
equal: he who hath other sentiments goeth voluntarily into the madhouse.

“Formerly all the world was insane,”—say the subtlest of them, and
blink thereby.

They are clever and know all that hath happened: so there is
no end to their raillery. People still fall out, but are soon
reconciled—otherwise it spoileth their stomachs.

They have their little pleasures for the day, and their little pleasures
for the night, but they have a regard for health.

“We have discovered happiness,”—say the last men, and blink thereby.—

And here ended the first discourse of Zarathustra, which is also
called “The Prologue”: for at this point the shouting and mirth of the
multitude interrupted him. “Give us this last man, O Zarathustra,”—they
called out—“make us into these last men! Then will we make thee a
present of the Superman!” And all the people exulted and smacked their
lips. Zarathustra, however, turned sad, and said to his heart:

“They understand me not: I am not the mouth for these ears.

Too long, perhaps, have I lived in the mountains; too much have I
hearkened unto the brooks and trees: now do I speak unto them as unto
the goatherds.

Calm is my soul, and clear, like the mountains in the morning. But they
think me cold, and a mocker with terrible jests.

And now do they look at me and laugh: and while they laugh they hate me
too. There is ice in their laughter.”

6.

Then, however, something happened which made every mouth mute and every
eye fixed. In the meantime, of course, the rope-dancer had commenced his
performance: he had come out at a little door, and was going along the
rope which was stretched between two towers, so that it hung above the
market-place and the people. When he was just midway across, the little
door opened once more, and a gaudily-dressed fellow like a buffoon
sprang out, and went rapidly after the first one. “Go on, halt-foot,”
 cried his frightful voice, “go on, lazy-bones, interloper,
sallow-face!—lest I tickle thee with my heel! What dost thou here
between the towers? In the tower is the place for thee, thou shouldst be
locked up; to one better than thyself thou blockest the way!”—And with
every word he came nearer and nearer the first one. When, however, he
was but a step behind, there happened the frightful thing which made
every mouth mute and every eye fixed—he uttered a yell like a devil,
and jumped over the other who was in his way. The latter, however, when
he thus saw his rival triumph, lost at the same time his head and his
footing on the rope; he threw his pole away, and shot downwards faster
than it, like an eddy of arms and legs, into the depth. The market-place
and the people were like the sea when the storm cometh on: they all flew
apart and in disorder, especially where the body was about to fall.

Zarathustra, however, remained standing, and just beside him fell the
body, badly injured and disfigured, but not yet dead. After a while
consciousness returned to the shattered man, and he saw Zarathustra
kneeling beside him. “What art thou doing there?” said he at last, “I
knew long ago that the devil would trip me up. Now he draggeth me to
hell: wilt thou prevent him?”

“On mine honour, my friend,” answered Zarathustra, “there is nothing of
all that whereof thou speakest: there is no devil and no hell. Thy soul
will be dead even sooner than thy body: fear, therefore, nothing any
more!”

The man looked up distrustfully. “If thou speakest the truth,” said he,
“I lose nothing when I lose my life. I am not much more than an animal
which hath been taught to dance by blows and scanty fare.”

“Not at all,” said Zarathustra, “thou hast made danger thy calling;
therein there is nothing contemptible. Now thou perishest by thy
calling: therefore will I bury thee with mine own hands.”

When Zarathustra had said this the dying one did not reply further; but
he moved his hand as if he sought the hand of Zarathustra in gratitude.

7.

Meanwhile the evening came on, and the market-place veiled itself in
gloom. Then the people dispersed, for even curiosity and terror become
fatigued. Zarathustra, however, still sat beside the dead man on the
ground, absorbed in thought: so he forgot the time. But at last it
became night, and a cold wind blew upon the lonely one. Then arose
Zarathustra and said to his heart:

Verily, a fine catch of fish hath Zarathustra made to-day! It is not a
man he hath caught, but a corpse.

Sombre is human life, and as yet without meaning: a buffoon may be
fateful to it.

I want to teach men the sense of their existence, which is the Superman,
the lightning out of the dark cloud—man.

But still am I far from them, and my sense speaketh not unto their
sense. To men I am still something between a fool and a corpse.

Gloomy is the night, gloomy are the ways of Zarathustra. Come, thou cold
and stiff companion! I carry thee to the place where I shall bury thee
with mine own hands.

8.

When Zarathustra had said this to his heart, he put the corpse upon his
shoulders and set out on his way. Yet had he not gone a hundred steps,
when there stole a man up to him and whispered in his ear—and lo!
he that spake was the buffoon from the tower. “Leave this town, O
Zarathustra,” said he, “there are too many here who hate thee. The
good and just hate thee, and call thee their enemy and despiser; the
believers in the orthodox belief hate thee, and call thee a danger to
the multitude. It was thy good fortune to be laughed at: and verily thou
spakest like a buffoon. It was thy good fortune to associate with the
dead dog; by so humiliating thyself thou hast saved thy life to-day.
Depart, however, from this town,—or to-morrow I shall jump over thee,
a living man over a dead one.” And when he had said this, the buffoon
vanished; Zarathustra, however, went on through the dark streets.

At the gate of the town the grave-diggers met him: they shone their
torch on his face, and, recognising Zarathustra, they sorely derided
him. “Zarathustra is carrying away the dead dog: a fine thing that
Zarathustra hath turned a grave-digger! For our hands are too cleanly
for that roast. Will Zarathustra steal the bite from the devil? Well
then, good luck to the repast! If only the devil is not a better thief
than Zarathustra!—he will steal them both, he will eat them both!” And
they laughed among themselves, and put their heads together.

Zarathustra made no answer thereto, but went on his way. When he had
gone on for two hours, past forests and swamps, he had heard too much of
the hungry howling of the wolves, and he himself became a-hungry. So he
halted at a lonely house in which a light was burning.

“Hunger attacketh me,” said Zarathustra, “like a robber. Among forests
and swamps my hunger attacketh me, and late in the night.

“Strange humours hath my hunger. Often it cometh to me only after a
repast, and all day it hath failed to come: where hath it been?”

And thereupon Zarathustra knocked at the door of the house. An old man
appeared, who carried a light, and asked: “Who cometh unto me and my bad
sleep?”

“A living man and a dead one,” said Zarathustra. “Give me something to
eat and drink, I forgot it during the day. He that feedeth the hungry
refresheth his own soul, saith wisdom.”

The old man withdrew, but came back immediately and offered Zarathustra
bread and wine. “A bad country for the hungry,” said he; “that is why
I live here. Animal and man come unto me, the anchorite. But bid thy
companion eat and drink also, he is wearier than thou.” Zarathustra
answered: “My companion is dead; I shall hardly be able to persuade him
to eat.” “That doth not concern me,” said the old man sullenly; “he
that knocketh at my door must take what I offer him. Eat, and fare ye
well!”—

Thereafter Zarathustra again went on for two hours, trusting to the path
and the light of the stars: for he was an experienced night-walker, and
liked to look into the face of all that slept. When the morning dawned,
however, Zarathustra found himself in a thick forest, and no path was
any longer visible. He then put the dead man in a hollow tree at his
head—for he wanted to protect him from the wolves—and laid himself
down on the ground and moss. And immediately he fell asleep, tired in
body, but with a tranquil soul.

9.

Long slept Zarathustra; and not only the rosy dawn passed over his head,
but also the morning. At last, however, his eyes opened, and amazedly he
gazed into the forest and the stillness, amazedly he gazed into himself.
Then he arose quickly, like a seafarer who all at once seeth the land;
and he shouted for joy: for he saw a new truth. And he spake thus to his
heart:

A light hath dawned upon me: I need companions—living ones; not dead
companions and corpses, which I carry with me where I will.

But I need living companions, who will follow me because they want to
follow themselves—and to the place where I will.

A light hath dawned upon me. Not to the people is Zarathustra to speak,
but to companions! Zarathustra shall not be the herd’s herdsman and
hound!

To allure many from the herd—for that purpose have I come. The people
and the herd must be angry with me: a robber shall Zarathustra be called
by the herdsmen.

Herdsmen, I say, but they call themselves the good and just. Herdsmen, I
say, but they call themselves the believers in the orthodox belief.

Behold the good and just! Whom do they hate most? Him who breaketh up
their tables of values, the breaker, the law-breaker:—he, however, is
the creator.

Behold the believers of all beliefs! Whom do they hate most? Him who
breaketh up their tables of values, the breaker, the law-breaker—he,
however, is the creator.

Companions, the creator seeketh, not corpses—and not herds or believers
either. Fellow-creators the creator seeketh—those who grave new values
on new tables.

Companions, the creator seeketh, and fellow-reapers: for everything is
ripe for the harvest with him. But he lacketh the hundred sickles: so he
plucketh the ears of corn and is vexed.

Companions, the creator seeketh, and such as know how to whet their
sickles. Destroyers, will they be called, and despisers of good and
evil. But they are the reapers and rejoicers.

Fellow-creators, Zarathustra seeketh; fellow-reapers and
fellow-rejoicers, Zarathustra seeketh: what hath he to do with herds and
herdsmen and corpses!

And thou, my first companion, rest in peace! Well have I buried thee in
thy hollow tree; well have I hid thee from the wolves.

But I part from thee; the time hath arrived. ‘Twixt rosy dawn and rosy
dawn there came unto me a new truth.

I am not to be a herdsman, I am not to be a grave-digger. Not any more
will I discourse unto the people; for the last time have I spoken unto
the dead.

With the creators, the reapers, and the rejoicers will I associate: the
rainbow will I show them, and all the stairs to the Superman.

To the lone-dwellers will I sing my song, and to the twain-dwellers;
and unto him who hath still ears for the unheard, will I make the heart
heavy with my happiness.

I make for my goal, I follow my course; over the loitering and tardy
will I leap. Thus let my on-going be their down-going!

10.

This had Zarathustra said to his heart when the sun stood at noontide.
Then he looked inquiringly aloft,—for he heard above him the sharp call
of a bird. And behold! An eagle swept through the air in wide circles,
and on it hung a serpent, not like a prey, but like a friend: for it
kept itself coiled round the eagle’s neck.

“They are mine animals,” said Zarathustra, and rejoiced in his heart.

“The proudest animal under the sun, and the wisest animal under the
sun,—they have come out to reconnoitre.

They want to know whether Zarathustra still liveth. Verily, do I still
live?

More dangerous have I found it among men than among animals; in
dangerous paths goeth Zarathustra. Let mine animals lead me!”

When Zarathustra had said this, he remembered the words of the saint in
the forest. Then he sighed and spake thus to his heart:

“Would that I were wiser! Would that I were wise from the very heart,
like my serpent!

But I am asking the impossible. Therefore do I ask my pride to go always
with my wisdom!

And if my wisdom should some day forsake me:—alas! it loveth to fly
away!—may my pride then fly with my folly!”

Thus began Zarathustra’s down-going.




ZARATHUSTRA’S DISCOURSES.




I. THE THREE METAMORPHOSES.


Three metamorphoses of the spirit do I designate to you: how the spirit
becometh a camel, the camel a lion, and the lion at last a child.

Many heavy things are there for the spirit, the strong load-bearing
spirit in which reverence dwelleth: for the heavy and the heaviest
longeth its strength.

What is heavy? so asketh the load-bearing spirit; then kneeleth it down
like the camel, and wanteth to be well laden.

What is the heaviest thing, ye heroes? asketh the load-bearing spirit,
that I may take it upon me and rejoice in my strength.

Is it not this: To humiliate oneself in order to mortify one’s pride? To
exhibit one’s folly in order to mock at one’s wisdom?

Or is it this: To desert our cause when it celebrateth its triumph? To
ascend high mountains to tempt the tempter?

Or is it this: To feed on the acorns and grass of knowledge, and for the
sake of truth to suffer hunger of soul?

Or is it this: To be sick and dismiss comforters, and make friends of
the deaf, who never hear thy requests?

Or is it this: To go into foul water when it is the water of truth, and
not disclaim cold frogs and hot toads?

Or is it this: To love those who despise us, and give one’s hand to the
phantom when it is going to frighten us?

All these heaviest things the load-bearing spirit taketh upon itself:
and like the camel, which, when laden, hasteneth into the wilderness, so
hasteneth the spirit into its wilderness.

But in the loneliest wilderness happeneth the second metamorphosis: here
the spirit becometh a lion; freedom will it capture, and lordship in its
own wilderness.

Its last Lord it here seeketh: hostile will it be to him, and to its
last God; for victory will it struggle with the great dragon.

What is the great dragon which the spirit is no longer inclined to call
Lord and God? “Thou shalt,” is the great dragon called. But the spirit
of the lion saith, “I will.”

“Thou shalt,” lieth in its path, sparkling with gold—a scale-covered
beast; and on every scale glittereth golden, “Thou shalt!”

The values of a thousand years glitter on those scales, and
thus speaketh the mightiest of all dragons: “All the values of
things—glitter on me.

All values have already been created, and all created values—do I
represent. Verily, there shall be no ‘I will’ any more.” Thus speaketh
the dragon.

My brethren, wherefore is there need of the lion in the spirit? Why
sufficeth not the beast of burden, which renounceth and is reverent?

To create new values—that, even the lion cannot yet accomplish: but to
create itself freedom for new creating—that can the might of the lion
do.

To create itself freedom, and give a holy Nay even unto duty: for that,
my brethren, there is need of the lion.

To assume the right to new values—that is the most formidable
assumption for a load-bearing and reverent spirit. Verily, unto such a
spirit it is preying, and the work of a beast of prey.

As its holiest, it once loved “Thou shalt”: now is it forced to find
illusion and arbitrariness even in the holiest things, that it may
capture freedom from its love: the lion is needed for this capture.

But tell me, my brethren, what the child can do, which even the lion
could not do? Why hath the preying lion still to become a child?

Innocence is the child, and forgetfulness, a new beginning, a game, a
self-rolling wheel, a first movement, a holy Yea.

Aye, for the game of creating, my brethren, there is needed a holy Yea
unto life: ITS OWN will, willeth now the spirit; HIS OWN world winneth
the world’s outcast.

Three metamorphoses of the spirit have I designated to you: how the
spirit became a camel, the camel a lion, and the lion at last a child.—

Thus spake Zarathustra. And at that time he abode in the town which is
called The Pied Cow.




II. THE ACADEMIC CHAIRS OF VIRTUE.


People commended unto Zarathustra a wise man, as one who could discourse
well about sleep and virtue: greatly was he honoured and rewarded for
it, and all the youths sat before his chair. To him went Zarathustra,
and sat among the youths before his chair. And thus spake the wise man:

Respect and modesty in presence of sleep! That is the first thing! And
to go out of the way of all who sleep badly and keep awake at night!

Modest is even the thief in presence of sleep: he always stealeth softly
through the night. Immodest, however, is the night-watchman; immodestly
he carrieth his horn.

No small art is it to sleep: it is necessary for that purpose to keep
awake all day.

Ten times a day must thou overcome thyself: that causeth wholesome
weariness, and is poppy to the soul.

Ten times must thou reconcile again with thyself; for overcoming is
bitterness, and badly sleep the unreconciled.

Ten truths must thou find during the day; otherwise wilt thou seek truth
during the night, and thy soul will have been hungry.

Ten times must thou laugh during the day, and be cheerful; otherwise thy
stomach, the father of affliction, will disturb thee in the night.

Few people know it, but one must have all the virtues in order to sleep
well. Shall I bear false witness? Shall I commit adultery?

Shall I covet my neighbour’s maidservant? All that would ill accord with
good sleep.

And even if one have all the virtues, there is still one thing needful:
to send the virtues themselves to sleep at the right time.

That they may not quarrel with one another, the good females! And about
thee, thou unhappy one!

Peace with God and thy neighbour: so desireth good sleep. And peace also
with thy neighbour’s devil! Otherwise it will haunt thee in the night.

Honour to the government, and obedience, and also to the crooked
government! So desireth good sleep. How can I help it, if power like to
walk on crooked legs?

He who leadeth his sheep to the greenest pasture, shall always be for me
the best shepherd: so doth it accord with good sleep.

Many honours I want not, nor great treasures: they excite the spleen.
But it is bad sleeping without a good name and a little treasure.

A small company is more welcome to me than a bad one: but they must come
and go at the right time. So doth it accord with good sleep.

Well, also, do the poor in spirit please me: they promote sleep. Blessed
are they, especially if one always give in to them.

Thus passeth the day unto the virtuous. When night cometh, then take I
good care not to summon sleep. It disliketh to be summoned—sleep, the
lord of the virtues!

But I think of what I have done and thought during the day. Thus
ruminating, patient as a cow, I ask myself: What were thy ten
overcomings?

And what were the ten reconciliations, and the ten truths, and the ten
laughters with which my heart enjoyed itself?

Thus pondering, and cradled by forty thoughts, it overtaketh me all at
once—sleep, the unsummoned, the lord of the virtues.

Sleep tappeth on mine eye, and it turneth heavy. Sleep toucheth my
mouth, and it remaineth open.

Verily, on soft soles doth it come to me, the dearest of thieves, and
stealeth from me my thoughts: stupid do I then stand, like this academic
chair.

But not much longer do I then stand: I already lie.—

When Zarathustra heard the wise man thus speak, he laughed in his heart:
for thereby had a light dawned upon him. And thus spake he to his heart:

A fool seemeth this wise man with his forty thoughts: but I believe he
knoweth well how to sleep.

Happy even is he who liveth near this wise man! Such sleep is
contagious—even through a thick wall it is contagious.

A magic resideth even in his academic chair. And not in vain did the
youths sit before the preacher of virtue.

His wisdom is to keep awake in order to sleep well. And verily, if
life had no sense, and had I to choose nonsense, this would be the
desirablest nonsense for me also.

Now know I well what people sought formerly above all else when they
sought teachers of virtue. Good sleep they sought for themselves, and
poppy-head virtues to promote it!

To all those belauded sages of the academic chairs, wisdom was sleep
without dreams: they knew no higher significance of life.

Even at present, to be sure, there are some like this preacher of
virtue, and not always so honourable: but their time is past. And not
much longer do they stand: there they already lie.

Blessed are those drowsy ones: for they shall soon nod to sleep.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




III. BACKWORLDSMEN.


Once on a time, Zarathustra also cast his fancy beyond man, like all
backworldsmen. The work of a suffering and tortured God, did the world
then seem to me.

The dream—and diction—of a God, did the world then seem to me;
coloured vapours before the eyes of a divinely dissatisfied one.

Good and evil, and joy and woe, and I and thou—coloured vapours did
they seem to me before creative eyes. The creator wished to look away
from himself,—thereupon he created the world.

Intoxicating joy is it for the sufferer to look away from his suffering
and forget himself. Intoxicating joy and self-forgetting, did the world
once seem to me.

This world, the eternally imperfect, an eternal contradiction’s image
and imperfect image—an intoxicating joy to its imperfect creator:—thus
did the world once seem to me.

Thus, once on a time, did I also cast my fancy beyond man, like all
backworldsmen. Beyond man, forsooth?

Ah, ye brethren, that God whom I created was human work and human
madness, like all the Gods!

A man was he, and only a poor fragment of a man and ego. Out of mine own
ashes and glow it came unto me, that phantom. And verily, it came not
unto me from the beyond!

What happened, my brethren? I surpassed myself, the suffering one; I
carried mine own ashes to the mountain; a brighter flame I contrived for
myself. And lo! Thereupon the phantom WITHDREW from me!

To me the convalescent would it now be suffering and torment to believe
in such phantoms: suffering would it now be to me, and humiliation. Thus
speak I to backworldsmen.

Suffering was it, and impotence—that created all backworlds; and
the short madness of happiness, which only the greatest sufferer
experienceth.

Weariness, which seeketh to get to the ultimate with one leap, with
a death-leap; a poor ignorant weariness, unwilling even to will any
longer: that created all Gods and backworlds.

Believe me, my brethren! It was the body which despaired of the body—it
groped with the fingers of the infatuated spirit at the ultimate walls.

Believe me, my brethren! It was the body which despaired of the
earth—it heard the bowels of existence speaking unto it.

And then it sought to get through the ultimate walls with its head—and
not with its head only—into “the other world.”

But that “other world” is well concealed from man, that dehumanised,
inhuman world, which is a celestial naught; and the bowels of existence
do not speak unto man, except as man.

Verily, it is difficult to prove all being, and hard to make it speak.
Tell me, ye brethren, is not the strangest of all things best proved?

Yea, this ego, with its contradiction and perplexity, speaketh most
uprightly of its being—this creating, willing, evaluing ego, which is
the measure and value of things.

And this most upright existence, the ego—it speaketh of the body, and
still implieth the body, even when it museth and raveth and fluttereth
with broken wings.

Always more uprightly learneth it to speak, the ego; and the more it
learneth, the more doth it find titles and honours for the body and the
earth.

A new pride taught me mine ego, and that teach I unto men: no longer
to thrust one’s head into the sand of celestial things, but to carry it
freely, a terrestrial head, which giveth meaning to the earth!

A new will teach I unto men: to choose that path which man hath followed
blindly, and to approve of it—and no longer to slink aside from it,
like the sick and perishing!

The sick and perishing—it was they who despised the body and the earth,
and invented the heavenly world, and the redeeming blood-drops; but even
those sweet and sad poisons they borrowed from the body and the earth!

From their misery they sought escape, and the stars were too remote for
them. Then they sighed: “O that there were heavenly paths by which to
steal into another existence and into happiness!” Then they contrived
for themselves their by-paths and bloody draughts!

Beyond the sphere of their body and this earth they now fancied
themselves transported, these ungrateful ones. But to what did they owe
the convulsion and rapture of their transport? To their body and this
earth.

Gentle is Zarathustra to the sickly. Verily, he is not indignant
at their modes of consolation and ingratitude. May they become
convalescents and overcomers, and create higher bodies for themselves!

Neither is Zarathustra indignant at a convalescent who looketh tenderly
on his delusions, and at midnight stealeth round the grave of his God;
but sickness and a sick frame remain even in his tears.

Many sickly ones have there always been among those who muse, and
languish for God; violently they hate the discerning ones, and the
latest of virtues, which is uprightness.

Backward they always gaze toward dark ages: then, indeed, were delusion
and faith something different. Raving of the reason was likeness to God,
and doubt was sin.

Too well do I know those godlike ones: they insist on being believed in,
and that doubt is sin. Too well, also, do I know what they themselves
most believe in.

Verily, not in backworlds and redeeming blood-drops: but in the body
do they also believe most; and their own body is for them the
thing-in-itself.

But it is a sickly thing to them, and gladly would they get out of their
skin. Therefore hearken they to the preachers of death, and themselves
preach backworlds.

Hearken rather, my brethren, to the voice of the healthy body; it is a
more upright and pure voice.

More uprightly and purely speaketh the healthy body, perfect and
square-built; and it speaketh of the meaning of the earth.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




IV. THE DESPISERS OF THE BODY.


To the despisers of the body will I speak my word. I wish them neither
to learn afresh, nor teach anew, but only to bid farewell to their own
bodies,—and thus be dumb.

“Body am I, and soul”—so saith the child. And why should one not speak
like children?

But the awakened one, the knowing one, saith: “Body am I entirely, and
nothing more; and soul is only the name of something in the body.”

The body is a big sagacity, a plurality with one sense, a war and a
peace, a flock and a shepherd.

An instrument of thy body is also thy little sagacity, my brother, which
thou callest “spirit”—a little instrument and plaything of thy big
sagacity.

“Ego,” sayest thou, and art proud of that word. But the greater
thing—in which thou art unwilling to believe—is thy body with its big
sagacity; it saith not “ego,” but doeth it.

What the sense feeleth, what the spirit discerneth, hath never its end
in itself. But sense and spirit would fain persuade thee that they are
the end of all things: so vain are they.

Instruments and playthings are sense and spirit: behind them there
is still the Self. The Self seeketh with the eyes of the senses, it
hearkeneth also with the ears of the spirit.

Ever hearkeneth the Self, and seeketh; it compareth, mastereth,
conquereth, and destroyeth. It ruleth, and is also the ego’s ruler.

Behind thy thoughts and feelings, my brother, there is a mighty lord,
an unknown sage—it is called Self; it dwelleth in thy body, it is thy
body.

There is more sagacity in thy body than in thy best wisdom. And who then
knoweth why thy body requireth just thy best wisdom?

Thy Self laugheth at thine ego, and its proud prancings. “What are these
prancings and flights of thought unto me?” it saith to itself. “A by-way
to my purpose. I am the leading-string of the ego, and the prompter of
its notions.”

The Self saith unto the ego: “Feel pain!” And thereupon it suffereth,
and thinketh how it may put an end thereto—and for that very purpose it
IS MEANT to think.

The Self saith unto the ego: “Feel pleasure!” Thereupon it rejoiceth,
and thinketh how it may ofttimes rejoice—and for that very purpose it
IS MEANT to think.

To the despisers of the body will I speak a word. That they despise is
caused by their esteem. What is it that created esteeming and despising
and worth and will?

The creating Self created for itself esteeming and despising, it created
for itself joy and woe. The creating body created for itself spirit, as
a hand to its will.

Even in your folly and despising ye each serve your Self, ye despisers
of the body. I tell you, your very Self wanteth to die, and turneth away
from life.

No longer can your Self do that which it desireth most:—create beyond
itself. That is what it desireth most; that is all its fervour.

But it is now too late to do so:—so your Self wisheth to succumb, ye
despisers of the body.

To succumb—so wisheth your Self; and therefore have ye become despisers
of the body. For ye can no longer create beyond yourselves.

And therefore are ye now angry with life and with the earth. And
unconscious envy is in the sidelong look of your contempt.

I go not your way, ye despisers of the body! Ye are no bridges for me to
the Superman!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




V. JOYS AND PASSIONS.


My brother, when thou hast a virtue, and it is thine own virtue, thou
hast it in common with no one.

To be sure, thou wouldst call it by name and caress it; thou wouldst
pull its ears and amuse thyself with it.

And lo! Then hast thou its name in common with the people, and hast
become one of the people and the herd with thy virtue!

Better for thee to say: “Ineffable is it, and nameless, that which is
pain and sweetness to my soul, and also the hunger of my bowels.”

Let thy virtue be too high for the familiarity of names, and if thou
must speak of it, be not ashamed to stammer about it.

Thus speak and stammer: “That is MY good, that do I love, thus doth it
please me entirely, thus only do _I_ desire the good.

Not as the law of a God do I desire it, not as a human law or a human
need do I desire it; it is not to be a guide-post for me to superearths
and paradises.

An earthly virtue is it which I love: little prudence is therein, and
the least everyday wisdom.

But that bird built its nest beside me: therefore, I love and cherish
it—now sitteth it beside me on its golden eggs.”

Thus shouldst thou stammer, and praise thy virtue.

Once hadst thou passions and calledst them evil. But now hast thou only
thy virtues: they grew out of thy passions.

Thou implantedst thy highest aim into the heart of those passions: then
became they thy virtues and joys.

And though thou wert of the race of the hot-tempered, or of the
voluptuous, or of the fanatical, or the vindictive;

All thy passions in the end became virtues, and all thy devils angels.

Once hadst thou wild dogs in thy cellar: but they changed at last into
birds and charming songstresses.

Out of thy poisons brewedst thou balsam for thyself; thy cow,
affliction, milkedst thou—now drinketh thou the sweet milk of her
udder.

And nothing evil groweth in thee any longer, unless it be the evil that
groweth out of the conflict of thy virtues.

My brother, if thou be fortunate, then wilt thou have one virtue and no
more: thus goest thou easier over the bridge.

Illustrious is it to have many virtues, but a hard lot; and many a one
hath gone into the wilderness and killed himself, because he was weary
of being the battle and battlefield of virtues.

My brother, are war and battle evil? Necessary, however, is the evil;
necessary are the envy and the distrust and the back-biting among the
virtues.

Lo! how each of thy virtues is covetous of the highest place; it wanteth
thy whole spirit to be ITS herald, it wanteth thy whole power, in wrath,
hatred, and love.

Jealous is every virtue of the others, and a dreadful thing is jealousy.
Even virtues may succumb by jealousy.

He whom the flame of jealousy encompasseth, turneth at last, like the
scorpion, the poisoned sting against himself.

Ah! my brother, hast thou never seen a virtue backbite and stab itself?

Man is something that hath to be surpassed: and therefore shalt thou
love thy virtues,—for thou wilt succumb by them.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




VI. THE PALE CRIMINAL.


Ye do not mean to slay, ye judges and sacrificers, until the animal hath
bowed its head? Lo! the pale criminal hath bowed his head: out of his
eye speaketh the great contempt.

“Mine ego is something which is to be surpassed: mine ego is to me the
great contempt of man”: so speaketh it out of that eye.

When he judged himself—that was his supreme moment; let not the exalted
one relapse again into his low estate!

There is no salvation for him who thus suffereth from himself, unless it
be speedy death.

Your slaying, ye judges, shall be pity, and not revenge; and in that ye
slay, see to it that ye yourselves justify life!

It is not enough that ye should reconcile with him whom ye slay. Let
your sorrow be love to the Superman: thus will ye justify your own
survival!

“Enemy” shall ye say but not “villain,” “invalid” shall ye say but not
“wretch,” “fool” shall ye say but not “sinner.”

And thou, red judge, if thou would say audibly all thou hast done in
thought, then would every one cry: “Away with the nastiness and the
virulent reptile!”

But one thing is the thought, another thing is the deed, and another
thing is the idea of the deed. The wheel of causality doth not roll
between them.

An idea made this pale man pale. Adequate was he for his deed when he
did it, but the idea of it, he could not endure when it was done.

Evermore did he now see himself as the doer of one deed. Madness, I call
this: the exception reversed itself to the rule in him.

The streak of chalk bewitcheth the hen; the stroke he struck bewitched
his weak reason. Madness AFTER the deed, I call this.

Hearken, ye judges! There is another madness besides, and it is BEFORE
the deed. Ah! ye have not gone deep enough into this soul!

Thus speaketh the red judge: “Why did this criminal commit murder? He
meant to rob.” I tell you, however, that his soul wanted blood, not
booty: he thirsted for the happiness of the knife!

But his weak reason understood not this madness, and it persuaded him.
“What matter about blood!” it said; “wishest thou not, at least, to make
booty thereby? Or take revenge?”

And he hearkened unto his weak reason: like lead lay its words upon
him—thereupon he robbed when he murdered. He did not mean to be
ashamed of his madness.

And now once more lieth the lead of his guilt upon him, and once more is
his weak reason so benumbed, so paralysed, and so dull.

Could he only shake his head, then would his burden roll off; but who
shaketh that head?

What is this man? A mass of diseases that reach out into the world
through the spirit; there they want to get their prey.

What is this man? A coil of wild serpents that are seldom at peace among
themselves—so they go forth apart and seek prey in the world.

Look at that poor body! What it suffered and craved, the poor soul
interpreted to itself—it interpreted it as murderous desire, and
eagerness for the happiness of the knife.

Him who now turneth sick, the evil overtaketh which is now the evil: he
seeketh to cause pain with that which causeth him pain. But there have
been other ages, and another evil and good.

Once was doubt evil, and the will to Self. Then the invalid became a
heretic or sorcerer; as heretic or sorcerer he suffered, and sought to
cause suffering.

But this will not enter your ears; it hurteth your good people, ye tell
me. But what doth it matter to me about your good people!

Many things in your good people cause me disgust, and verily, not their
evil. I would that they had a madness by which they succumbed, like this
pale criminal!

Verily, I would that their madness were called truth, or fidelity,
or justice: but they have their virtue in order to live long, and in
wretched self-complacency.

I am a railing alongside the torrent; whoever is able to grasp me may
grasp me! Your crutch, however, I am not.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




VII. READING AND WRITING.


Of all that is written, I love only what a person hath written with his
blood. Write with blood, and thou wilt find that blood is spirit.

It is no easy task to understand unfamiliar blood; I hate the reading
idlers.

He who knoweth the reader, doeth nothing more for the reader. Another
century of readers—and spirit itself will stink.

Every one being allowed to learn to read, ruineth in the long run not
only writing but also thinking.

Once spirit was God, then it became man, and now it even becometh
populace.

He that writeth in blood and proverbs doth not want to be read, but
learnt by heart.

In the mountains the shortest way is from peak to peak, but for that
route thou must have long legs. Proverbs should be peaks, and those
spoken to should be big and tall.

The atmosphere rare and pure, danger near and the spirit full of a
joyful wickedness: thus are things well matched.

I want to have goblins about me, for I am courageous. The courage which
scareth away ghosts, createth for itself goblins—it wanteth to laugh.

I no longer feel in common with you; the very cloud which I see
beneath me, the blackness and heaviness at which I laugh—that is your
thunder-cloud.

Ye look aloft when ye long for exaltation; and I look downward because I
am exalted.

Who among you can at the same time laugh and be exalted?

He who climbeth on the highest mountains, laugheth at all tragic plays
and tragic realities.

Courageous, unconcerned, scornful, coercive—so wisdom wisheth us; she
is a woman, and ever loveth only a warrior.

Ye tell me, “Life is hard to bear.” But for what purpose should ye have
your pride in the morning and your resignation in the evening?

Life is hard to bear: but do not affect to be so delicate! We are all of
us fine sumpter asses and assesses.

What have we in common with the rose-bud, which trembleth because a drop
of dew hath formed upon it?

It is true we love life; not because we are wont to live, but because we
are wont to love.

There is always some madness in love. But there is always, also, some
method in madness.

And to me also, who appreciate life, the butterflies, and soap-bubbles,
and whatever is like them amongst us, seem most to enjoy happiness.

To see these light, foolish, pretty, lively little sprites flit
about—that moveth Zarathustra to tears and songs.

I should only believe in a God that would know how to dance.

And when I saw my devil, I found him serious, thorough, profound,
solemn: he was the spirit of gravity—through him all things fall.

Not by wrath, but by laughter, do we slay. Come, let us slay the spirit
of gravity!

I learned to walk; since then have I let myself run. I learned to fly;
since then I do not need pushing in order to move from a spot.

Now am I light, now do I fly; now do I see myself under myself. Now
there danceth a God in me.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




VIII. THE TREE ON THE HILL.


Zarathustra’s eye had perceived that a certain youth avoided him. And as
he walked alone one evening over the hills surrounding the town called
“The Pied Cow,” behold, there found he the youth sitting leaning against
a tree, and gazing with wearied look into the valley. Zarathustra
thereupon laid hold of the tree beside which the youth sat, and spake
thus:

“If I wished to shake this tree with my hands, I should not be able to
do so.

But the wind, which we see not, troubleth and bendeth it as it listeth.
We are sorest bent and troubled by invisible hands.”

Thereupon the youth arose disconcerted, and said: “I hear Zarathustra,
and just now was I thinking of him!” Zarathustra answered:

“Why art thou frightened on that account?—But it is the same with man
as with the tree.

The more he seeketh to rise into the height and light, the more
vigorously do his roots struggle earthward, downward, into the dark and
deep—into the evil.”

“Yea, into the evil!” cried the youth. “How is it possible that thou
hast discovered my soul?”

Zarathustra smiled, and said: “Many a soul one will never discover,
unless one first invent it.”

“Yea, into the evil!” cried the youth once more.

“Thou saidst the truth, Zarathustra. I trust myself no longer since I
sought to rise into the height, and nobody trusteth me any longer; how
doth that happen?

I change too quickly: my to-day refuteth my yesterday. I often overleap
the steps when I clamber; for so doing, none of the steps pardons me.

When aloft, I find myself always alone. No one speaketh unto me; the
frost of solitude maketh me tremble. What do I seek on the height?

My contempt and my longing increase together; the higher I clamber, the
more do I despise him who clambereth. What doth he seek on the height?

How ashamed I am of my clambering and stumbling! How I mock at my
violent panting! How I hate him who flieth! How tired I am on the
height!”

Here the youth was silent. And Zarathustra contemplated the tree beside
which they stood, and spake thus:

“This tree standeth lonely here on the hills; it hath grown up high
above man and beast.

And if it wanted to speak, it would have none who could understand it:
so high hath it grown.

Now it waiteth and waiteth,—for what doth it wait? It dwelleth too
close to the seat of the clouds; it waiteth perhaps for the first
lightning?”

When Zarathustra had said this, the youth called out with violent
gestures: “Yea, Zarathustra, thou speakest the truth. My destruction
I longed for, when I desired to be on the height, and thou art the
lightning for which I waited! Lo! what have I been since thou hast
appeared amongst us? It is mine envy of thee that hath destroyed
me!”—Thus spake the youth, and wept bitterly. Zarathustra, however, put
his arm about him, and led the youth away with him.

And when they had walked a while together, Zarathustra began to speak
thus:

It rendeth my heart. Better than thy words express it, thine eyes tell
me all thy danger.

As yet thou art not free; thou still SEEKEST freedom. Too unslept hath
thy seeking made thee, and too wakeful.

On the open height wouldst thou be; for the stars thirsteth thy soul.
But thy bad impulses also thirst for freedom.

Thy wild dogs want liberty; they bark for joy in their cellar when thy
spirit endeavoureth to open all prison doors.

Still art thou a prisoner—it seemeth to me—who deviseth liberty
for himself: ah! sharp becometh the soul of such prisoners, but also
deceitful and wicked.

To purify himself, is still necessary for the freedman of the spirit.
Much of the prison and the mould still remaineth in him: pure hath his
eye still to become.

Yea, I know thy danger. But by my love and hope I conjure thee: cast not
thy love and hope away!

Noble thou feelest thyself still, and noble others also feel thee still,
though they bear thee a grudge and cast evil looks. Know this, that to
everybody a noble one standeth in the way.

Also to the good, a noble one standeth in the way: and even when they
call him a good man, they want thereby to put him aside.

The new, would the noble man create, and a new virtue. The old, wanteth
the good man, and that the old should be conserved.

But it is not the danger of the noble man to turn a good man, but lest
he should become a blusterer, a scoffer, or a destroyer.

Ah! I have known noble ones who lost their highest hope. And then they
disparaged all high hopes.

Then lived they shamelessly in temporary pleasures, and beyond the day
had hardly an aim.

“Spirit is also voluptuousness,”—said they. Then broke the wings of
their spirit; and now it creepeth about, and defileth where it gnaweth.

Once they thought of becoming heroes; but sensualists are they now. A
trouble and a terror is the hero to them.

But by my love and hope I conjure thee: cast not away the hero in thy
soul! Maintain holy thy highest hope!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




IX. THE PREACHERS OF DEATH.


There are preachers of death: and the earth is full of those to whom
desistance from life must be preached.

Full is the earth of the superfluous; marred is life by the
many-too-many. May they be decoyed out of this life by the “life
eternal”!

“The yellow ones”: so are called the preachers of death, or “the black
ones.” But I will show them unto you in other colours besides.

There are the terrible ones who carry about in themselves the beast of
prey, and have no choice except lusts or self-laceration. And even their
lusts are self-laceration.

They have not yet become men, those terrible ones: may they preach
desistance from life, and pass away themselves!

There are the spiritually consumptive ones: hardly are they born when
they begin to die, and long for doctrines of lassitude and renunciation.

They would fain be dead, and we should approve of their wish! Let
us beware of awakening those dead ones, and of damaging those living
coffins!

They meet an invalid, or an old man, or a corpse—and immediately they
say: “Life is refuted!”

But they only are refuted, and their eye, which seeth only one aspect of
existence.

Shrouded in thick melancholy, and eager for the little casualties that
bring death: thus do they wait, and clench their teeth.

Or else, they grasp at sweetmeats, and mock at their childishness
thereby: they cling to their straw of life, and mock at their still
clinging to it.

Their wisdom speaketh thus: “A fool, he who remaineth alive; but so far
are we fools! And that is the foolishest thing in life!”

“Life is only suffering”: so say others, and lie not. Then see to it
that YE cease! See to it that the life ceaseth which is only suffering!

And let this be the teaching of your virtue: “Thou shalt slay thyself!
Thou shalt steal away from thyself!”—

“Lust is sin,”—so say some who preach death—“let us go apart and beget
no children!”

“Giving birth is troublesome,”—say others—“why still give birth? One
beareth only the unfortunate!” And they also are preachers of death.

“Pity is necessary,”—so saith a third party. “Take what I have! Take
what I am! So much less doth life bind me!”

Were they consistently pitiful, then would they make their neighbours
sick of life. To be wicked—that would be their true goodness.

But they want to be rid of life; what care they if they bind others
still faster with their chains and gifts!—

And ye also, to whom life is rough labour and disquiet, are ye not very
tired of life? Are ye not very ripe for the sermon of death?

All ye to whom rough labour is dear, and the rapid, new, and strange—ye
put up with yourselves badly; your diligence is flight, and the will to
self-forgetfulness.

If ye believed more in life, then would ye devote yourselves less to the
momentary. But for waiting, ye have not enough of capacity in you—nor
even for idling!

Everywhere resoundeth the voices of those who preach death; and the
earth is full of those to whom death hath to be preached.

Or “life eternal”; it is all the same to me—if only they pass away
quickly!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




X. WAR AND WARRIORS.


By our best enemies we do not want to be spared, nor by those either
whom we love from the very heart. So let me tell you the truth!

My brethren in war! I love you from the very heart. I am, and was ever,
your counterpart. And I am also your best enemy. So let me tell you the
truth!

I know the hatred and envy of your hearts. Ye are not great enough not
to know of hatred and envy. Then be great enough not to be ashamed of
them!

And if ye cannot be saints of knowledge, then, I pray you, be at least
its warriors. They are the companions and forerunners of such saintship.

I see many soldiers; could I but see many warriors! “Uniform” one
calleth what they wear; may it not be uniform what they therewith hide!

Ye shall be those whose eyes ever seek for an enemy—for YOUR enemy. And
with some of you there is hatred at first sight.

Your enemy shall ye seek; your war shall ye wage, and for the sake of
your thoughts! And if your thoughts succumb, your uprightness shall
still shout triumph thereby!

Ye shall love peace as a means to new wars—and the short peace more
than the long.

You I advise not to work, but to fight. You I advise not to peace, but
to victory. Let your work be a fight, let your peace be a victory!

One can only be silent and sit peacefully when one hath arrow and bow;
otherwise one prateth and quarrelleth. Let your peace be a victory!

Ye say it is the good cause which halloweth even war? I say unto you: it
is the good war which halloweth every cause.

War and courage have done more great things than charity. Not your
sympathy, but your bravery hath hitherto saved the victims.

“What is good?” ye ask. To be brave is good. Let the little girls say:
“To be good is what is pretty, and at the same time touching.”

They call you heartless: but your heart is true, and I love the
bashfulness of your good-will. Ye are ashamed of your flow, and others
are ashamed of their ebb.

Ye are ugly? Well then, my brethren, take the sublime about you, the
mantle of the ugly!

And when your soul becometh great, then doth it become haughty, and in
your sublimity there is wickedness. I know you.

In wickedness the haughty man and the weakling meet. But they
misunderstand one another. I know you.

Ye shall only have enemies to be hated, but not enemies to be despised.
Ye must be proud of your enemies; then, the successes of your enemies
are also your successes.

Resistance—that is the distinction of the slave. Let your distinction
be obedience. Let your commanding itself be obeying!

To the good warrior soundeth “thou shalt” pleasanter than “I will.” And
all that is dear unto you, ye shall first have it commanded unto you.

Let your love to life be love to your highest hope; and let your highest
hope be the highest thought of life!

Your highest thought, however, ye shall have it commanded unto you by
me—and it is this: man is something that is to be surpassed.

So live your life of obedience and of war! What matter about long life!
What warrior wisheth to be spared!

I spare you not, I love you from my very heart, my brethren in war!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XI. THE NEW IDOL.


Somewhere there are still peoples and herds, but not with us, my
brethren: here there are states.

A state? What is that? Well! open now your ears unto me, for now will I
say unto you my word concerning the death of peoples.

A state, is called the coldest of all cold monsters. Coldly lieth
it also; and this lie creepeth from its mouth: “I, the state, am the
people.”

It is a lie! Creators were they who created peoples, and hung a faith
and a love over them: thus they served life.

Destroyers, are they who lay snares for many, and call it the state:
they hang a sword and a hundred cravings over them.

Where there is still a people, there the state is not understood, but
hated as the evil eye, and as sin against laws and customs.

This sign I give unto you: every people speaketh its language of good
and evil: this its neighbour understandeth not. Its language hath it
devised for itself in laws and customs.

But the state lieth in all languages of good and evil; and whatever it
saith it lieth; and whatever it hath it hath stolen.

False is everything in it; with stolen teeth it biteth, the biting one.
False are even its bowels.

Confusion of language of good and evil; this sign I give unto you as
the sign of the state. Verily, the will to death, indicateth this sign!
Verily, it beckoneth unto the preachers of death!

Many too many are born: for the superfluous ones was the state devised!

See just how it enticeth them to it, the many-too-many! How it
swalloweth and cheweth and recheweth them!

“On earth there is nothing greater than I: it is I who am the regulating
finger of God”—thus roareth the monster. And not only the long-eared
and short-sighted fall upon their knees!

Ah! even in your ears, ye great souls, it whispereth its gloomy lies!
Ah! it findeth out the rich hearts which willingly lavish themselves!

Yea, it findeth you out too, ye conquerors of the old God! Weary ye
became of the conflict, and now your weariness serveth the new idol!

Heroes and honourable ones, it would fain set up around it, the new
idol! Gladly it basketh in the sunshine of good consciences,—the cold
monster!

Everything will it give YOU, if YE worship it, the new idol: thus it
purchaseth the lustre of your virtue, and the glance of your proud eyes.

It seeketh to allure by means of you, the many-too-many! Yea, a hellish
artifice hath here been devised, a death-horse jingling with the
trappings of divine honours!

Yea, a dying for many hath here been devised, which glorifieth itself as
life: verily, a hearty service unto all preachers of death!

The state, I call it, where all are poison-drinkers, the good and the
bad: the state, where all lose themselves, the good and the bad: the
state, where the slow suicide of all—is called “life.”

Just see these superfluous ones! They steal the works of the inventors
and the treasures of the wise. Culture, they call their theft—and
everything becometh sickness and trouble unto them!

Just see these superfluous ones! Sick are they always; they vomit their
bile and call it a newspaper. They devour one another, and cannot even
digest themselves.

Just see these superfluous ones! Wealth they acquire and become poorer
thereby. Power they seek for, and above all, the lever of power, much
money—these impotent ones!

See them clamber, these nimble apes! They clamber over one another, and
thus scuffle into the mud and the abyss.

Towards the throne they all strive: it is their madness—as if happiness
sat on the throne! Ofttimes sitteth filth on the throne.—and ofttimes
also the throne on filth.

Madmen they all seem to me, and clambering apes, and too eager. Badly
smelleth their idol to me, the cold monster: badly they all smell to me,
these idolaters.

My brethren, will ye suffocate in the fumes of their maws and appetites!
Better break the windows and jump into the open air!

Do go out of the way of the bad odour! Withdraw from the idolatry of the
superfluous!

Do go out of the way of the bad odour! Withdraw from the steam of these
human sacrifices!

Open still remaineth the earth for great souls. Empty are still many
sites for lone ones and twain ones, around which floateth the odour of
tranquil seas.

Open still remaineth a free life for great souls. Verily, he who
possesseth little is so much the less possessed: blessed be moderate
poverty!

There, where the state ceaseth—there only commenceth the man who is not
superfluous: there commenceth the song of the necessary ones, the single
and irreplaceable melody.

There, where the state CEASETH—pray look thither, my brethren! Do ye
not see it, the rainbow and the bridges of the Superman?—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XII. THE FLIES IN THE MARKET-PLACE.


Flee, my friend, into thy solitude! I see thee deafened with the noise
of the great men, and stung all over with the stings of the little ones.

Admirably do forest and rock know how to be silent with thee. Resemble
again the tree which thou lovest, the broad-branched one—silently and
attentively it o’erhangeth the sea.

Where solitude endeth, there beginneth the market-place; and where the
market-place beginneth, there beginneth also the noise of the great
actors, and the buzzing of the poison-flies.

In the world even the best things are worthless without those who
represent them: those representers, the people call great men.

Little do the people understand what is great—that is to say, the
creating agency. But they have a taste for all representers and actors
of great things.

Around the devisers of new values revolveth the world:—invisibly it
revolveth. But around the actors revolve the people and the glory: such
is the course of things.

Spirit, hath the actor, but little conscience of the spirit. He
believeth always in that wherewith he maketh believe most strongly—in
HIMSELF!

To-morrow he hath a new belief, and the day after, one still newer. Sharp
perceptions hath he, like the people, and changeable humours.

To upset—that meaneth with him to prove. To drive mad—that meaneth
with him to convince. And blood is counted by him as the best of all
arguments.

A truth which only glideth into fine ears, he calleth falsehood and
trumpery. Verily, he believeth only in Gods that make a great noise in
the world!

Full of clattering buffoons is the market-place,—and the people glory
in their great men! These are for them the masters of the hour.

But the hour presseth them; so they press thee. And also from thee
they want Yea or Nay. Alas! thou wouldst set thy chair betwixt For and
Against?

On account of those absolute and impatient ones, be not jealous, thou
lover of truth! Never yet did truth cling to the arm of an absolute one.

On account of those abrupt ones, return into thy security: only in the
market-place is one assailed by Yea? or Nay?

Slow is the experience of all deep fountains: long have they to wait
until they know WHAT hath fallen into their depths.

Away from the market-place and from fame taketh place all that is great:
away from the market-place and from fame have ever dwelt the devisers of
new values.

Flee, my friend, into thy solitude: I see thee stung all over by the
poisonous flies. Flee thither, where a rough, strong breeze bloweth!

Flee into thy solitude! Thou hast lived too closely to the small and the
pitiable. Flee from their invisible vengeance! Towards thee they have
nothing but vengeance.

Raise no longer an arm against them! Innumerable are they, and it is not
thy lot to be a fly-flap.

Innumerable are the small and pitiable ones; and of many a proud
structure, rain-drops and weeds have been the ruin.

Thou art not stone; but already hast thou become hollow by the numerous
drops. Thou wilt yet break and burst by the numerous drops.

Exhausted I see thee, by poisonous flies; bleeding I see thee, and torn
at a hundred spots; and thy pride will not even upbraid.

Blood they would have from thee in all innocence; blood their bloodless
souls crave for—and they sting, therefore, in all innocence.

But thou, profound one, thou sufferest too profoundly even from small
wounds; and ere thou hadst recovered, the same poison-worm crawled over
thy hand.

Too proud art thou to kill these sweet-tooths. But take care lest it be
thy fate to suffer all their poisonous injustice!

They buzz around thee also with their praise: obtrusiveness, is their
praise. They want to be close to thy skin and thy blood.

They flatter thee, as one flattereth a God or devil; they whimper before
thee, as before a God or devil. What doth it come to! Flatterers are
they, and whimperers, and nothing more.

Often, also, do they show themselves to thee as amiable ones. But that
hath ever been the prudence of the cowardly. Yea! the cowardly are wise!

They think much about thee with their circumscribed souls—thou art
always suspected by them! Whatever is much thought about is at last
thought suspicious.

They punish thee for all thy virtues. They pardon thee in their inmost
hearts only—for thine errors.

Because thou art gentle and of upright character, thou sayest:
“Blameless are they for their small existence.” But their circumscribed
souls think: “Blamable is all great existence.”

Even when thou art gentle towards them, they still feel themselves
despised by thee; and they repay thy beneficence with secret
maleficence.

Thy silent pride is always counter to their taste; they rejoice if once
thou be humble enough to be frivolous.

What we recognise in a man, we also irritate in him. Therefore be on
your guard against the small ones!

In thy presence they feel themselves small, and their baseness gleameth
and gloweth against thee in invisible vengeance.

Sawest thou not how often they became dumb when thou approachedst them,
and how their energy left them like the smoke of an extinguishing fire?

Yea, my friend, the bad conscience art thou of thy neighbours; for they
are unworthy of thee. Therefore they hate thee, and would fain suck thy
blood.

Thy neighbours will always be poisonous flies; what is great in
thee—that itself must make them more poisonous, and always more
fly-like.

Flee, my friend, into thy solitude—and thither, where a rough strong
breeze bloweth. It is not thy lot to be a fly-flap.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XIII. CHASTITY.


I love the forest. It is bad to live in cities: there, there are too
many of the lustful.

Is it not better to fall into the hands of a murderer, than into the
dreams of a lustful woman?

And just look at these men: their eye saith it—they know nothing better
on earth than to lie with a woman.

Filth is at the bottom of their souls; and alas! if their filth hath
still spirit in it!

Would that ye were perfect—at least as animals! But to animals
belongeth innocence.

Do I counsel you to slay your instincts? I counsel you to innocence in
your instincts.

Do I counsel you to chastity? Chastity is a virtue with some, but with
many almost a vice.

These are continent, to be sure: but doggish lust looketh enviously out
of all that they do.

Even into the heights of their virtue and into their cold spirit doth
this creature follow them, with its discord.

And how nicely can doggish lust beg for a piece of spirit, when a piece
of flesh is denied it!

Ye love tragedies and all that breaketh the heart? But I am distrustful
of your doggish lust.

Ye have too cruel eyes, and ye look wantonly towards the sufferers.
Hath not your lust just disguised itself and taken the name of
fellow-suffering?

And also this parable give I unto you: Not a few who meant to cast out
their devil, went thereby into the swine themselves.

To whom chastity is difficult, it is to be dissuaded: lest it become the
road to hell—to filth and lust of soul.

Do I speak of filthy things? That is not the worst thing for me to do.

Not when the truth is filthy, but when it is shallow, doth the
discerning one go unwillingly into its waters.

Verily, there are chaste ones from their very nature; they are gentler
of heart, and laugh better and oftener than you.

They laugh also at chastity, and ask: “What is chastity?

Is chastity not folly? But the folly came unto us, and not we unto it.

We offered that guest harbour and heart: now it dwelleth with us—let it
stay as long as it will!”—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XIV. THE FRIEND.


“One, is always too many about me”—thinketh the anchorite. “Always once
one—that maketh two in the long run!”

I and me are always too earnestly in conversation: how could it be
endured, if there were not a friend?

The friend of the anchorite is always the third one: the third one is
the cork which preventeth the conversation of the two sinking into the
depth.

Ah! there are too many depths for all anchorites. Therefore, do they
long so much for a friend, and for his elevation.

Our faith in others betrayeth wherein we would fain have faith in
ourselves. Our longing for a friend is our betrayer.

And often with our love we want merely to overleap envy. And often we
attack and make ourselves enemies, to conceal that we are vulnerable.

“Be at least mine enemy!”—thus speaketh the true reverence, which doth
not venture to solicit friendship.

If one would have a friend, then must one also be willing to wage war
for him: and in order to wage war, one must be CAPABLE of being an
enemy.

One ought still to honour the enemy in one’s friend. Canst thou go nigh
unto thy friend, and not go over to him?

In one’s friend one shall have one’s best enemy. Thou shalt be closest
unto him with thy heart when thou withstandest him.

Thou wouldst wear no raiment before thy friend? It is in honour of thy
friend that thou showest thyself to him as thou art? But he wisheth thee
to the devil on that account!

He who maketh no secret of himself shocketh: so much reason have ye
to fear nakedness! Aye, if ye were Gods, ye could then be ashamed of
clothing!

Thou canst not adorn thyself fine enough for thy friend; for thou shalt
be unto him an arrow and a longing for the Superman.

Sawest thou ever thy friend asleep—to know how he looketh? What is
usually the countenance of thy friend? It is thine own countenance, in a
coarse and imperfect mirror.

Sawest thou ever thy friend asleep? Wert thou not dismayed at thy friend
looking so? O my friend, man is something that hath to be surpassed.

In divining and keeping silence shall the friend be a master: not
everything must thou wish to see. Thy dream shall disclose unto thee
what thy friend doeth when awake.

Let thy pity be a divining: to know first if thy friend wanteth pity.
Perhaps he loveth in thee the unmoved eye, and the look of eternity.

Let thy pity for thy friend be hid under a hard shell; thou shalt bite
out a tooth upon it. Thus will it have delicacy and sweetness.

Art thou pure air and solitude and bread and medicine to thy friend?
Many a one cannot loosen his own fetters, but is nevertheless his
friend’s emancipator.

Art thou a slave? Then thou canst not be a friend. Art thou a tyrant?
Then thou canst not have friends.

Far too long hath there been a slave and a tyrant concealed in woman.
On that account woman is not yet capable of friendship: she knoweth only
love.

In woman’s love there is injustice and blindness to all she doth not
love. And even in woman’s conscious love, there is still always surprise
and lightning and night, along with the light.

As yet woman is not capable of friendship: women are still cats, and
birds. Or at the best, cows.

As yet woman is not capable of friendship. But tell me, ye men, who of
you are capable of friendship?

Oh! your poverty, ye men, and your sordidness of soul! As much as ye
give to your friend, will I give even to my foe, and will not have
become poorer thereby.

There is comradeship: may there be friendship!

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XV. THE THOUSAND AND ONE GOALS.


Many lands saw Zarathustra, and many peoples: thus he discovered the
good and bad of many peoples. No greater power did Zarathustra find on
earth than good and bad.

No people could live without first valuing; if a people will maintain
itself, however, it must not value as its neighbour valueth.

Much that passed for good with one people was regarded with scorn and
contempt by another: thus I found it. Much found I here called bad,
which was there decked with purple honours.

Never did the one neighbour understand the other: ever did his soul
marvel at his neighbour’s delusion and wickedness.

A table of excellencies hangeth over every people. Lo! it is the table
of their triumphs; lo! it is the voice of their Will to Power.

It is laudable, what they think hard; what is indispensable and hard
they call good; and what relieveth in the direst distress, the unique
and hardest of all,—they extol as holy.

Whatever maketh them rule and conquer and shine, to the dismay and envy
of their neighbours, they regard as the high and foremost thing, the
test and the meaning of all else.

Verily, my brother, if thou knewest but a people’s need, its land,
its sky, and its neighbour, then wouldst thou divine the law of its
surmountings, and why it climbeth up that ladder to its hope.

“Always shalt thou be the foremost and prominent above others: no one
shall thy jealous soul love, except a friend”—that made the soul of a
Greek thrill: thereby went he his way to greatness.

“To speak truth, and be skilful with bow and arrow”—so seemed it alike
pleasing and hard to the people from whom cometh my name—the name which
is alike pleasing and hard to me.

“To honour father and mother, and from the root of the soul to do their
will”—this table of surmounting hung another people over them, and
became powerful and permanent thereby.

“To have fidelity, and for the sake of fidelity to risk honour and
blood, even in evil and dangerous courses”—teaching itself so, another
people mastered itself, and thus mastering itself, became pregnant and
heavy with great hopes.

Verily, men have given unto themselves all their good and bad. Verily,
they took it not, they found it not, it came not unto them as a voice
from heaven.

Values did man only assign to things in order to maintain himself—he
created only the significance of things, a human significance!
Therefore, calleth he himself “man,” that is, the valuator.

Valuing is creating: hear it, ye creating ones! Valuation itself is the
treasure and jewel of the valued things.

Through valuation only is there value; and without valuation the nut of
existence would be hollow. Hear it, ye creating ones!

Change of values—that is, change of the creating ones. Always doth he
destroy who hath to be a creator.

Creating ones were first of all peoples, and only in late times
individuals; verily, the individual himself is still the latest
creation.

Peoples once hung over them tables of the good. Love which would rule
and love which would obey, created for themselves such tables.

Older is the pleasure in the herd than the pleasure in the ego: and as
long as the good conscience is for the herd, the bad conscience only
saith: ego.

Verily, the crafty ego, the loveless one, that seeketh its advantage in
the advantage of many—it is not the origin of the herd, but its ruin.

Loving ones, was it always, and creating ones, that created good and
bad. Fire of love gloweth in the names of all the virtues, and fire of
wrath.

Many lands saw Zarathustra, and many peoples: no greater power did
Zarathustra find on earth than the creations of the loving ones—“good”
 and “bad” are they called.

Verily, a prodigy is this power of praising and blaming. Tell me, ye
brethren, who will master it for me? Who will put a fetter upon the
thousand necks of this animal?

A thousand goals have there been hitherto, for a thousand peoples have
there been. Only the fetter for the thousand necks is still lacking;
there is lacking the one goal. As yet humanity hath not a goal.

But pray tell me, my brethren, if the goal of humanity be still lacking,
is there not also still lacking—humanity itself?—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XVI. NEIGHBOUR-LOVE.


Ye crowd around your neighbour, and have fine words for it. But I say
unto you: your neighbour-love is your bad love of yourselves.

Ye flee unto your neighbour from yourselves, and would fain make a
virtue thereof: but I fathom your “unselfishness.”

The THOU is older than the _I_; the THOU hath been consecrated, but not
yet the _I_: so man presseth nigh unto his neighbour.

Do I advise you to neighbour-love? Rather do I advise you to
neighbour-flight and to furthest love!

Higher than love to your neighbour is love to the furthest and future
ones; higher still than love to men, is love to things and phantoms.

The phantom that runneth on before thee, my brother, is fairer than
thou; why dost thou not give unto it thy flesh and thy bones? But thou
fearest, and runnest unto thy neighbour.

Ye cannot endure it with yourselves, and do not love yourselves
sufficiently: so ye seek to mislead your neighbour into love, and would
fain gild yourselves with his error.

Would that ye could not endure it with any kind of near ones, or their
neighbours; then would ye have to create your friend and his overflowing
heart out of yourselves.

Ye call in a witness when ye want to speak well of yourselves; and
when ye have misled him to think well of you, ye also think well of
yourselves.

Not only doth he lie, who speaketh contrary to his knowledge, but more
so, he who speaketh contrary to his ignorance. And thus speak ye
of yourselves in your intercourse, and belie your neighbour with
yourselves.

Thus saith the fool: “Association with men spoileth the character,
especially when one hath none.”

The one goeth to his neighbour because he seeketh himself, and the other
because he would fain lose himself. Your bad love to yourselves maketh
solitude a prison to you.

The furthest ones are they who pay for your love to the near ones; and
when there are but five of you together, a sixth must always die.

I love not your festivals either: too many actors found I there, and
even the spectators often behaved like actors.

Not the neighbour do I teach you, but the friend. Let the friend be the
festival of the earth to you, and a foretaste of the Superman.

I teach you the friend and his overflowing heart. But one must know how
to be a sponge, if one would be loved by overflowing hearts.

I teach you the friend in whom the world standeth complete, a capsule
of the good,—the creating friend, who hath always a complete world to
bestow.

And as the world unrolled itself for him, so rolleth it together again
for him in rings, as the growth of good through evil, as the growth of
purpose out of chance.

Let the future and the furthest be the motive of thy to-day; in thy
friend shalt thou love the Superman as thy motive.

My brethren, I advise you not to neighbour-love—I advise you to
furthest love!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XVII. THE WAY OF THE CREATING ONE.


Wouldst thou go into isolation, my brother? Wouldst thou seek the way
unto thyself? Tarry yet a little and hearken unto me.

“He who seeketh may easily get lost himself. All isolation is wrong”: so
say the herd. And long didst thou belong to the herd.

The voice of the herd will still echo in thee. And when thou sayest,
“I have no longer a conscience in common with you,” then will it be a
plaint and a pain.

Lo, that pain itself did the same conscience produce; and the last gleam
of that conscience still gloweth on thine affliction.

But thou wouldst go the way of thine affliction, which is the way unto
thyself? Then show me thine authority and thy strength to do so!

Art thou a new strength and a new authority? A first motion? A
self-rolling wheel? Canst thou also compel stars to revolve around thee?

Alas! there is so much lusting for loftiness! There are so many
convulsions of the ambitions! Show me that thou art not a lusting and
ambitious one!

Alas! there are so many great thoughts that do nothing more than the
bellows: they inflate, and make emptier than ever.

Free, dost thou call thyself? Thy ruling thought would I hear of, and
not that thou hast escaped from a yoke.

Art thou one ENTITLED to escape from a yoke? Many a one hath cast away
his final worth when he hath cast away his servitude.

Free from what? What doth that matter to Zarathustra! Clearly, however,
shall thine eye show unto me: free FOR WHAT?

Canst thou give unto thyself thy bad and thy good, and set up thy will
as a law over thee? Canst thou be judge for thyself, and avenger of thy
law?

Terrible is aloneness with the judge and avenger of one’s own law.
Thus is a star projected into desert space, and into the icy breath of
aloneness.

To-day sufferest thou still from the multitude, thou individual; to-day
hast thou still thy courage unabated, and thy hopes.

But one day will the solitude weary thee; one day will thy pride yield,
and thy courage quail. Thou wilt one day cry: “I am alone!”

One day wilt thou see no longer thy loftiness, and see too closely thy
lowliness; thy sublimity itself will frighten thee as a phantom. Thou
wilt one day cry: “All is false!”

There are feelings which seek to slay the lonesome one; if they do not
succeed, then must they themselves die! But art thou capable of it—to
be a murderer?

Hast thou ever known, my brother, the word “disdain”? And the anguish of
thy justice in being just to those that disdain thee?

Thou forcest many to think differently about thee; that, charge they
heavily to thine account. Thou camest nigh unto them, and yet wentest
past: for that they never forgive thee.

Thou goest beyond them: but the higher thou risest, the smaller doth the
eye of envy see thee. Most of all, however, is the flying one hated.

“How could ye be just unto me!”—must thou say—“I choose your injustice
as my allotted portion.”

Injustice and filth cast they at the lonesome one: but, my brother, if
thou wouldst be a star, thou must shine for them none the less on that
account!

And be on thy guard against the good and just! They would fain crucify
those who devise their own virtue—they hate the lonesome ones.

Be on thy guard, also, against holy simplicity! All is unholy to it that
is not simple; fain, likewise, would it play with the fire—of the fagot
and stake.

And be on thy guard, also, against the assaults of thy love! Too readily
doth the recluse reach his hand to any one who meeteth him.

To many a one mayest thou not give thy hand, but only thy paw; and I
wish thy paw also to have claws.

But the worst enemy thou canst meet, wilt thou thyself always be; thou
waylayest thyself in caverns and forests.

Thou lonesome one, thou goest the way to thyself! And past thyself and
thy seven devils leadeth thy way!

A heretic wilt thou be to thyself, and a wizard and a soothsayer, and a
fool, and a doubter, and a reprobate, and a villain.

Ready must thou be to burn thyself in thine own flame; how couldst thou
become new if thou have not first become ashes!

Thou lonesome one, thou goest the way of the creating one: a God wilt
thou create for thyself out of thy seven devils!

Thou lonesome one, thou goest the way of the loving one: thou lovest
thyself, and on that account despisest thou thyself, as only the loving
ones despise.

To create, desireth the loving one, because he despiseth! What knoweth
he of love who hath not been obliged to despise just what he loved!

With thy love, go into thine isolation, my brother, and with thy
creating; and late only will justice limp after thee.

With my tears, go into thine isolation, my brother. I love him who
seeketh to create beyond himself, and thus succumbeth.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XVIII. OLD AND YOUNG WOMEN.


“Why stealest thou along so furtively in the twilight, Zarathustra? And
what hidest thou so carefully under thy mantle?

Is it a treasure that hath been given thee? Or a child that hath been
born thee? Or goest thou thyself on a thief’s errand, thou friend of the
evil?”—

Verily, my brother, said Zarathustra, it is a treasure that hath been
given me: it is a little truth which I carry.

But it is naughty, like a young child; and if I hold not its mouth, it
screameth too loudly.

As I went on my way alone to-day, at the hour when the sun declineth,
there met me an old woman, and she spake thus unto my soul:

“Much hath Zarathustra spoken also to us women, but never spake he unto
us concerning woman.”

And I answered her: “Concerning woman, one should only talk unto men.”

“Talk also unto me of woman,” said she; “I am old enough to forget it
presently.”

And I obliged the old woman and spake thus unto her:

Everything in woman is a riddle, and everything in woman hath one
solution—it is called pregnancy.

Man is for woman a means: the purpose is always the child. But what is
woman for man?

Two different things wanteth the true man: danger and diversion.
Therefore wanteth he woman, as the most dangerous plaything.

Man shall be trained for war, and woman for the recreation of the
warrior: all else is folly.

Too sweet fruits—these the warrior liketh not. Therefore liketh he
woman;—bitter is even the sweetest woman.

Better than man doth woman understand children, but man is more childish
than woman.

In the true man there is a child hidden: it wanteth to play. Up then, ye
women, and discover the child in man!

A plaything let woman be, pure and fine like the precious stone,
illumined with the virtues of a world not yet come.

Let the beam of a star shine in your love! Let your hope say: “May I
bear the Superman!”

In your love let there be valour! With your love shall ye assail him who
inspireth you with fear!

In your love be your honour! Little doth woman understand otherwise
about honour. But let this be your honour: always to love more than ye
are loved, and never be the second.

Let man fear woman when she loveth: then maketh she every sacrifice, and
everything else she regardeth as worthless.

Let man fear woman when she hateth: for man in his innermost soul is
merely evil; woman, however, is mean.

Whom hateth woman most?—Thus spake the iron to the loadstone: “I hate
thee most, because thou attractest, but art too weak to draw unto thee.”

The happiness of man is, “I will.” The happiness of woman is, “He will.”

“Lo! now hath the world become perfect!”—thus thinketh every woman when
she obeyeth with all her love.

Obey, must the woman, and find a depth for her surface. Surface, is
woman’s soul, a mobile, stormy film on shallow water.

Man’s soul, however, is deep, its current gusheth in subterranean
caverns: woman surmiseth its force, but comprehendeth it not.—

Then answered me the old woman: “Many fine things hath Zarathustra said,
especially for those who are young enough for them.

Strange! Zarathustra knoweth little about woman, and yet he is right
about them! Doth this happen, because with women nothing is impossible?

And now accept a little truth by way of thanks! I am old enough for it!

Swaddle it up and hold its mouth: otherwise it will scream too loudly,
the little truth.”

“Give me, woman, thy little truth!” said I. And thus spake the old
woman:

“Thou goest to women? Do not forget thy whip!”—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XIX. THE BITE OF THE ADDER.


One day had Zarathustra fallen asleep under a fig-tree, owing to the
heat, with his arms over his face. And there came an adder and bit him
in the neck, so that Zarathustra screamed with pain. When he had
taken his arm from his face he looked at the serpent; and then did it
recognise the eyes of Zarathustra, wriggled awkwardly, and tried to get
away. “Not at all,” said Zarathustra, “as yet hast thou not received
my thanks! Thou hast awakened me in time; my journey is yet long.”
 “Thy journey is short,” said the adder sadly; “my poison is fatal.”
 Zarathustra smiled. “When did ever a dragon die of a serpent’s
poison?”—said he. “But take thy poison back! Thou art not rich enough
to present it to me.” Then fell the adder again on his neck, and licked
his wound.

When Zarathustra once told this to his disciples they asked him:
“And what, O Zarathustra, is the moral of thy story?” And Zarathustra
answered them thus:

The destroyer of morality, the good and just call me: my story is
immoral.

When, however, ye have an enemy, then return him not good for evil: for
that would abash him. But prove that he hath done something good to you.

And rather be angry than abash any one! And when ye are cursed, it
pleaseth me not that ye should then desire to bless. Rather curse a
little also!

And should a great injustice befall you, then do quickly five small ones
besides. Hideous to behold is he on whom injustice presseth alone.

Did ye ever know this? Shared injustice is half justice. And he who can
bear it, shall take the injustice upon himself!

A small revenge is humaner than no revenge at all. And if the punishment
be not also a right and an honour to the transgressor, I do not like
your punishing.

Nobler is it to own oneself in the wrong than to establish one’s right,
especially if one be in the right. Only, one must be rich enough to do
so.

I do not like your cold justice; out of the eye of your judges there
always glanceth the executioner and his cold steel.

Tell me: where find we justice, which is love with seeing eyes?

Devise me, then, the love which not only beareth all punishment, but
also all guilt!

Devise me, then, the justice which acquitteth every one except the
judge!

And would ye hear this likewise? To him who seeketh to be just from the
heart, even the lie becometh philanthropy.

But how could I be just from the heart! How can I give every one his
own! Let this be enough for me: I give unto every one mine own.

Finally, my brethren, guard against doing wrong to any anchorite. How
could an anchorite forget! How could he requite!

Like a deep well is an anchorite. Easy is it to throw in a stone: if
it should sink to the bottom, however, tell me, who will bring it out
again?

Guard against injuring the anchorite! If ye have done so, however, well
then, kill him also!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XX. CHILD AND MARRIAGE.


I have a question for thee alone, my brother: like a sounding-lead, cast
I this question into thy soul, that I may know its depth.

Thou art young, and desirest child and marriage. But I ask thee: Art
thou a man ENTITLED to desire a child?

Art thou the victorious one, the self-conqueror, the ruler of thy
passions, the master of thy virtues? Thus do I ask thee.

Or doth the animal speak in thy wish, and necessity? Or isolation? Or
discord in thee?

I would have thy victory and freedom long for a child. Living monuments
shalt thou build to thy victory and emancipation.

Beyond thyself shalt thou build. But first of all must thou be built
thyself, rectangular in body and soul.

Not only onward shalt thou propagate thyself, but upward! For that
purpose may the garden of marriage help thee!

A higher body shalt thou create, a first movement, a spontaneously
rolling wheel—a creating one shalt thou create.

Marriage: so call I the will of the twain to create the one that is
more than those who created it. The reverence for one another, as those
exercising such a will, call I marriage.

Let this be the significance and the truth of thy marriage. But that
which the many-too-many call marriage, those superfluous ones—ah, what
shall I call it?

Ah, the poverty of soul in the twain! Ah, the filth of soul in the
twain! Ah, the pitiable self-complacency in the twain!

Marriage they call it all; and they say their marriages are made in
heaven.

Well, I do not like it, that heaven of the superfluous! No, I do not
like them, those animals tangled in the heavenly toils!

Far from me also be the God who limpeth thither to bless what he hath
not matched!

Laugh not at such marriages! What child hath not had reason to weep over
its parents?

Worthy did this man seem, and ripe for the meaning of the earth: but
when I saw his wife, the earth seemed to me a home for madcaps.

Yea, I would that the earth shook with convulsions when a saint and a
goose mate with one another.

This one went forth in quest of truth as a hero, and at last got for
himself a small decked-up lie: his marriage he calleth it.

That one was reserved in intercourse and chose choicely. But one time he
spoilt his company for all time: his marriage he calleth it.

Another sought a handmaid with the virtues of an angel. But all at once
he became the handmaid of a woman, and now would he need also to become
an angel.

Careful, have I found all buyers, and all of them have astute eyes. But
even the astutest of them buyeth his wife in a sack.

Many short follies—that is called love by you. And your marriage
putteth an end to many short follies, with one long stupidity.

Your love to woman, and woman’s love to man—ah, would that it were
sympathy for suffering and veiled deities! But generally two animals
alight on one another.

But even your best love is only an enraptured simile and a painful
ardour. It is a torch to light you to loftier paths.

Beyond yourselves shall ye love some day! Then LEARN first of all to
love. And on that account ye had to drink the bitter cup of your love.

Bitterness is in the cup even of the best love: thus doth it cause
longing for the Superman; thus doth it cause thirst in thee, the
creating one!

Thirst in the creating one, arrow and longing for the Superman: tell me,
my brother, is this thy will to marriage?

Holy call I such a will, and such a marriage.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXI. VOLUNTARY DEATH.


Many die too late, and some die too early. Yet strange soundeth the
precept: “Die at the right time!”

Die at the right time: so teacheth Zarathustra.

To be sure, he who never liveth at the right time, how could he ever die
at the right time? Would that he might never be born!—Thus do I advise
the superfluous ones.

But even the superfluous ones make much ado about their death, and even
the hollowest nut wanteth to be cracked.

Every one regardeth dying as a great matter: but as yet death is not
a festival. Not yet have people learned to inaugurate the finest
festivals.

The consummating death I show unto you, which becometh a stimulus and
promise to the living.

His death, dieth the consummating one triumphantly, surrounded by hoping
and promising ones.

Thus should one learn to die; and there should be no festival at which
such a dying one doth not consecrate the oaths of the living!

Thus to die is best; the next best, however, is to die in battle, and
sacrifice a great soul.

But to the fighter equally hateful as to the victor, is your grinning
death which stealeth nigh like a thief,—and yet cometh as master.

My death, praise I unto you, the voluntary death, which cometh unto me
because _I_ want it.

And when shall I want it?—He that hath a goal and an heir, wanteth
death at the right time for the goal and the heir.

And out of reverence for the goal and the heir, he will hang up no more
withered wreaths in the sanctuary of life.

Verily, not the rope-makers will I resemble: they lengthen out their
cord, and thereby go ever backward.

Many a one, also, waxeth too old for his truths and triumphs; a
toothless mouth hath no longer the right to every truth.

And whoever wanteth to have fame, must take leave of honour betimes, and
practise the difficult art of—going at the right time.

One must discontinue being feasted upon when one tasteth best: that is
known by those who want to be long loved.

Sour apples are there, no doubt, whose lot is to wait until the last
day of autumn: and at the same time they become ripe, yellow, and
shrivelled.

In some ageth the heart first, and in others the spirit. And some are
hoary in youth, but the late young keep long young.

To many men life is a failure; a poison-worm gnaweth at their heart.
Then let them see to it that their dying is all the more a success.

Many never become sweet; they rot even in the summer. It is cowardice
that holdeth them fast to their branches.

Far too many live, and far too long hang they on their branches. Would
that a storm came and shook all this rottenness and worm-eatenness from
the tree!

Would that there came preachers of SPEEDY death! Those would be the
appropriate storms and agitators of the trees of life! But I hear only
slow death preached, and patience with all that is “earthly.”

Ah! ye preach patience with what is earthly? This earthly is it that
hath too much patience with you, ye blasphemers!

Verily, too early died that Hebrew whom the preachers of slow death
honour: and to many hath it proved a calamity that he died too early.

As yet had he known only tears, and the melancholy of the Hebrews,
together with the hatred of the good and just—the Hebrew Jesus: then
was he seized with the longing for death.

Had he but remained in the wilderness, and far from the good and just!
Then, perhaps, would he have learned to live, and love the earth—and
laughter also!

Believe it, my brethren! He died too early; he himself would have
disavowed his doctrine had he attained to my age! Noble enough was he to
disavow!

But he was still immature. Immaturely loveth the youth, and immaturely
also hateth he man and earth. Confined and awkward are still his soul
and the wings of his spirit.

But in man there is more of the child than in the youth, and less of
melancholy: better understandeth he about life and death.

Free for death, and free in death; a holy Naysayer, when there is no
longer time for Yea: thus understandeth he about death and life.

That your dying may not be a reproach to man and the earth, my friends:
that do I solicit from the honey of your soul.

In your dying shall your spirit and your virtue still shine like an
evening after-glow around the earth: otherwise your dying hath been
unsatisfactory.

Thus will I die myself, that ye friends may love the earth more for my
sake; and earth will I again become, to have rest in her that bore me.

Verily, a goal had Zarathustra; he threw his ball. Now be ye friends the
heirs of my goal; to you throw I the golden ball.

Best of all, do I see you, my friends, throw the golden ball! And so
tarry I still a little while on the earth—pardon me for it!

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXII. THE BESTOWING VIRTUE.


1.

When Zarathustra had taken leave of the town to which his heart was
attached, the name of which is “The Pied Cow,” there followed him many
people who called themselves his disciples, and kept him company. Thus
came they to a crossroad. Then Zarathustra told them that he now wanted
to go alone; for he was fond of going alone. His disciples, however,
presented him at his departure with a staff, on the golden handle of
which a serpent twined round the sun. Zarathustra rejoiced on account
of the staff, and supported himself thereon; then spake he thus to his
disciples:

Tell me, pray: how came gold to the highest value? Because it is
uncommon, and unprofiting, and beaming, and soft in lustre; it always
bestoweth itself.

Only as image of the highest virtue came gold to the highest value.
Goldlike, beameth the glance of the bestower. Gold-lustre maketh peace
between moon and sun.

Uncommon is the highest virtue, and unprofiting, beaming is it, and soft
of lustre: a bestowing virtue is the highest virtue.

Verily, I divine you well, my disciples: ye strive like me for the
bestowing virtue. What should ye have in common with cats and wolves?

It is your thirst to become sacrifices and gifts yourselves: and
therefore have ye the thirst to accumulate all riches in your soul.

Insatiably striveth your soul for treasures and jewels, because your
virtue is insatiable in desiring to bestow.

Ye constrain all things to flow towards you and into you, so that they
shall flow back again out of your fountain as the gifts of your love.

Verily, an appropriator of all values must such bestowing love become;
but healthy and holy, call I this selfishness.—

Another selfishness is there, an all-too-poor and hungry kind, which
would always steal—the selfishness of the sick, the sickly selfishness.

With the eye of the thief it looketh upon all that is lustrous; with the
craving of hunger it measureth him who hath abundance; and ever doth it
prowl round the tables of bestowers.

Sickness speaketh in such craving, and invisible degeneration; of a
sickly body, speaketh the larcenous craving of this selfishness.

Tell me, my brother, what do we think bad, and worst of all? Is it not
DEGENERATION?—And we always suspect degeneration when the bestowing
soul is lacking.

Upward goeth our course from genera on to super-genera. But a horror to
us is the degenerating sense, which saith: “All for myself.”

Upward soareth our sense: thus is it a simile of our body, a simile of
an elevation. Such similes of elevations are the names of the virtues.

Thus goeth the body through history, a becomer and fighter. And the
spirit—what is it to the body? Its fights’ and victories’ herald, its
companion and echo.

Similes, are all names of good and evil; they do not speak out, they
only hint. A fool who seeketh knowledge from them!

Give heed, my brethren, to every hour when your spirit would speak in
similes: there is the origin of your virtue.

Elevated is then your body, and raised up; with its delight, enraptureth
it the spirit; so that it becometh creator, and valuer, and lover, and
everything’s benefactor.

When your heart overfloweth broad and full like the river, a blessing
and a danger to the lowlanders: there is the origin of your virtue.

When ye are exalted above praise and blame, and your will would command
all things, as a loving one’s will: there is the origin of your virtue.

When ye despise pleasant things, and the effeminate couch, and cannot
couch far enough from the effeminate: there is the origin of your
virtue.

When ye are willers of one will, and when that change of every need is
needful to you: there is the origin of your virtue.

Verily, a new good and evil is it! Verily, a new deep murmuring, and the
voice of a new fountain!

Power is it, this new virtue; a ruling thought is it, and around it a
subtle soul: a golden sun, with the serpent of knowledge around it.

2.

Here paused Zarathustra awhile, and looked lovingly on his disciples.
Then he continued to speak thus—and his voice had changed:

Remain true to the earth, my brethren, with the power of your virtue!
Let your bestowing love and your knowledge be devoted to be the meaning
of the earth! Thus do I pray and conjure you.

Let it not fly away from the earthly and beat against eternal walls with
its wings! Ah, there hath always been so much flown-away virtue!

Lead, like me, the flown-away virtue back to the earth—yea, back
to body and life: that it may give to the earth its meaning, a human
meaning!

A hundred times hitherto hath spirit as well as virtue flown away
and blundered. Alas! in our body dwelleth still all this delusion and
blundering: body and will hath it there become.

A hundred times hitherto hath spirit as well as virtue attempted and
erred. Yea, an attempt hath man been. Alas, much ignorance and error
hath become embodied in us!

Not only the rationality of millenniums—also their madness, breaketh
out in us. Dangerous is it to be an heir.

Still fight we step by step with the giant Chance, and over all mankind
hath hitherto ruled nonsense, the lack-of-sense.

Let your spirit and your virtue be devoted to the sense of the earth,
my brethren: let the value of everything be determined anew by you!
Therefore shall ye be fighters! Therefore shall ye be creators!

Intelligently doth the body purify itself; attempting with intelligence
it exalteth itself; to the discerners all impulses sanctify themselves;
to the exalted the soul becometh joyful.

Physician, heal thyself: then wilt thou also heal thy patient. Let it be
his best cure to see with his eyes him who maketh himself whole.

A thousand paths are there which have never yet been trodden; a thousand
salubrities and hidden islands of life. Unexhausted and undiscovered is
still man and man’s world.

Awake and hearken, ye lonesome ones! From the future come winds with
stealthy pinions, and to fine ears good tidings are proclaimed.

Ye lonesome ones of to-day, ye seceding ones, ye shall one day be a
people: out of you who have chosen yourselves, shall a chosen people
arise:—and out of it the Superman.

Verily, a place of healing shall the earth become! And already is a new
odour diffused around it, a salvation-bringing odour—and a new hope!

3.

When Zarathustra had spoken these words, he paused, like one who had not
said his last word; and long did he balance the staff doubtfully in his
hand. At last he spake thus—and his voice had changed:

I now go alone, my disciples! Ye also now go away, and alone! So will I
have it.

Verily, I advise you: depart from me, and guard yourselves against
Zarathustra! And better still: be ashamed of him! Perhaps he hath
deceived you.

The man of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies, but also
to hate his friends.

One requiteth a teacher badly if one remain merely a scholar. And why
will ye not pluck at my wreath?

Ye venerate me; but what if your veneration should some day collapse?
Take heed lest a statue crush you!

Ye say, ye believe in Zarathustra? But of what account is Zarathustra!
Ye are my believers: but of what account are all believers!

Ye had not yet sought yourselves: then did ye find me. So do all
believers; therefore all belief is of so little account.

Now do I bid you lose me and find yourselves; and only when ye have all
denied me, will I return unto you.

Verily, with other eyes, my brethren, shall I then seek my lost ones;
with another love shall I then love you.

And once again shall ye have become friends unto me, and children of one
hope: then will I be with you for the third time, to celebrate the great
noontide with you.

And it is the great noontide, when man is in the middle of his course
between animal and Superman, and celebrateth his advance to the evening
as his highest hope: for it is the advance to a new morning.

At such time will the down-goer bless himself, that he should be an
over-goer; and the sun of his knowledge will be at noontide.

“DEAD ARE ALL THE GODS: NOW DO WE DESIRE THE SUPERMAN TO LIVE.”—Let
this be our final will at the great noontide!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA. SECOND PART.


“—and only when ye have all denied me, will I return unto you.

Verily, with other eyes, my brethren, shall I then seek my lost ones;
with another love shall I then love you.”—ZARATHUSTRA, I., “The
Bestowing Virtue.”




XXIII. THE CHILD WITH THE MIRROR.


After this Zarathustra returned again into the mountains to the solitude
of his cave, and withdrew himself from men, waiting like a sower who
hath scattered his seed. His soul, however, became impatient and full of
longing for those whom he loved: because he had still much to give them.
For this is hardest of all: to close the open hand out of love, and keep
modest as a giver.

Thus passed with the lonesome one months and years; his wisdom meanwhile
increased, and caused him pain by its abundance.

One morning, however, he awoke ere the rosy dawn, and having meditated
long on his couch, at last spake thus to his heart:

Why did I startle in my dream, so that I awoke? Did not a child come to
me, carrying a mirror?

“O Zarathustra”—said the child unto me—“look at thyself in the
mirror!”

But when I looked into the mirror, I shrieked, and my heart throbbed:
for not myself did I see therein, but a devil’s grimace and derision.

Verily, all too well do I understand the dream’s portent and monition:
my DOCTRINE is in danger; tares want to be called wheat!

Mine enemies have grown powerful and have disfigured the likeness of
my doctrine, so that my dearest ones have to blush for the gifts that I
gave them.

Lost are my friends; the hour hath come for me to seek my lost ones!—

With these words Zarathustra started up, not however like a person in
anguish seeking relief, but rather like a seer and a singer whom the
spirit inspireth. With amazement did his eagle and serpent gaze upon
him: for a coming bliss overspread his countenance like the rosy dawn.

What hath happened unto me, mine animals?—said Zarathustra. Am I not
transformed? Hath not bliss come unto me like a whirlwind?

Foolish is my happiness, and foolish things will it speak: it is still
too young—so have patience with it!

Wounded am I by my happiness: all sufferers shall be physicians unto me!

To my friends can I again go down, and also to mine enemies! Zarathustra
can again speak and bestow, and show his best love to his loved ones!

My impatient love overfloweth in streams,—down towards sunrise and
sunset. Out of silent mountains and storms of affliction, rusheth my
soul into the valleys.

Too long have I longed and looked into the distance. Too long hath
solitude possessed me: thus have I unlearned to keep silence.

Utterance have I become altogether, and the brawling of a brook from
high rocks: downward into the valleys will I hurl my speech.

And let the stream of my love sweep into unfrequented channels! How
should a stream not finally find its way to the sea!

Forsooth, there is a lake in me, sequestered and self-sufficing; but the
stream of my love beareth this along with it, down—to the sea!

New paths do I tread, a new speech cometh unto me; tired have I become—
like all creators—of the old tongues. No longer will my spirit walk on
worn-out soles.

Too slowly runneth all speaking for me:—into thy chariot, O storm, do I
leap! And even thee will I whip with my spite!

Like a cry and an huzza will I traverse wide seas, till I find the Happy
Isles where my friends sojourn;—

And mine enemies amongst them! How I now love every one unto whom I may
but speak! Even mine enemies pertain to my bliss.

And when I want to mount my wildest horse, then doth my spear always
help me up best: it is my foot’s ever ready servant:—

The spear which I hurl at mine enemies! How grateful am I to mine
enemies that I may at last hurl it!

Too great hath been the tension of my cloud: ‘twixt laughters of
lightnings will I cast hail-showers into the depths.

Violently will my breast then heave; violently will it blow its storm
over the mountains: thus cometh its assuagement.

Verily, like a storm cometh my happiness, and my freedom! But mine
enemies shall think that THE EVIL ONE roareth over their heads.

Yea, ye also, my friends, will be alarmed by my wild wisdom; and perhaps
ye will flee therefrom, along with mine enemies.

Ah, that I knew how to lure you back with shepherds’ flutes! Ah, that
my lioness wisdom would learn to roar softly! And much have we already
learned with one another!

My wild wisdom became pregnant on the lonesome mountains; on the rough
stones did she bear the youngest of her young.

Now runneth she foolishly in the arid wilderness, and seeketh and
seeketh the soft sward—mine old, wild wisdom!

On the soft sward of your hearts, my friends!—on your love, would she
fain couch her dearest one!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXIV. IN THE HAPPY ISLES.


The figs fall from the trees, they are good and sweet; and in falling
the red skins of them break. A north wind am I to ripe figs.

Thus, like figs, do these doctrines fall for you, my friends: imbibe
now their juice and their sweet substance! It is autumn all around, and
clear sky, and afternoon.

Lo, what fulness is around us! And out of the midst of superabundance,
it is delightful to look out upon distant seas.

Once did people say God, when they looked out upon distant seas; now,
however, have I taught you to say, Superman.

God is a conjecture: but I do not wish your conjecturing to reach beyond
your creating will.

Could ye CREATE a God?—Then, I pray you, be silent about all Gods! But
ye could well create the Superman.

Not perhaps ye yourselves, my brethren! But into fathers and forefathers
of the Superman could ye transform yourselves: and let that be your best
creating!—

God is a conjecture: but I should like your conjecturing restricted to
the conceivable.

Could ye CONCEIVE a God?—But let this mean Will to Truth unto you,
that everything be transformed into the humanly conceivable, the humanly
visible, the humanly sensible! Your own discernment shall ye follow out
to the end!

And what ye have called the world shall but be created by you: your
reason, your likeness, your will, your love, shall it itself become! And
verily, for your bliss, ye discerning ones!

And how would ye endure life without that hope, ye discerning ones?
Neither in the inconceivable could ye have been born, nor in the
irrational.

But that I may reveal my heart entirely unto you, my friends: IF there
were gods, how could I endure it to be no God! THEREFORE there are no
Gods.

Yea, I have drawn the conclusion; now, however, doth it draw me.—

God is a conjecture: but who could drink all the bitterness of this
conjecture without dying? Shall his faith be taken from the creating
one, and from the eagle his flights into eagle-heights?

God is a thought—it maketh all the straight crooked, and all that
standeth reel. What? Time would be gone, and all the perishable would be
but a lie?

To think this is giddiness and vertigo to human limbs, and even vomiting
to the stomach: verily, the reeling sickness do I call it, to conjecture
such a thing.

Evil do I call it and misanthropic: all that teaching about the one, and
the plenum, and the unmoved, and the sufficient, and the imperishable!

All the imperishable—that’s but a simile, and the poets lie too much.—

But of time and of becoming shall the best similes speak: a praise shall
they be, and a justification of all perishableness!

Creating—that is the great salvation from suffering, and life’s
alleviation. But for the creator to appear, suffering itself is needed,
and much transformation.

Yea, much bitter dying must there be in your life, ye creators! Thus are
ye advocates and justifiers of all perishableness.

For the creator himself to be the new-born child, he must also
be willing to be the child-bearer, and endure the pangs of the
child-bearer.

Verily, through a hundred souls went I my way, and through a hundred
cradles and birth-throes. Many a farewell have I taken; I know the
heart-breaking last hours.

But so willeth it my creating Will, my fate. Or, to tell you it more
candidly: just such a fate—willeth my Will.

All FEELING suffereth in me, and is in prison: but my WILLING ever
cometh to me as mine emancipator and comforter.

Willing emancipateth: that is the true doctrine of will and
emancipation—so teacheth you Zarathustra.

No longer willing, and no longer valuing, and no longer creating! Ah,
that that great debility may ever be far from me!

And also in discerning do I feel only my will’s procreating and evolving
delight; and if there be innocence in my knowledge, it is because there
is will to procreation in it.

Away from God and Gods did this will allure me; what would there be to
create if there were—Gods!

But to man doth it ever impel me anew, my fervent creative will; thus
impelleth it the hammer to the stone.

Ah, ye men, within the stone slumbereth an image for me, the image of my
visions! Ah, that it should slumber in the hardest, ugliest stone!

Now rageth my hammer ruthlessly against its prison. From the stone fly
the fragments: what’s that to me?

I will complete it: for a shadow came unto me—the stillest and lightest
of all things once came unto me!

The beauty of the Superman came unto me as a shadow. Ah, my brethren! Of
what account now are—the Gods to me!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXV. THE PITIFUL.


My friends, there hath arisen a satire on your friend: “Behold
Zarathustra! Walketh he not amongst us as if amongst animals?”

But it is better said in this wise: “The discerning one walketh amongst
men AS amongst animals.”

Man himself is to the discerning one: the animal with red cheeks.

How hath that happened unto him? Is it not because he hath had to be
ashamed too oft?

O my friends! Thus speaketh the discerning one: shame, shame,
shame—that is the history of man!

And on that account doth the noble one enjoin upon himself not to abash:
bashfulness doth he enjoin on himself in presence of all sufferers.

Verily, I like them not, the merciful ones, whose bliss is in their
pity: too destitute are they of bashfulness.

If I must be pitiful, I dislike to be called so; and if I be so, it is
preferably at a distance.

Preferably also do I shroud my head, and flee, before being recognised:
and thus do I bid you do, my friends!

May my destiny ever lead unafflicted ones like you across my path, and
those with whom I MAY have hope and repast and honey in common!

Verily, I have done this and that for the afflicted: but something
better did I always seem to do when I had learned to enjoy myself
better.

Since humanity came into being, man hath enjoyed himself too little:
that alone, my brethren, is our original sin!

And when we learn better to enjoy ourselves, then do we unlearn best to
give pain unto others, and to contrive pain.

Therefore do I wash the hand that hath helped the sufferer; therefore do
I wipe also my soul.

For in seeing the sufferer suffering—thereof was I ashamed on account
of his shame; and in helping him, sorely did I wound his pride.

Great obligations do not make grateful, but revengeful; and when a small
kindness is not forgotten, it becometh a gnawing worm.

“Be shy in accepting! Distinguish by accepting!”—thus do I advise those
who have naught to bestow.

I, however, am a bestower: willingly do I bestow as friend to friends.
Strangers, however, and the poor, may pluck for themselves the fruit
from my tree: thus doth it cause less shame.

Beggars, however, one should entirely do away with! Verily, it annoyeth
one to give unto them, and it annoyeth one not to give unto them.

And likewise sinners and bad consciences! Believe me, my friends: the
sting of conscience teacheth one to sting.

The worst things, however, are the petty thoughts. Verily, better to
have done evilly than to have thought pettily!

To be sure, ye say: “The delight in petty evils spareth one many a great
evil deed.” But here one should not wish to be sparing.

Like a boil is the evil deed: it itcheth and irritateth and breaketh
forth—it speaketh honourably.

“Behold, I am disease,” saith the evil deed: that is its honourableness.

But like infection is the petty thought: it creepeth and hideth, and
wanteth to be nowhere—until the whole body is decayed and withered by
the petty infection.

To him however, who is possessed of a devil, I would whisper this word
in the ear: “Better for thee to rear up thy devil! Even for thee there
is still a path to greatness!”—

Ah, my brethren! One knoweth a little too much about every one! And many
a one becometh transparent to us, but still we can by no means penetrate
him.

It is difficult to live among men because silence is so difficult.

And not to him who is offensive to us are we most unfair, but to him who
doth not concern us at all.

If, however, thou hast a suffering friend, then be a resting-place for
his suffering; like a hard bed, however, a camp-bed: thus wilt thou
serve him best.

And if a friend doeth thee wrong, then say: “I forgive thee what thou
hast done unto me; that thou hast done it unto THYSELF, however—how
could I forgive that!”

Thus speaketh all great love: it surpasseth even forgiveness and pity.

One should hold fast one’s heart; for when one letteth it go, how
quickly doth one’s head run away!

Ah, where in the world have there been greater follies than with the
pitiful? And what in the world hath caused more suffering than the
follies of the pitiful?

Woe unto all loving ones who have not an elevation which is above their
pity!

Thus spake the devil unto me, once on a time: “Even God hath his hell:
it is his love for man.”

And lately, did I hear him say these words: “God is dead: of his pity
for man hath God died.”—

So be ye warned against pity: FROM THENCE there yet cometh unto men a
heavy cloud! Verily, I understand weather-signs!

But attend also to this word: All great love is above all its pity: for
it seeketh—to create what is loved!

“Myself do I offer unto my love, AND MY NEIGHBOUR AS MYSELF”—such is
the language of all creators.

All creators, however, are hard.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXVI. THE PRIESTS.


And one day Zarathustra made a sign to his disciples, and spake these
words unto them:

“Here are priests: but although they are mine enemies, pass them quietly
and with sleeping swords!

Even among them there are heroes; many of them have suffered too much—:
so they want to make others suffer.

Bad enemies are they: nothing is more revengeful than their meekness.
And readily doth he soil himself who toucheth them.

But my blood is related to theirs; and I want withal to see my blood
honoured in theirs.”—

And when they had passed, a pain attacked Zarathustra; but not long had
he struggled with the pain, when he began to speak thus:

It moveth my heart for those priests. They also go against my taste; but
that is the smallest matter unto me, since I am among men.

But I suffer and have suffered with them: prisoners are they unto me,
and stigmatised ones. He whom they call Saviour put them in fetters:—

In fetters of false values and fatuous words! Oh, that some one would
save them from their Saviour!

On an isle they once thought they had landed, when the sea tossed them
about; but behold, it was a slumbering monster!

False values and fatuous words: these are the worst monsters for
mortals—long slumbereth and waiteth the fate that is in them.

But at last it cometh and awaketh and devoureth and engulfeth whatever
hath built tabernacles upon it.

Oh, just look at those tabernacles which those priests have built
themselves! Churches, they call their sweet-smelling caves!

Oh, that falsified light, that mustified air! Where the soul—may not
fly aloft to its height!

But so enjoineth their belief: “On your knees, up the stair, ye
sinners!”

Verily, rather would I see a shameless one than the distorted eyes of
their shame and devotion!

Who created for themselves such caves and penitence-stairs? Was it not
those who sought to conceal themselves, and were ashamed under the clear
sky?

And only when the clear sky looketh again through ruined roofs, and down
upon grass and red poppies on ruined walls—will I again turn my heart
to the seats of this God.

They called God that which opposed and afflicted them: and verily, there
was much hero-spirit in their worship!

And they knew not how to love their God otherwise than by nailing men to
the cross!

As corpses they thought to live; in black draped they their corpses;
even in their talk do I still feel the evil flavour of charnel-houses.

And he who liveth nigh unto them liveth nigh unto black pools, wherein
the toad singeth his song with sweet gravity.

Better songs would they have to sing, for me to believe in their
Saviour: more like saved ones would his disciples have to appear unto
me!

Naked, would I like to see them: for beauty alone should preach
penitence. But whom would that disguised affliction convince!

Verily, their Saviours themselves came not from freedom and freedom’s
seventh heaven! Verily, they themselves never trod the carpets of
knowledge!

Of defects did the spirit of those Saviours consist; but into every
defect had they put their illusion, their stop-gap, which they called
God.

In their pity was their spirit drowned; and when they swelled and
o’erswelled with pity, there always floated to the surface a great
folly.

Eagerly and with shouts drove they their flock over their foot-bridge;
as if there were but one foot-bridge to the future! Verily, those
shepherds also were still of the flock!

Small spirits and spacious souls had those shepherds: but, my brethren,
what small domains have even the most spacious souls hitherto been!

Characters of blood did they write on the way they went, and their folly
taught that truth is proved by blood.

But blood is the very worst witness to truth; blood tainteth the purest
teaching, and turneth it into delusion and hatred of heart.

And when a person goeth through fire for his teaching—what doth that
prove! It is more, verily, when out of one’s own burning cometh one’s
own teaching!

Sultry heart and cold head; where these meet, there ariseth the
blusterer, the “Saviour.”

Greater ones, verily, have there been, and higher-born ones, than those
whom the people call Saviours, those rapturous blusterers!

And by still greater ones than any of the Saviours must ye be saved, my
brethren, if ye would find the way to freedom!

Never yet hath there been a Superman. Naked have I seen both of them,
the greatest man and the smallest man:—

All-too-similar are they still to each other. Verily, even the greatest
found I—all-too-human!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXVII. THE VIRTUOUS.


With thunder and heavenly fireworks must one speak to indolent and
somnolent senses.

But beauty’s voice speaketh gently: it appealeth only to the most
awakened souls.

Gently vibrated and laughed unto me to-day my buckler; it was beauty’s
holy laughing and thrilling.

At you, ye virtuous ones, laughed my beauty to-day. And thus came its
voice unto me: “They want—to be paid besides!”

Ye want to be paid besides, ye virtuous ones! Ye want reward for virtue,
and heaven for earth, and eternity for your to-day?

And now ye upbraid me for teaching that there is no reward-giver,
nor paymaster? And verily, I do not even teach that virtue is its own
reward.

Ah! this is my sorrow: into the basis of things have reward and
punishment been insinuated—and now even into the basis of your souls,
ye virtuous ones!

But like the snout of the boar shall my word grub up the basis of your
souls; a ploughshare will I be called by you.

All the secrets of your heart shall be brought to light; and when ye
lie in the sun, grubbed up and broken, then will also your falsehood be
separated from your truth.

For this is your truth: ye are TOO PURE for the filth of the words:
vengeance, punishment, recompense, retribution.

Ye love your virtue as a mother loveth her child; but when did one hear
of a mother wanting to be paid for her love?

It is your dearest Self, your virtue. The ring’s thirst is in you: to
reach itself again struggleth every ring, and turneth itself.

And like the star that goeth out, so is every work of your virtue: ever
is its light on its way and travelling—and when will it cease to be on
its way?

Thus is the light of your virtue still on its way, even when its work
is done. Be it forgotten and dead, still its ray of light liveth and
travelleth.

That your virtue is your Self, and not an outward thing, a skin, or
a cloak: that is the truth from the basis of your souls, ye virtuous
ones!—

But sure enough there are those to whom virtue meaneth writhing under
the lash: and ye have hearkened too much unto their crying!

And others are there who call virtue the slothfulness of their vices;
and when once their hatred and jealousy relax the limbs, their “justice”
 becometh lively and rubbeth its sleepy eyes.

And others are there who are drawn downwards: their devils draw them.
But the more they sink, the more ardently gloweth their eye, and the
longing for their God.

Ah! their crying also hath reached your ears, ye virtuous ones: “What I
am NOT, that, that is God to me, and virtue!”

And others are there who go along heavily and creakingly, like carts
taking stones downhill: they talk much of dignity and virtue—their drag
they call virtue!

And others are there who are like eight-day clocks when wound up; they
tick, and want people to call ticking—virtue.

Verily, in those have I mine amusement: wherever I find such clocks I
shall wind them up with my mockery, and they shall even whirr thereby!

And others are proud of their modicum of righteousness, and for the sake
of it do violence to all things: so that the world is drowned in their
unrighteousness.

Ah! how ineptly cometh the word “virtue” out of their mouth! And when
they say: “I am just,” it always soundeth like: “I am just—revenged!”

With their virtues they want to scratch out the eyes of their enemies;
and they elevate themselves only that they may lower others.

And again there are those who sit in their swamp, and speak thus from
among the bulrushes: “Virtue—that is to sit quietly in the swamp.

We bite no one, and go out of the way of him who would bite; and in all
matters we have the opinion that is given us.”

And again there are those who love attitudes, and think that virtue is a
sort of attitude.

Their knees continually adore, and their hands are eulogies of virtue,
but their heart knoweth naught thereof.

And again there are those who regard it as virtue to say: “Virtue
is necessary”; but after all they believe only that policemen are
necessary.

And many a one who cannot see men’s loftiness, calleth it virtue to see
their baseness far too well: thus calleth he his evil eye virtue.—

And some want to be edified and raised up, and call it virtue: and
others want to be cast down,—and likewise call it virtue.

And thus do almost all think that they participate in virtue; and at
least every one claimeth to be an authority on “good” and “evil.”

But Zarathustra came not to say unto all those liars and fools: “What do
YE know of virtue! What COULD ye know of virtue!”—

But that ye, my friends, might become weary of the old words which ye
have learned from the fools and liars:

That ye might become weary of the words “reward,” “retribution,”
 “punishment,” “righteous vengeance.”—

That ye might become weary of saying: “That an action is good is because
it is unselfish.”

Ah! my friends! That YOUR very Self be in your action, as the mother is
in the child: let that be YOUR formula of virtue!

Verily, I have taken from you a hundred formulae and your virtue’s
favourite playthings; and now ye upbraid me, as children upbraid.

They played by the sea—then came there a wave and swept their
playthings into the deep: and now do they cry.

But the same wave shall bring them new playthings, and spread before
them new speckled shells!

Thus will they be comforted; and like them shall ye also, my friends,
have your comforting—and new speckled shells!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXVIII. THE RABBLE.


Life is a well of delight; but where the rabble also drink, there all
fountains are poisoned.

To everything cleanly am I well disposed; but I hate to see the grinning
mouths and the thirst of the unclean.

They cast their eye down into the fountain: and now glanceth up to me
their odious smile out of the fountain.

The holy water have they poisoned with their lustfulness; and when they
called their filthy dreams delight, then poisoned they also the words.

Indignant becometh the flame when they put their damp hearts to the
fire; the spirit itself bubbleth and smoketh when the rabble approach
the fire.

Mawkish and over-mellow becometh the fruit in their hands: unsteady, and
withered at the top, doth their look make the fruit-tree.

And many a one who hath turned away from life, hath only turned away
from the rabble: he hated to share with them fountain, flame, and fruit.

And many a one who hath gone into the wilderness and suffered thirst
with beasts of prey, disliked only to sit at the cistern with filthy
camel-drivers.

And many a one who hath come along as a destroyer, and as a hailstorm
to all cornfields, wanted merely to put his foot into the jaws of the
rabble, and thus stop their throat.

And it is not the mouthful which hath most choked me, to know that life
itself requireth enmity and death and torture-crosses:—

But I asked once, and suffocated almost with my question: What? is the
rabble also NECESSARY for life?

Are poisoned fountains necessary, and stinking fires, and filthy dreams,
and maggots in the bread of life?

Not my hatred, but my loathing, gnawed hungrily at my life! Ah, ofttimes
became I weary of spirit, when I found even the rabble spiritual!

And on the rulers turned I my back, when I saw what they now call
ruling: to traffic and bargain for power—with the rabble!

Amongst peoples of a strange language did I dwell, with stopped ears: so
that the language of their trafficking might remain strange unto me, and
their bargaining for power.

And holding my nose, I went morosely through all yesterdays and to-days:
verily, badly smell all yesterdays and to-days of the scribbling rabble!

Like a cripple become deaf, and blind, and dumb—thus have I lived long;
that I might not live with the power-rabble, the scribe-rabble, and the
pleasure-rabble.

Toilsomely did my spirit mount stairs, and cautiously; alms of delight
were its refreshment; on the staff did life creep along with the blind
one.

What hath happened unto me? How have I freed myself from loathing?
Who hath rejuvenated mine eye? How have I flown to the height where no
rabble any longer sit at the wells?

Did my loathing itself create for me wings and fountain-divining powers?
Verily, to the loftiest height had I to fly, to find again the well of
delight!

Oh, I have found it, my brethren! Here on the loftiest height bubbleth
up for me the well of delight! And there is a life at whose waters none
of the rabble drink with me!

Almost too violently dost thou flow for me, thou fountain of delight!
And often emptiest thou the goblet again, in wanting to fill it!

And yet must I learn to approach thee more modestly: far too violently
doth my heart still flow towards thee:—

My heart on which my summer burneth, my short, hot, melancholy,
over-happy summer: how my summer heart longeth for thy coolness!

Past, the lingering distress of my spring! Past, the wickedness of my
snowflakes in June! Summer have I become entirely, and summer-noontide!

A summer on the loftiest height, with cold fountains and blissful
stillness: oh, come, my friends, that the stillness may become more
blissful!

For this is OUR height and our home: too high and steep do we here dwell
for all uncleanly ones and their thirst.

Cast but your pure eyes into the well of my delight, my friends! How
could it become turbid thereby! It shall laugh back to you with ITS
purity.

On the tree of the future build we our nest; eagles shall bring us lone
ones food in their beaks!

Verily, no food of which the impure could be fellow-partakers! Fire,
would they think they devoured, and burn their mouths!

Verily, no abodes do we here keep ready for the impure! An ice-cave to
their bodies would our happiness be, and to their spirits!

And as strong winds will we live above them, neighbours to the eagles,
neighbours to the snow, neighbours to the sun: thus live the strong
winds.

And like a wind will I one day blow amongst them, and with my spirit,
take the breath from their spirit: thus willeth my future.

Verily, a strong wind is Zarathustra to all low places; and this counsel
counselleth he to his enemies, and to whatever spitteth and speweth:
“Take care not to spit AGAINST the wind!”—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXIX. THE TARANTULAS.


Lo, this is the tarantula’s den! Wouldst thou see the tarantula itself?
Here hangeth its web: touch this, so that it may tremble.

There cometh the tarantula willingly: Welcome, tarantula! Black on thy
back is thy triangle and symbol; and I know also what is in thy soul.

Revenge is in thy soul: wherever thou bitest, there ariseth black scab;
with revenge, thy poison maketh the soul giddy!

Thus do I speak unto you in parable, ye who make the soul giddy,
ye preachers of EQUALITY! Tarantulas are ye unto me, and secretly
revengeful ones!

But I will soon bring your hiding-places to the light: therefore do I
laugh in your face my laughter of the height.

Therefore do I tear at your web, that your rage may lure you out of your
den of lies, and that your revenge may leap forth from behind your word
“justice.”

Because, FOR MAN TO BE REDEEMED FROM REVENGE—that is for me the bridge
to the highest hope, and a rainbow after long storms.

Otherwise, however, would the tarantulas have it. “Let it be
very justice for the world to become full of the storms of our
vengeance”—thus do they talk to one another.

“Vengeance will we use, and insult, against all who are not like
us”—thus do the tarantula-hearts pledge themselves.

“And ‘Will to Equality’—that itself shall henceforth be the name of
virtue; and against all that hath power will we raise an outcry!”

Ye preachers of equality, the tyrant-frenzy of impotence crieth thus in
you for “equality”: your most secret tyrant-longings disguise themselves
thus in virtue-words!

Fretted conceit and suppressed envy—perhaps your fathers’ conceit and
envy: in you break they forth as flame and frenzy of vengeance.

What the father hath hid cometh out in the son; and oft have I found in
the son the father’s revealed secret.

Inspired ones they resemble: but it is not the heart that inspireth
them—but vengeance. And when they become subtle and cold, it is not
spirit, but envy, that maketh them so.

Their jealousy leadeth them also into thinkers’ paths; and this is the
sign of their jealousy—they always go too far: so that their fatigue
hath at last to go to sleep on the snow.

In all their lamentations soundeth vengeance, in all their eulogies is
maleficence; and being judge seemeth to them bliss.

But thus do I counsel you, my friends: distrust all in whom the impulse
to punish is powerful!

They are people of bad race and lineage; out of their countenances peer
the hangman and the sleuth-hound.

Distrust all those who talk much of their justice! Verily, in their
souls not only honey is lacking.

And when they call themselves “the good and just,” forget not, that for
them to be Pharisees, nothing is lacking but—power!

My friends, I will not be mixed up and confounded with others.

There are those who preach my doctrine of life, and are at the same time
preachers of equality, and tarantulas.

That they speak in favour of life, though they sit in their den, these
poison-spiders, and withdrawn from life—is because they would thereby
do injury.

To those would they thereby do injury who have power at present: for
with those the preaching of death is still most at home.

Were it otherwise, then would the tarantulas teach otherwise: and they
themselves were formerly the best world-maligners and heretic-burners.

With these preachers of equality will I not be mixed up and confounded.
For thus speaketh justice UNTO ME: “Men are not equal.”

And neither shall they become so! What would be my love to the Superman,
if I spake otherwise?

On a thousand bridges and piers shall they throng to the future, and
always shall there be more war and inequality among them: thus doth my
great love make me speak!

Inventors of figures and phantoms shall they be in their hostilities;
and with those figures and phantoms shall they yet fight with each other
the supreme fight!

Good and evil, and rich and poor, and high and low, and all names of
values: weapons shall they be, and sounding signs, that life must again
and again surpass itself!

Aloft will it build itself with columns and stairs—life itself: into
remote distances would it gaze, and out towards blissful beauties—
THEREFORE doth it require elevation!

And because it requireth elevation, therefore doth it require steps, and
variance of steps and climbers! To rise striveth life, and in rising to
surpass itself.

And just behold, my friends! Here where the tarantula’s den is, riseth
aloft an ancient temple’s ruins—just behold it with enlightened eyes!

Verily, he who here towered aloft his thoughts in stone, knew as well as
the wisest ones about the secret of life!

That there is struggle and inequality even in beauty, and war for power
and supremacy: that doth he here teach us in the plainest parable.

How divinely do vault and arch here contrast in the struggle: how with
light and shade they strive against each other, the divinely striving
ones.—

Thus, steadfast and beautiful, let us also be enemies, my friends!
Divinely will we strive AGAINST one another!—

Alas! There hath the tarantula bit me myself, mine old enemy! Divinely
steadfast and beautiful, it hath bit me on the finger!

“Punishment must there be, and justice”—so thinketh it: “not
gratuitously shall he here sing songs in honour of enmity!”

Yea, it hath revenged itself! And alas! now will it make my soul also
dizzy with revenge!

That I may NOT turn dizzy, however, bind me fast, my friends, to this
pillar! Rather will I be a pillar-saint than a whirl of vengeance!

Verily, no cyclone or whirlwind is Zarathustra: and if he be a dancer,
he is not at all a tarantula-dancer!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXX. THE FAMOUS WISE ONES.


The people have ye served and the people’s superstition—NOT the
truth!—all ye famous wise ones! And just on that account did they pay
you reverence.

And on that account also did they tolerate your unbelief, because it
was a pleasantry and a by-path for the people. Thus doth the master give
free scope to his slaves, and even enjoyeth their presumptuousness.

But he who is hated by the people, as the wolf by the dogs—is the free
spirit, the enemy of fetters, the non-adorer, the dweller in the woods.

To hunt him out of his lair—that was always called “sense of right” by
the people: on him do they still hound their sharpest-toothed dogs.

“For there the truth is, where the people are! Woe, woe to the seeking
ones!”—thus hath it echoed through all time.

Your people would ye justify in their reverence: that called ye “Will to
Truth,” ye famous wise ones!

And your heart hath always said to itself: “From the people have I come:
from thence came to me also the voice of God.”

Stiff-necked and artful, like the ass, have ye always been, as the
advocates of the people.

And many a powerful one who wanted to run well with the people, hath
harnessed in front of his horses—a donkey, a famous wise man.

And now, ye famous wise ones, I would have you finally throw off
entirely the skin of the lion!

The skin of the beast of prey, the speckled skin, and the dishevelled
locks of the investigator, the searcher, and the conqueror!

Ah! for me to learn to believe in your “conscientiousness,” ye would
first have to break your venerating will.

Conscientious—so call I him who goeth into God-forsaken wildernesses,
and hath broken his venerating heart.

In the yellow sands and burnt by the sun, he doubtless peereth thirstily
at the isles rich in fountains, where life reposeth under shady trees.

But his thirst doth not persuade him to become like those comfortable
ones: for where there are oases, there are also idols.

Hungry, fierce, lonesome, God-forsaken: so doth the lion-will wish
itself.

Free from the happiness of slaves, redeemed from Deities and adorations,
fearless and fear-inspiring, grand and lonesome: so is the will of the
conscientious.

In the wilderness have ever dwelt the conscientious, the free spirits,
as lords of the wilderness; but in the cities dwell the well-foddered,
famous wise ones—the draught-beasts.

For, always, do they draw, as asses—the PEOPLE’S carts!

Not that I on that account upbraid them: but serving ones do they
remain, and harnessed ones, even though they glitter in golden harness.

And often have they been good servants and worthy of their hire. For
thus saith virtue: “If thou must be a servant, seek him unto whom thy
service is most useful!

The spirit and virtue of thy master shall advance by thou being his
servant: thus wilt thou thyself advance with his spirit and virtue!”

And verily, ye famous wise ones, ye servants of the people! Ye
yourselves have advanced with the people’s spirit and virtue—and the
people by you! To your honour do I say it!

But the people ye remain for me, even with your virtues, the people with
purblind eyes—the people who know not what SPIRIT is!

Spirit is life which itself cutteth into life: by its own torture doth
it increase its own knowledge,—did ye know that before?

And the spirit’s happiness is this: to be anointed and consecrated with
tears as a sacrificial victim,—did ye know that before?

And the blindness of the blind one, and his seeking and groping, shall
yet testify to the power of the sun into which he hath gazed,—did ye
know that before?

And with mountains shall the discerning one learn to BUILD! It is
a small thing for the spirit to remove mountains,—did ye know that
before?

Ye know only the sparks of the spirit: but ye do not see the anvil which
it is, and the cruelty of its hammer!

Verily, ye know not the spirit’s pride! But still less could ye endure
the spirit’s humility, should it ever want to speak!

And never yet could ye cast your spirit into a pit of snow: ye are not
hot enough for that! Thus are ye unaware, also, of the delight of its
coldness.

In all respects, however, ye make too familiar with the spirit; and out
of wisdom have ye often made an almshouse and a hospital for bad poets.

Ye are not eagles: thus have ye never experienced the happiness of the
alarm of the spirit. And he who is not a bird should not camp above
abysses.

Ye seem to me lukewarm ones: but coldly floweth all deep knowledge.
Ice-cold are the innermost wells of the spirit: a refreshment to hot
hands and handlers.

Respectable do ye there stand, and stiff, and with straight backs, ye
famous wise ones!—no strong wind or will impelleth you.

Have ye ne’er seen a sail crossing the sea, rounded and inflated, and
trembling with the violence of the wind?

Like the sail trembling with the violence of the spirit, doth my wisdom
cross the sea—my wild wisdom!

But ye servants of the people, ye famous wise ones—how COULD ye go with
me!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXXI. THE NIGHT-SONG.


‘Tis night: now do all gushing fountains speak louder. And my soul also
is a gushing fountain.

‘Tis night: now only do all songs of the loving ones awake. And my soul
also is the song of a loving one.

Something unappeased, unappeasable, is within me; it longeth to find
expression. A craving for love is within me, which speaketh itself the
language of love.

Light am I: ah, that I were night! But it is my lonesomeness to be
begirt with light!

Ah, that I were dark and nightly! How would I suck at the breasts of
light!

And you yourselves would I bless, ye twinkling starlets and glow-worms
aloft!—and would rejoice in the gifts of your light.

But I live in mine own light, I drink again into myself the flames that
break forth from me.

I know not the happiness of the receiver; and oft have I dreamt that
stealing must be more blessed than receiving.

It is my poverty that my hand never ceaseth bestowing; it is mine envy
that I see waiting eyes and the brightened nights of longing.

Oh, the misery of all bestowers! Oh, the darkening of my sun! Oh, the
craving to crave! Oh, the violent hunger in satiety!

They take from me: but do I yet touch their soul? There is a gap ‘twixt
giving and receiving; and the smallest gap hath finally to be bridged
over.

A hunger ariseth out of my beauty: I should like to injure those I
illumine; I should like to rob those I have gifted:—thus do I hunger
for wickedness.

Withdrawing my hand when another hand already stretcheth out to it;
hesitating like the cascade, which hesitateth even in its leap:—thus do
I hunger for wickedness!

Such revenge doth mine abundance think of: such mischief welleth out of
my lonesomeness.

My happiness in bestowing died in bestowing; my virtue became weary of
itself by its abundance!

He who ever bestoweth is in danger of losing his shame; to him who ever
dispenseth, the hand and heart become callous by very dispensing.

Mine eye no longer overfloweth for the shame of suppliants; my hand hath
become too hard for the trembling of filled hands.

Whence have gone the tears of mine eye, and the down of my heart? Oh,
the lonesomeness of all bestowers! Oh, the silence of all shining ones!

Many suns circle in desert space: to all that is dark do they speak with
their light—but to me they are silent.

Oh, this is the hostility of light to the shining one: unpityingly doth
it pursue its course.

Unfair to the shining one in its innermost heart, cold to the
suns:—thus travelleth every sun.

Like a storm do the suns pursue their courses: that is their travelling.
Their inexorable will do they follow: that is their coldness.

Oh, ye only is it, ye dark, nightly ones, that extract warmth from the
shining ones! Oh, ye only drink milk and refreshment from the light’s
udders!

Ah, there is ice around me; my hand burneth with the iciness! Ah, there
is thirst in me; it panteth after your thirst!

‘Tis night: alas, that I have to be light! And thirst for the nightly!
And lonesomeness!

‘Tis night: now doth my longing break forth in me as a fountain,—for
speech do I long.

‘Tis night: now do all gushing fountains speak louder. And my soul also
is a gushing fountain.

‘Tis night: now do all songs of loving ones awake. And my soul also is
the song of a loving one.—

Thus sang Zarathustra.




XXXII. THE DANCE-SONG.


One evening went Zarathustra and his disciples through the forest; and
when he sought for a well, lo, he lighted upon a green meadow peacefully
surrounded with trees and bushes, where maidens were dancing together.
As soon as the maidens recognised Zarathustra, they ceased dancing;
Zarathustra, however, approached them with friendly mien and spake these
words:

Cease not your dancing, ye lovely maidens! No game-spoiler hath come to
you with evil eye, no enemy of maidens.

God’s advocate am I with the devil: he, however, is the spirit of
gravity. How could I, ye light-footed ones, be hostile to divine dances?
Or to maidens’ feet with fine ankles?

To be sure, I am a forest, and a night of dark trees: but he who is not
afraid of my darkness, will find banks full of roses under my cypresses.

And even the little God may he find, who is dearest to maidens: beside
the well lieth he quietly, with closed eyes.

Verily, in broad daylight did he fall asleep, the sluggard! Had he
perhaps chased butterflies too much?

Upbraid me not, ye beautiful dancers, when I chasten the little God
somewhat! He will cry, certainly, and weep—but he is laughable even
when weeping!

And with tears in his eyes shall he ask you for a dance; and I myself
will sing a song to his dance:

A dance-song and satire on the spirit of gravity my supremest,
powerfulest devil, who is said to be “lord of the world.”—

And this is the song that Zarathustra sang when Cupid and the maidens
danced together:

Of late did I gaze into thine eye, O Life! And into the unfathomable did
I there seem to sink.

But thou pulledst me out with a golden angle; derisively didst thou
laugh when I called thee unfathomable.

“Such is the language of all fish,” saidst thou; “what THEY do not
fathom is unfathomable.

But changeable am I only, and wild, and altogether a woman, and no
virtuous one:

Though I be called by you men the ‘profound one,’ or the ‘faithful one,’
‘the eternal one,’ ‘the mysterious one.’

But ye men endow us always with your own virtues—alas, ye virtuous
ones!”

Thus did she laugh, the unbelievable one; but never do I believe her and
her laughter, when she speaketh evil of herself.

And when I talked face to face with my wild Wisdom, she said to me
angrily: “Thou willest, thou cravest, thou lovest; on that account alone
dost thou PRAISE Life!”

Then had I almost answered indignantly and told the truth to the angry
one; and one cannot answer more indignantly than when one “telleth the
truth” to one’s Wisdom.

For thus do things stand with us three. In my heart do I love only
Life—and verily, most when I hate her!

But that I am fond of Wisdom, and often too fond, is because she
remindeth me very strongly of Life!

She hath her eye, her laugh, and even her golden angle-rod: am I
responsible for it that both are so alike?

And when once Life asked me: “Who is she then, this Wisdom?”—then said
I eagerly: “Ah, yes! Wisdom!

One thirsteth for her and is not satisfied, one looketh through veils,
one graspeth through nets.

Is she beautiful? What do I know! But the oldest carps are still lured
by her.

Changeable is she, and wayward; often have I seen her bite her lip, and
pass the comb against the grain of her hair.

Perhaps she is wicked and false, and altogether a woman; but when she
speaketh ill of herself, just then doth she seduce most.”

When I had said this unto Life, then laughed she maliciously, and shut
her eyes. “Of whom dost thou speak?” said she. “Perhaps of me?

And if thou wert right—is it proper to say THAT in such wise to my
face! But now, pray, speak also of thy Wisdom!”

Ah, and now hast thou again opened thine eyes, O beloved Life! And into
the unfathomable have I again seemed to sink.—

Thus sang Zarathustra. But when the dance was over and the maidens had
departed, he became sad.

“The sun hath been long set,” said he at last, “the meadow is damp, and
from the forest cometh coolness.

An unknown presence is about me, and gazeth thoughtfully. What! Thou
livest still, Zarathustra?

Why? Wherefore? Whereby? Whither? Where? How? Is it not folly still to
live?—

Ah, my friends; the evening is it which thus interrogateth in me.
Forgive me my sadness!

Evening hath come on: forgive me that evening hath come on!”

Thus sang Zarathustra.




XXXIII. THE GRAVE-SONG.


“Yonder is the grave-island, the silent isle; yonder also are the graves
of my youth. Thither will I carry an evergreen wreath of life.”

Resolving thus in my heart, did I sail o’er the sea.—

Oh, ye sights and scenes of my youth! Oh, all ye gleams of love, ye
divine fleeting gleams! How could ye perish so soon for me! I think of
you to-day as my dead ones.

From you, my dearest dead ones, cometh unto me a sweet savour,
heart-opening and melting. Verily, it convulseth and openeth the heart
of the lone seafarer.

Still am I the richest and most to be envied—I, the lonesomest one!
For I HAVE POSSESSED you, and ye possess me still. Tell me: to whom hath
there ever fallen such rosy apples from the tree as have fallen unto me?

Still am I your love’s heir and heritage, blooming to your memory with
many-hued, wild-growing virtues, O ye dearest ones!

Ah, we were made to remain nigh unto each other, ye kindly strange
marvels; and not like timid birds did ye come to me and my longing—nay,
but as trusting ones to a trusting one!

Yea, made for faithfulness, like me, and for fond eternities, must I now
name you by your faithlessness, ye divine glances and fleeting gleams:
no other name have I yet learnt.

Verily, too early did ye die for me, ye fugitives. Yet did ye not flee
from me, nor did I flee from you: innocent are we to each other in our
faithlessness.

To kill ME, did they strangle you, ye singing birds of my hopes! Yea, at
you, ye dearest ones, did malice ever shoot its arrows—to hit my heart!

And they hit it! Because ye were always my dearest, my possession and my
possessedness: ON THAT ACCOUNT had ye to die young, and far too early!

At my most vulnerable point did they shoot the arrow—namely, at you,
whose skin is like down—or more like the smile that dieth at a glance!

But this word will I say unto mine enemies: What is all manslaughter in
comparison with what ye have done unto me!

Worse evil did ye do unto me than all manslaughter; the irretrievable
did ye take from me:—thus do I speak unto you, mine enemies!

Slew ye not my youth’s visions and dearest marvels! My playmates took ye
from me, the blessed spirits! To their memory do I deposit this wreath
and this curse.

This curse upon you, mine enemies! Have ye not made mine eternal short,
as a tone dieth away in a cold night! Scarcely, as the twinkle of divine
eyes, did it come to me—as a fleeting gleam!

Thus spake once in a happy hour my purity: “Divine shall everything be
unto me.”

Then did ye haunt me with foul phantoms; ah, whither hath that happy
hour now fled!

“All days shall be holy unto me”—so spake once the wisdom of my youth:
verily, the language of a joyous wisdom!

But then did ye enemies steal my nights, and sold them to sleepless
torture: ah, whither hath that joyous wisdom now fled?

Once did I long for happy auspices: then did ye lead an owl-monster
across my path, an adverse sign. Ah, whither did my tender longing then
flee?

All loathing did I once vow to renounce: then did ye change my nigh ones
and nearest ones into ulcerations. Ah, whither did my noblest vow then
flee?

As a blind one did I once walk in blessed ways: then did ye cast
filth on the blind one’s course: and now is he disgusted with the old
footpath.

And when I performed my hardest task, and celebrated the triumph of
my victories, then did ye make those who loved me call out that I then
grieved them most.

Verily, it was always your doing: ye embittered to me my best honey, and
the diligence of my best bees.

To my charity have ye ever sent the most impudent beggars; around my
sympathy have ye ever crowded the incurably shameless. Thus have ye
wounded the faith of my virtue.

And when I offered my holiest as a sacrifice, immediately did your
“piety” put its fatter gifts beside it: so that my holiest suffocated in
the fumes of your fat.

And once did I want to dance as I had never yet danced: beyond all
heavens did I want to dance. Then did ye seduce my favourite minstrel.

And now hath he struck up an awful, melancholy air; alas, he tooted as a
mournful horn to mine ear!

Murderous minstrel, instrument of evil, most innocent instrument!
Already did I stand prepared for the best dance: then didst thou slay my
rapture with thy tones!

Only in the dance do I know how to speak the parable of the highest
things:—and now hath my grandest parable remained unspoken in my limbs!

Unspoken and unrealised hath my highest hope remained! And there have
perished for me all the visions and consolations of my youth!

How did I ever bear it? How did I survive and surmount such wounds? How
did my soul rise again out of those sepulchres?

Yea, something invulnerable, unburiable is with me, something that would
rend rocks asunder: it is called MY WILL. Silently doth it proceed, and
unchanged throughout the years.

Its course will it go upon my feet, mine old Will; hard of heart is its
nature and invulnerable.

Invulnerable am I only in my heel. Ever livest thou there, and art like
thyself, thou most patient one! Ever hast thou burst all shackles of the
tomb!

In thee still liveth also the unrealisedness of my youth; and as life
and youth sittest thou here hopeful on the yellow ruins of graves.

Yea, thou art still for me the demolisher of all graves: Hail to thee,
my Will! And only where there are graves are there resurrections.—

Thus sang Zarathustra.




XXXIV. SELF-SURPASSING.


“Will to Truth” do ye call it, ye wisest ones, that which impelleth you
and maketh you ardent?

Will for the thinkableness of all being: thus do _I_ call your will!

All being would ye MAKE thinkable: for ye doubt with good reason whether
it be already thinkable.

But it shall accommodate and bend itself to you! So willeth your will.
Smooth shall it become and subject to the spirit, as its mirror and
reflection.

That is your entire will, ye wisest ones, as a Will to Power; and even
when ye speak of good and evil, and of estimates of value.

Ye would still create a world before which ye can bow the knee: such is
your ultimate hope and ecstasy.

The ignorant, to be sure, the people—they are like a river on which a
boat floateth along: and in the boat sit the estimates of value, solemn
and disguised.

Your will and your valuations have ye put on the river of becoming; it
betrayeth unto me an old Will to Power, what is believed by the people
as good and evil.

It was ye, ye wisest ones, who put such guests in this boat, and gave
them pomp and proud names—ye and your ruling Will!

Onward the river now carrieth your boat: it MUST carry it. A small
matter if the rough wave foameth and angrily resisteth its keel!

It is not the river that is your danger and the end of your good and
evil, ye wisest ones: but that Will itself, the Will to Power—the
unexhausted, procreating life-will.

But that ye may understand my gospel of good and evil, for that purpose
will I tell you my gospel of life, and of the nature of all living
things.

The living thing did I follow; I walked in the broadest and narrowest
paths to learn its nature.

With a hundred-faced mirror did I catch its glance when its mouth was
shut, so that its eye might speak unto me. And its eye spake unto me.

But wherever I found living things, there heard I also the language of
obedience. All living things are obeying things.

And this heard I secondly: Whatever cannot obey itself, is commanded.
Such is the nature of living things.

This, however, is the third thing which I heard—namely, that commanding
is more difficult than obeying. And not only because the commander
beareth the burden of all obeyers, and because this burden readily
crusheth him:—

An attempt and a risk seemed all commanding unto me; and whenever it
commandeth, the living thing risketh itself thereby.

Yea, even when it commandeth itself, then also must it atone for its
commanding. Of its own law must it become the judge and avenger and
victim.

How doth this happen! so did I ask myself. What persuadeth the living
thing to obey, and command, and even be obedient in commanding?

Hearken now unto my word, ye wisest ones! Test it seriously, whether
I have crept into the heart of life itself, and into the roots of its
heart!

Wherever I found a living thing, there found I Will to Power; and even
in the will of the servant found I the will to be master.

That to the stronger the weaker shall serve—thereto persuadeth he his
will who would be master over a still weaker one. That delight alone he
is unwilling to forego.

And as the lesser surrendereth himself to the greater that he may have
delight and power over the least of all, so doth even the greatest
surrender himself, and staketh—life, for the sake of power.

It is the surrender of the greatest to run risk and danger, and play
dice for death.

And where there is sacrifice and service and love-glances, there also
is the will to be master. By by-ways doth the weaker then slink into
the fortress, and into the heart of the mightier one—and there stealeth
power.

And this secret spake Life herself unto me. “Behold,” said she, “I am
that WHICH MUST EVER SURPASS ITSELF.

To be sure, ye call it will to procreation, or impulse towards a goal,
towards the higher, remoter, more manifold: but all that is one and the
same secret.

Rather would I succumb than disown this one thing; and verily, where
there is succumbing and leaf-falling, lo, there doth Life sacrifice
itself—for power!

That I have to be struggle, and becoming, and purpose, and
cross-purpose—ah, he who divineth my will, divineth well also on what
CROOKED paths it hath to tread!

Whatever I create, and however much I love it,—soon must I be adverse
to it, and to my love: so willeth my will.

And even thou, discerning one, art only a path and footstep of my will:
verily, my Will to Power walketh even on the feet of thy Will to Truth!

He certainly did not hit the truth who shot at it the formula: ‘Will to
existence’: that will—doth not exist!

For what is not, cannot will; that, however, which is in existence—how
could it still strive for existence!

Only where there is life, is there also will: not, however, Will to
Life, but—so teach I thee—Will to Power!

Much is reckoned higher than life itself by the living one; but out of
the very reckoning speaketh—the Will to Power!”—

Thus did Life once teach me: and thereby, ye wisest ones, do I solve you
the riddle of your hearts.

Verily, I say unto you: good and evil which would be everlasting—it
doth not exist! Of its own accord must it ever surpass itself anew.

With your values and formulae of good and evil, ye exercise power,
ye valuing ones: and that is your secret love, and the sparkling,
trembling, and overflowing of your souls.

But a stronger power groweth out of your values, and a new surpassing:
by it breaketh egg and egg-shell.

And he who hath to be a creator in good and evil—verily, he hath first
to be a destroyer, and break values in pieces.

Thus doth the greatest evil pertain to the greatest good: that, however,
is the creating good.—

Let us SPEAK thereof, ye wisest ones, even though it be bad. To be
silent is worse; all suppressed truths become poisonous.

And let everything break up which—can break up by our truths! Many a
house is still to be built!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXXV. THE SUBLIME ONES.


Calm is the bottom of my sea: who would guess that it hideth droll
monsters!

Unmoved is my depth: but it sparkleth with swimming enigmas and
laughters.

A sublime one saw I to-day, a solemn one, a penitent of the spirit: Oh,
how my soul laughed at his ugliness!

With upraised breast, and like those who draw in their breath: thus did
he stand, the sublime one, and in silence:

O’erhung with ugly truths, the spoil of his hunting, and rich in torn
raiment; many thorns also hung on him—but I saw no rose.

Not yet had he learned laughing and beauty. Gloomy did this hunter
return from the forest of knowledge.

From the fight with wild beasts returned he home: but even yet a wild
beast gazeth out of his seriousness—an unconquered wild beast!

As a tiger doth he ever stand, on the point of springing; but I do not
like those strained souls; ungracious is my taste towards all those
self-engrossed ones.

And ye tell me, friends, that there is to be no dispute about taste and
tasting? But all life is a dispute about taste and tasting!

Taste: that is weight at the same time, and scales and weigher; and alas
for every living thing that would live without dispute about weight and
scales and weigher!

Should he become weary of his sublimeness, this sublime one, then only
will his beauty begin—and then only will I taste him and find him
savoury.

And only when he turneth away from himself will he o’erleap his own
shadow—and verily! into HIS sun.

Far too long did he sit in the shade; the cheeks of the penitent of the
spirit became pale; he almost starved on his expectations.

Contempt is still in his eye, and loathing hideth in his mouth. To be
sure, he now resteth, but he hath not yet taken rest in the sunshine.

As the ox ought he to do; and his happiness should smell of the earth,
and not of contempt for the earth.

As a white ox would I like to see him, which, snorting and lowing,
walketh before the ploughshare: and his lowing should also laud all
that is earthly!

Dark is still his countenance; the shadow of his hand danceth upon it.
O’ershadowed is still the sense of his eye.

His deed itself is still the shadow upon him: his doing obscureth the
doer. Not yet hath he overcome his deed.

To be sure, I love in him the shoulders of the ox: but now do I want to
see also the eye of the angel.

Also his hero-will hath he still to unlearn: an exalted one shall he
be, and not only a sublime one:—the ether itself should raise him, the
will-less one!

He hath subdued monsters, he hath solved enigmas. But he should also
redeem his monsters and enigmas; into heavenly children should he
transform them.

As yet hath his knowledge not learned to smile, and to be without
jealousy; as yet hath his gushing passion not become calm in beauty.

Verily, not in satiety shall his longing cease and disappear, but in
beauty! Gracefulness belongeth to the munificence of the magnanimous.

His arm across his head: thus should the hero repose; thus should he
also surmount his repose.

But precisely to the hero is BEAUTY the hardest thing of all.
Unattainable is beauty by all ardent wills.

A little more, a little less: precisely this is much here, it is the
most here.

To stand with relaxed muscles and with unharnessed will: that is the
hardest for all of you, ye sublime ones!

When power becometh gracious and descendeth into the visible—I call
such condescension, beauty.

And from no one do I want beauty so much as from thee, thou powerful
one: let thy goodness be thy last self-conquest.

All evil do I accredit to thee: therefore do I desire of thee the good.

Verily, I have often laughed at the weaklings, who think themselves good
because they have crippled paws!

The virtue of the pillar shalt thou strive after: more beautiful doth
it ever become, and more graceful—but internally harder and more
sustaining—the higher it riseth.

Yea, thou sublime one, one day shalt thou also be beautiful, and hold up
the mirror to thine own beauty.

Then will thy soul thrill with divine desires; and there will be
adoration even in thy vanity!

For this is the secret of the soul: when the hero hath abandoned it,
then only approacheth it in dreams—the superhero.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXXVI. THE LAND OF CULTURE.


Too far did I fly into the future: a horror seized upon me.

And when I looked around me, lo! there time was my sole contemporary.

Then did I fly backwards, homewards—and always faster. Thus did I come
unto you, ye present-day men, and into the land of culture.

For the first time brought I an eye to see you, and good desire: verily,
with longing in my heart did I come.

But how did it turn out with me? Although so alarmed—I had yet to
laugh! Never did mine eye see anything so motley-coloured!

I laughed and laughed, while my foot still trembled, and my heart as
well. “Here forsooth, is the home of all the paintpots,”—said I.

With fifty patches painted on faces and limbs—so sat ye there to mine
astonishment, ye present-day men!

And with fifty mirrors around you, which flattered your play of colours,
and repeated it!

Verily, ye could wear no better masks, ye present-day men, than your own
faces! Who could—RECOGNISE you!

Written all over with the characters of the past, and these characters
also pencilled over with new characters—thus have ye concealed
yourselves well from all decipherers!

And though one be a trier of the reins, who still believeth that ye have
reins! Out of colours ye seem to be baked, and out of glued scraps.

All times and peoples gaze divers-coloured out of your veils; all
customs and beliefs speak divers-coloured out of your gestures.

He who would strip you of veils and wrappers, and paints and gestures,
would just have enough left to scare the crows.

Verily, I myself am the scared crow that once saw you naked, and without
paint; and I flew away when the skeleton ogled at me.

Rather would I be a day-labourer in the nether-world, and among the
shades of the bygone!—Fatter and fuller than ye, are forsooth the
nether-worldlings!

This, yea this, is bitterness to my bowels, that I can neither endure
you naked nor clothed, ye present-day men!

All that is unhomelike in the future, and whatever maketh strayed birds
shiver, is verily more homelike and familiar than your “reality.”

For thus speak ye: “Real are we wholly, and without faith and
superstition”: thus do ye plume yourselves—alas! even without plumes!

Indeed, how would ye be ABLE to believe, ye divers-coloured ones!—ye
who are pictures of all that hath ever been believed!

Perambulating refutations are ye, of belief itself, and a dislocation of
all thought. UNTRUSTWORTHY ONES: thus do _I_ call you, ye real ones!

All periods prate against one another in your spirits; and the dreams
and pratings of all periods were even realer than your awakeness!

Unfruitful are ye: THEREFORE do ye lack belief. But he who had to
create, had always his presaging dreams and astral premonitions—and
believed in believing!—

Half-open doors are ye, at which grave-diggers wait. And this is YOUR
reality: “Everything deserveth to perish.”

Alas, how ye stand there before me, ye unfruitful ones; how lean your
ribs! And many of you surely have had knowledge thereof.

Many a one hath said: “There hath surely a God filched something from
me secretly whilst I slept? Verily, enough to make a girl for himself
therefrom!

“Amazing is the poverty of my ribs!” thus hath spoken many a present-day
man.

Yea, ye are laughable unto me, ye present-day men! And especially when
ye marvel at yourselves!

And woe unto me if I could not laugh at your marvelling, and had to
swallow all that is repugnant in your platters!

As it is, however, I will make lighter of you, since I have to carry
_what is heavy;_ and what matter if beetles and May-bugs also alight on
my load!

Verily, it shall not on that account become heavier to me! And not from
you, ye present-day men, shall my great weariness arise.—

Ah, whither shall I now ascend with my longing! From all mountains do I
look out for fatherlands and motherlands.

But a home have I found nowhere: unsettled am I in all cities, and
decamping at all gates.

Alien to me, and a mockery, are the present-day men, to whom of late my
heart impelled me; and exiled am I from fatherlands and motherlands.

Thus do I love only my CHILDREN’S LAND, the undiscovered in the remotest
sea: for it do I bid my sails search and search.

Unto my children will I make amends for being the child of my fathers:
and unto all the future—for THIS present-day!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXXVII. IMMACULATE PERCEPTION.


When yester-eve the moon arose, then did I fancy it about to bear a sun:
so broad and teeming did it lie on the horizon.

But it was a liar with its pregnancy; and sooner will I believe in the
man in the moon than in the woman.

To be sure, little of a man is he also, that timid night-reveller.
Verily, with a bad conscience doth he stalk over the roofs.

For he is covetous and jealous, the monk in the moon; covetous of the
earth, and all the joys of lovers.

Nay, I like him not, that tom-cat on the roofs! Hateful unto me are all
that slink around half-closed windows!

Piously and silently doth he stalk along on the star-carpets:—but I
like no light-treading human feet, on which not even a spur jingleth.

Every honest one’s step speaketh; the cat however, stealeth along over
the ground. Lo! cat-like doth the moon come along, and dishonestly.—

This parable speak I unto you sentimental dissemblers, unto you, the
“pure discerners!” You do _I_ call—covetous ones!

Also ye love the earth, and the earthly: I have divined you well!—but
shame is in your love, and a bad conscience—ye are like the moon!

To despise the earthly hath your spirit been persuaded, but not your
bowels: these, however, are the strongest in you!

And now is your spirit ashamed to be at the service of your bowels, and
goeth by-ways and lying ways to escape its own shame.

“That would be the highest thing for me”—so saith your lying spirit
unto itself—“to gaze upon life without desire, and not like the dog,
with hanging-out tongue:

To be happy in gazing: with dead will, free from the grip and greed
of selfishness—cold and ashy-grey all over, but with intoxicated
moon-eyes!

That would be the dearest thing to me”—thus doth the seduced one seduce
himself,—“to love the earth as the moon loveth it, and with the eye
only to feel its beauty.

And this do I call IMMACULATE perception of all things: to want nothing
else from them, but to be allowed to lie before them as a mirror with a
hundred facets.”—

Oh, ye sentimental dissemblers, ye covetous ones! Ye lack innocence in
your desire: and now do ye defame desiring on that account!

Verily, not as creators, as procreators, or as jubilators do ye love the
earth!

Where is innocence? Where there is will to procreation. And he who
seeketh to create beyond himself, hath for me the purest will.

Where is beauty? Where I MUST WILL with my whole Will; where I will love
and perish, that an image may not remain merely an image.

Loving and perishing: these have rhymed from eternity. Will to love:
that is to be ready also for death. Thus do I speak unto you cowards!

But now doth your emasculated ogling profess to be “contemplation!”
 And that which can be examined with cowardly eyes is to be christened
“beautiful!” Oh, ye violators of noble names!

But it shall be your curse, ye immaculate ones, ye pure discerners, that
ye shall never bring forth, even though ye lie broad and teeming on the
horizon!

Verily, ye fill your mouth with noble words: and we are to believe that
your heart overfloweth, ye cozeners?

But MY words are poor, contemptible, stammering words: gladly do I pick
up what falleth from the table at your repasts.

Yet still can I say therewith the truth—to dissemblers! Yea, my
fish-bones, shells, and prickly leaves shall—tickle the noses of
dissemblers!

Bad air is always about you and your repasts: your lascivious thoughts,
your lies, and secrets are indeed in the air!

Dare only to believe in yourselves—in yourselves and in your inward
parts! He who doth not believe in himself always lieth.

A God’s mask have ye hung in front of you, ye “pure ones”: into a God’s
mask hath your execrable coiling snake crawled.

Verily ye deceive, ye “contemplative ones!” Even Zarathustra was once
the dupe of your godlike exterior; he did not divine the serpent’s coil
with which it was stuffed.

A God’s soul, I once thought I saw playing in your games, ye pure
discerners! No better arts did I once dream of than your arts!

Serpents’ filth and evil odour, the distance concealed from me: and that
a lizard’s craft prowled thereabouts lasciviously.

But I came NIGH unto you: then came to me the day,—and now cometh it to
you,—at an end is the moon’s love affair!

See there! Surprised and pale doth it stand—before the rosy dawn!

For already she cometh, the glowing one,—HER love to the earth cometh!
Innocence and creative desire, is all solar love!

See there, how she cometh impatiently over the sea! Do ye not feel the
thirst and the hot breath of her love?

At the sea would she suck, and drink its depths to her height: now
riseth the desire of the sea with its thousand breasts.

Kissed and sucked WOULD it be by the thirst of the sun; vapour WOULD it
become, and height, and path of light, and light itself!

Verily, like the sun do I love life, and all deep seas.

And this meaneth TO ME knowledge: all that is deep shall ascend—to my
height!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXXVIII. SCHOLARS.


When I lay asleep, then did a sheep eat at the ivy-wreath on my
head,—it ate, and said thereby: “Zarathustra is no longer a scholar.”

It said this, and went away clumsily and proudly. A child told it to me.

I like to lie here where the children play, beside the ruined wall,
among thistles and red poppies.

A scholar am I still to the children, and also to the thistles and red
poppies. Innocent are they, even in their wickedness.

But to the sheep I am no longer a scholar: so willeth my lot—blessings
upon it!

For this is the truth: I have departed from the house of the scholars,
and the door have I also slammed behind me.

Too long did my soul sit hungry at their table: not like them have I got
the knack of investigating, as the knack of nut-cracking.

Freedom do I love, and the air over fresh soil; rather would I sleep on
ox-skins than on their honours and dignities.

I am too hot and scorched with mine own thought: often is it ready to
take away my breath. Then have I to go into the open air, and away from
all dusty rooms.

But they sit cool in the cool shade: they want in everything to be
merely spectators, and they avoid sitting where the sun burneth on the
steps.

Like those who stand in the street and gape at the passers-by: thus do
they also wait, and gape at the thoughts which others have thought.

Should one lay hold of them, then do they raise a dust like flour-sacks,
and involuntarily: but who would divine that their dust came from corn,
and from the yellow delight of the summer fields?

When they give themselves out as wise, then do their petty sayings and
truths chill me: in their wisdom there is often an odour as if it came
from the swamp; and verily, I have even heard the frog croak in it!

Clever are they—they have dexterous fingers: what doth MY simplicity
pretend to beside their multiplicity! All threading and knitting and
weaving do their fingers understand: thus do they make the hose of the
spirit!

Good clockworks are they: only be careful to wind them up properly!
Then do they indicate the hour without mistake, and make a modest noise
thereby.

Like millstones do they work, and like pestles: throw only seed-corn
unto them!—they know well how to grind corn small, and make white dust
out of it.

They keep a sharp eye on one another, and do not trust each other the
best. Ingenious in little artifices, they wait for those whose knowledge
walketh on lame feet,—like spiders do they wait.

I saw them always prepare their poison with precaution; and always did
they put glass gloves on their fingers in doing so.

They also know how to play with false dice; and so eagerly did I find
them playing, that they perspired thereby.

We are alien to each other, and their virtues are even more repugnant to
my taste than their falsehoods and false dice.

And when I lived with them, then did I live above them. Therefore did
they take a dislike to me.

They want to hear nothing of any one walking above their heads; and so
they put wood and earth and rubbish betwixt me and their heads.

Thus did they deafen the sound of my tread: and least have I hitherto
been heard by the most learned.

All mankind’s faults and weaknesses did they put betwixt themselves and
me:—they call it “false ceiling” in their houses.

But nevertheless I walk with my thoughts ABOVE their heads; and even
should I walk on mine own errors, still would I be above them and their
heads.

For men are NOT equal: so speaketh justice. And what I will, THEY may
not will!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XXXIX. POETS.


“Since I have known the body better”—said Zarathustra to one of his
disciples—“the spirit hath only been to me symbolically spirit; and all
the ‘imperishable’—that is also but a simile.”

“So have I heard thee say once before,” answered the disciple, “and then
thou addedst: ‘But the poets lie too much.’ Why didst thou say that the
poets lie too much?”

“Why?” said Zarathustra. “Thou askest why? I do not belong to those who
may be asked after their Why.

Is my experience but of yesterday? It is long ago that I experienced the
reasons for mine opinions.

Should I not have to be a cask of memory, if I also wanted to have my
reasons with me?

It is already too much for me even to retain mine opinions; and many a
bird flieth away.

And sometimes, also, do I find a fugitive creature in my dovecote, which
is alien to me, and trembleth when I lay my hand upon it.

But what did Zarathustra once say unto thee? That the poets lie too
much?—But Zarathustra also is a poet.

Believest thou that he there spake the truth? Why dost thou believe it?”

The disciple answered: “I believe in Zarathustra.” But Zarathustra shook
his head and smiled.—

Belief doth not sanctify me, said he, least of all the belief in myself.

But granting that some one did say in all seriousness that the poets lie
too much: he was right—WE do lie too much.

We also know too little, and are bad learners: so we are obliged to lie.

And which of us poets hath not adulterated his wine? Many a poisonous
hotchpotch hath evolved in our cellars: many an indescribable thing hath
there been done.

And because we know little, therefore are we pleased from the heart with
the poor in spirit, especially when they are young women!

And even of those things are we desirous, which old women tell one
another in the evening. This do we call the eternally feminine in us.

And as if there were a special secret access to knowledge, which CHOKETH
UP for those who learn anything, so do we believe in the people and in
their “wisdom.”

This, however, do all poets believe: that whoever pricketh up his ears
when lying in the grass or on lonely slopes, learneth something of the
things that are betwixt heaven and earth.

And if there come unto them tender emotions, then do the poets always
think that nature herself is in love with them:

And that she stealeth to their ear to whisper secrets into it, and
amorous flatteries: of this do they plume and pride themselves, before
all mortals!

Ah, there are so many things betwixt heaven and earth of which only the
poets have dreamed!

And especially ABOVE the heavens: for all Gods are poet-symbolisations,
poet-sophistications!

Verily, ever are we drawn aloft—that is, to the realm of the clouds:
on these do we set our gaudy puppets, and then call them Gods and
Supermen:—

Are not they light enough for those chairs!—all these Gods and
Supermen?—

Ah, how I am weary of all the inadequate that is insisted on as actual!
Ah, how I am weary of the poets!

When Zarathustra so spake, his disciple resented it, but was silent. And
Zarathustra also was silent; and his eye directed itself inwardly, as if
it gazed into the far distance. At last he sighed and drew breath.—

I am of to-day and heretofore, said he thereupon; but something is in me
that is of the morrow, and the day following, and the hereafter.

I became weary of the poets, of the old and of the new: superficial are
they all unto me, and shallow seas.

They did not think sufficiently into the depth; therefore their feeling
did not reach to the bottom.

Some sensation of voluptuousness and some sensation of tedium: these
have as yet been their best contemplation.

Ghost-breathing and ghost-whisking, seemeth to me all the
jingle-jangling of their harps; what have they known hitherto of the
fervour of tones!—

They are also not pure enough for me: they all muddle their water that
it may seem deep.

And fain would they thereby prove themselves reconcilers: but mediaries
and mixers are they unto me, and half-and-half, and impure!—

Ah, I cast indeed my net into their sea, and meant to catch good fish;
but always did I draw up the head of some ancient God.

Thus did the sea give a stone to the hungry one. And they themselves may
well originate from the sea.

Certainly, one findeth pearls in them: thereby they are the more like
hard molluscs. And instead of a soul, I have often found in them salt
slime.

They have learned from the sea also its vanity: is not the sea the
peacock of peacocks?

Even before the ugliest of all buffaloes doth it spread out its tail;
never doth it tire of its lace-fan of silver and silk.

Disdainfully doth the buffalo glance thereat, nigh to the sand with its
soul, nigher still to the thicket, nighest, however, to the swamp.

What is beauty and sea and peacock-splendour to it! This parable I speak
unto the poets.

Verily, their spirit itself is the peacock of peacocks, and a sea of
vanity!

Spectators, seeketh the spirit of the poet—should they even be
buffaloes!—

But of this spirit became I weary; and I see the time coming when it
will become weary of itself.

Yea, changed have I seen the poets, and their glance turned towards
themselves.

Penitents of the spirit have I seen appearing; they grew out of the
poets.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XL. GREAT EVENTS.


There is an isle in the sea—not far from the Happy Isles of
Zarathustra—on which a volcano ever smoketh; of which isle the people,
and especially the old women amongst them, say that it is placed as a
rock before the gate of the nether-world; but that through the volcano
itself the narrow way leadeth downwards which conducteth to this gate.

Now about the time that Zarathustra sojourned on the Happy Isles, it
happened that a ship anchored at the isle on which standeth the smoking
mountain, and the crew went ashore to shoot rabbits. About the noontide
hour, however, when the captain and his men were together again, they
saw suddenly a man coming towards them through the air, and a voice said
distinctly: “It is time! It is the highest time!” But when the figure
was nearest to them (it flew past quickly, however, like a shadow, in
the direction of the volcano), then did they recognise with the greatest
surprise that it was Zarathustra; for they had all seen him before
except the captain himself, and they loved him as the people love: in
such wise that love and awe were combined in equal degree.

“Behold!” said the old helmsman, “there goeth Zarathustra to hell!”

About the same time that these sailors landed on the fire-isle, there
was a rumour that Zarathustra had disappeared; and when his friends were
asked about it, they said that he had gone on board a ship by night,
without saying whither he was going.

Thus there arose some uneasiness. After three days, however, there came
the story of the ship’s crew in addition to this uneasiness—and
then did all the people say that the devil had taken Zarathustra. His
disciples laughed, sure enough, at this talk; and one of them said even:
“Sooner would I believe that Zarathustra hath taken the devil.” But at
the bottom of their hearts they were all full of anxiety and longing: so
their joy was great when on the fifth day Zarathustra appeared amongst
them.

And this is the account of Zarathustra’s interview with the fire-dog:

The earth, said he, hath a skin; and this skin hath diseases. One of
these diseases, for example, is called “man.”

And another of these diseases is called “the fire-dog”: concerning HIM
men have greatly deceived themselves, and let themselves be deceived.

To fathom this mystery did I go o’er the sea; and I have seen the truth
naked, verily! barefooted up to the neck.

Now do I know how it is concerning the fire-dog; and likewise concerning
all the spouting and subversive devils, of which not only old women are
afraid.

“Up with thee, fire-dog, out of thy depth!” cried I, “and confess how
deep that depth is! Whence cometh that which thou snortest up?

Thou drinkest copiously at the sea: that doth thine embittered eloquence
betray! In sooth, for a dog of the depth, thou takest thy nourishment
too much from the surface!

At the most, I regard thee as the ventriloquist of the earth: and ever,
when I have heard subversive and spouting devils speak, I have found
them like thee: embittered, mendacious, and shallow.

Ye understand how to roar and obscure with ashes! Ye are the best
braggarts, and have sufficiently learned the art of making dregs boil.

Where ye are, there must always be dregs at hand, and much that is
spongy, hollow, and compressed: it wanteth to have freedom.

‘Freedom’ ye all roar most eagerly: but I have unlearned the belief in
‘great events,’ when there is much roaring and smoke about them.

And believe me, friend Hullabaloo! The greatest events—are not our
noisiest, but our stillest hours.

Not around the inventors of new noise, but around the inventors of new
values, doth the world revolve; INAUDIBLY it revolveth.

And just own to it! Little had ever taken place when thy noise and smoke
passed away. What, if a city did become a mummy, and a statue lay in the
mud!

And this do I say also to the o’erthrowers of statues: It is certainly
the greatest folly to throw salt into the sea, and statues into the mud.

In the mud of your contempt lay the statue: but it is just its law, that
out of contempt, its life and living beauty grow again!

With diviner features doth it now arise, seducing by its suffering; and
verily! it will yet thank you for o’erthrowing it, ye subverters!

This counsel, however, do I counsel to kings and churches, and to all
that is weak with age or virtue—let yourselves be o’erthrown! That ye
may again come to life, and that virtue—may come to you!—”

Thus spake I before the fire-dog: then did he interrupt me sullenly, and
asked: “Church? What is that?”

“Church?” answered I, “that is a kind of state, and indeed the most
mendacious. But remain quiet, thou dissembling dog! Thou surely knowest
thine own species best!

Like thyself the state is a dissembling dog; like thee doth it like
to speak with smoke and roaring—to make believe, like thee, that it
speaketh out of the heart of things.

For it seeketh by all means to be the most important creature on earth,
the state; and people think it so.”

When I had said this, the fire-dog acted as if mad with envy. “What!”
 cried he, “the most important creature on earth? And people think it
so?” And so much vapour and terrible voices came out of his throat, that
I thought he would choke with vexation and envy.

At last he became calmer and his panting subsided; as soon, however, as
he was quiet, I said laughingly:

“Thou art angry, fire-dog: so I am in the right about thee!

And that I may also maintain the right, hear the story of another
fire-dog; he speaketh actually out of the heart of the earth.

Gold doth his breath exhale, and golden rain: so doth his heart desire.
What are ashes and smoke and hot dregs to him!

Laughter flitteth from him like a variegated cloud; adverse is he to thy
gargling and spewing and grips in the bowels!

The gold, however, and the laughter—these doth he take out of the heart
of the earth: for, that thou mayst know it,—THE HEART OF THE EARTH IS
OF GOLD.”

When the fire-dog heard this, he could no longer endure to listen to me.
Abashed did he draw in his tail, said “bow-wow!” in a cowed voice, and
crept down into his cave.—

Thus told Zarathustra. His disciples, however, hardly listened to him:
so great was their eagerness to tell him about the sailors, the rabbits,
and the flying man.

“What am I to think of it!” said Zarathustra. “Am I indeed a ghost?

But it may have been my shadow. Ye have surely heard something of the
Wanderer and his Shadow?

One thing, however, is certain: I must keep a tighter hold of it;
otherwise it will spoil my reputation.”

And once more Zarathustra shook his head and wondered. “What am I to
think of it!” said he once more.

“Why did the ghost cry: ‘It is time! It is the highest time!’

_For what_ is it then—the highest time?”—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XLI. THE SOOTHSAYER.


“—And I saw a great sadness come over mankind. The best turned weary of
their works.

A doctrine appeared, a faith ran beside it: ‘All is empty, all is alike,
all hath been!’

And from all hills there re-echoed: ‘All is empty, all is alike, all
hath been!’

To be sure we have harvested: but why have all our fruits become rotten
and brown? What was it fell last night from the evil moon?

In vain was all our labour, poison hath our wine become, the evil eye
hath singed yellow our fields and hearts.

Arid have we all become; and fire falling upon us, then do we turn dust
like ashes:—yea, the fire itself have we made aweary.

All our fountains have dried up, even the sea hath receded. All the
ground trieth to gape, but the depth will not swallow!

‘Alas! where is there still a sea in which one could be drowned?’ so
soundeth our plaint—across shallow swamps.

Verily, even for dying have we become too weary; now do we keep awake
and live on—in sepulchres.”

Thus did Zarathustra hear a soothsayer speak; and the foreboding touched
his heart and transformed him. Sorrowfully did he go about and wearily;
and he became like unto those of whom the soothsayer had spoken.—

Verily, said he unto his disciples, a little while, and there cometh the
long twilight. Alas, how shall I preserve my light through it!

That it may not smother in this sorrowfulness! To remoter worlds shall
it be a light, and also to remotest nights!

Thus did Zarathustra go about grieved in his heart, and for three days
he did not take any meat or drink: he had no rest, and lost his speech.
At last it came to pass that he fell into a deep sleep. His disciples,
however, sat around him in long night-watches, and waited anxiously to
see if he would awake, and speak again, and recover from his affliction.

And this is the discourse that Zarathustra spake when he awoke; his
voice, however, came unto his disciples as from afar:

Hear, I pray you, the dream that I dreamed, my friends, and help me to
divine its meaning!

A riddle is it still unto me, this dream; the meaning is hidden in it
and encaged, and doth not yet fly above it on free pinions.

All life had I renounced, so I dreamed. Night-watchman and
grave-guardian had I become, aloft, in the lone mountain-fortress of
Death.

There did I guard his coffins: full stood the musty vaults of those
trophies of victory. Out of glass coffins did vanquished life gaze upon
me.

The odour of dust-covered eternities did I breathe: sultry and
dust-covered lay my soul. And who could have aired his soul there!

Brightness of midnight was ever around me; lonesomeness cowered beside
her; and as a third, death-rattle stillness, the worst of my female
friends.

Keys did I carry, the rustiest of all keys; and I knew how to open with
them the most creaking of all gates.

Like a bitterly angry croaking ran the sound through the long corridors
when the leaves of the gate opened: ungraciously did this bird cry,
unwillingly was it awakened.

But more frightful even, and more heart-strangling was it, when it again
became silent and still all around, and I alone sat in that malignant
silence.

Thus did time pass with me, and slip by, if time there still was: what
do I know thereof! But at last there happened that which awoke me.

Thrice did there peal peals at the gate like thunders, thrice did the
vaults resound and howl again: then did I go to the gate.

Alpa! cried I, who carrieth his ashes unto the mountain? Alpa! Alpa! who
carrieth his ashes unto the mountain?

And I pressed the key, and pulled at the gate, and exerted myself. But
not a finger’s-breadth was it yet open:

Then did a roaring wind tear the folds apart: whistling, whizzing, and
piercing, it threw unto me a black coffin.

And in the roaring, and whistling, and whizzing the coffin burst up, and
spouted out a thousand peals of laughter.

And a thousand caricatures of children, angels, owls, fools, and
child-sized butterflies laughed and mocked, and roared at me.

Fearfully was I terrified thereby: it prostrated me. And I cried with
horror as I ne’er cried before.

But mine own crying awoke me:—and I came to myself.—

Thus did Zarathustra relate his dream, and then was silent: for as yet
he knew not the interpretation thereof. But the disciple whom he loved
most arose quickly, seized Zarathustra’s hand, and said:

“Thy life itself interpreteth unto us this dream, O Zarathustra!

Art thou not thyself the wind with shrill whistling, which bursteth open
the gates of the fortress of Death?

Art thou not thyself the coffin full of many-hued malices and
angel-caricatures of life?

Verily, like a thousand peals of children’s laughter cometh
Zarathustra into all sepulchres, laughing at those night-watchmen and
grave-guardians, and whoever else rattleth with sinister keys.

With thy laughter wilt thou frighten and prostrate them: fainting and
recovering will demonstrate thy power over them.

And when the long twilight cometh and the mortal weariness, even then
wilt thou not disappear from our firmament, thou advocate of life!

New stars hast thou made us see, and new nocturnal glories: verily,
laughter itself hast thou spread out over us like a many-hued canopy.

Now will children’s laughter ever from coffins flow; now will a strong
wind ever come victoriously unto all mortal weariness: of this thou art
thyself the pledge and the prophet!

Verily, THEY THEMSELVES DIDST THOU DREAM, thine enemies: that was thy
sorest dream.

But as thou awokest from them and camest to thyself, so shall they
awaken from themselves—and come unto thee!”

Thus spake the disciple; and all the others then thronged around
Zarathustra, grasped him by the hands, and tried to persuade him to
leave his bed and his sadness, and return unto them. Zarathustra,
however, sat upright on his couch, with an absent look. Like one
returning from long foreign sojourn did he look on his disciples, and
examined their features; but still he knew them not. When, however, they
raised him, and set him upon his feet, behold, all on a sudden his eye
changed; he understood everything that had happened, stroked his beard,
and said with a strong voice:

“Well! this hath just its time; but see to it, my disciples, that we
have a good repast; and without delay! Thus do I mean to make amends for
bad dreams!

The soothsayer, however, shall eat and drink at my side: and verily, I
will yet show him a sea in which he can drown himself!”—

Thus spake Zarathustra. Then did he gaze long into the face of the
disciple who had been the dream-interpreter, and shook his head.—




XLII. REDEMPTION.


When Zarathustra went one day over the great bridge, then did the
cripples and beggars surround him, and a hunchback spake thus unto him:

“Behold, Zarathustra! Even the people learn from thee, and acquire faith
in thy teaching: but for them to believe fully in thee, one thing is
still needful—thou must first of all convince us cripples! Here hast
thou now a fine selection, and verily, an opportunity with more than one
forelock! The blind canst thou heal, and make the lame run; and from
him who hath too much behind, couldst thou well, also, take away a
little;—that, I think, would be the right method to make the cripples
believe in Zarathustra!”

Zarathustra, however, answered thus unto him who so spake: When one
taketh his hump from the hunchback, then doth one take from him his
spirit—so do the people teach. And when one giveth the blind man eyes,
then doth he see too many bad things on the earth: so that he curseth
him who healed him. He, however, who maketh the lame man run, inflicteth
upon him the greatest injury; for hardly can he run, when his vices
run away with him—so do the people teach concerning cripples. And why
should not Zarathustra also learn from the people, when the people learn
from Zarathustra?

It is, however, the smallest thing unto me since I have been amongst
men, to see one person lacking an eye, another an ear, and a third a
leg, and that others have lost the tongue, or the nose, or the head.

I see and have seen worse things, and divers things so hideous, that I
should neither like to speak of all matters, nor even keep silent about
some of them: namely, men who lack everything, except that they have
too much of one thing—men who are nothing more than a big eye, or a big
mouth, or a big belly, or something else big,—reversed cripples, I call
such men.

And when I came out of my solitude, and for the first time passed over
this bridge, then I could not trust mine eyes, but looked again and
again, and said at last: “That is an ear! An ear as big as a man!” I
looked still more attentively—and actually there did move under the ear
something that was pitiably small and poor and slim. And in truth this
immense ear was perched on a small thin stalk—the stalk, however, was a
man! A person putting a glass to his eyes, could even recognise further
a small envious countenance, and also that a bloated soullet dangled at
the stalk. The people told me, however, that the big ear was not only a
man, but a great man, a genius. But I never believed in the people when
they spake of great men—and I hold to my belief that it was a reversed
cripple, who had too little of everything, and too much of one thing.

When Zarathustra had spoken thus unto the hunchback, and unto those of
whom the hunchback was the mouthpiece and advocate, then did he turn to
his disciples in profound dejection, and said:

Verily, my friends, I walk amongst men as amongst the fragments and
limbs of human beings!

This is the terrible thing to mine eye, that I find man broken up, and
scattered about, as on a battle- and butcher-ground.

And when mine eye fleeth from the present to the bygone, it findeth ever
the same: fragments and limbs and fearful chances—but no men!

The present and the bygone upon earth—ah! my friends—that is MY most
unbearable trouble; and I should not know how to live, if I were not a
seer of what is to come.

A seer, a purposer, a creator, a future itself, and a bridge to the
future—and alas! also as it were a cripple on this bridge: all that is
Zarathustra.

And ye also asked yourselves often: “Who is Zarathustra to us? What
shall he be called by us?” And like me, did ye give yourselves questions
for answers.

Is he a promiser? Or a fulfiller? A conqueror? Or an inheritor? A
harvest? Or a ploughshare? A physician? Or a healed one?

Is he a poet? Or a genuine one? An emancipator? Or a subjugator? A good
one? Or an evil one?

I walk amongst men as the fragments of the future: that future which I
contemplate.

And it is all my poetisation and aspiration to compose and collect into
unity what is fragment and riddle and fearful chance.

And how could I endure to be a man, if man were not also the composer,
and riddle-reader, and redeemer of chance!

To redeem what is past, and to transform every “It was” into “Thus would
I have it!”—that only do I call redemption!

Will—so is the emancipator and joy-bringer called: thus have I taught
you, my friends! But now learn this likewise: the Will itself is still a
prisoner.

Willing emancipateth: but what is that called which still putteth the
emancipator in chains?

“It was”: thus is the Will’s teeth-gnashing and lonesomest tribulation
called. Impotent towards what hath been done—it is a malicious
spectator of all that is past.

Not backward can the Will will; that it cannot break time and time’s
desire—that is the Will’s lonesomest tribulation.

Willing emancipateth: what doth Willing itself devise in order to get
free from its tribulation and mock at its prison?

Ah, a fool becometh every prisoner! Foolishly delivereth itself also the
imprisoned Will.

That time doth not run backward—that is its animosity: “That which
was”: so is the stone which it cannot roll called.

And thus doth it roll stones out of animosity and ill-humour, and taketh
revenge on whatever doth not, like it, feel rage and ill-humour.

Thus did the Will, the emancipator, become a torturer; and on all
that is capable of suffering it taketh revenge, because it cannot go
backward.

This, yea, this alone is REVENGE itself: the Will’s antipathy to time,
and its “It was.”

Verily, a great folly dwelleth in our Will; and it became a curse unto
all humanity, that this folly acquired spirit!

THE SPIRIT OF REVENGE: my friends, that hath hitherto been man’s best
contemplation; and where there was suffering, it was claimed there was
always penalty.

“Penalty,” so calleth itself revenge. With a lying word it feigneth a
good conscience.

And because in the willer himself there is suffering, because he cannot
will backwards—thus was Willing itself, and all life, claimed—to be
penalty!

And then did cloud after cloud roll over the spirit, until at last
madness preached: “Everything perisheth, therefore everything deserveth
to perish!”

“And this itself is justice, the law of time—that he must devour his
children:” thus did madness preach.

“Morally are things ordered according to justice and penalty. Oh, where
is there deliverance from the flux of things and from the ‘existence’ of
penalty?” Thus did madness preach.

“Can there be deliverance when there is eternal justice? Alas,
unrollable is the stone, ‘It was’: eternal must also be all penalties!”
 Thus did madness preach.

“No deed can be annihilated: how could it be undone by the penalty!
This, this is what is eternal in the ‘existence’ of penalty, that
existence also must be eternally recurring deed and guilt!

Unless the Will should at last deliver itself, and Willing become
non-Willing—:” but ye know, my brethren, this fabulous song of madness!

Away from those fabulous songs did I lead you when I taught you: “The
Will is a creator.”

All “It was” is a fragment, a riddle, a fearful chance—until the
creating Will saith thereto: “But thus would I have it.”—

Until the creating Will saith thereto: “But thus do I will it! Thus
shall I will it!”

But did it ever speak thus? And when doth this take place? Hath the Will
been unharnessed from its own folly?

Hath the Will become its own deliverer and joy-bringer? Hath it
unlearned the spirit of revenge and all teeth-gnashing?

And who hath taught it reconciliation with time, and something higher
than all reconciliation?

Something higher than all reconciliation must the Will will which is the
Will to Power—: but how doth that take place? Who hath taught it also
to will backwards?

—But at this point in his discourse it chanced that Zarathustra
suddenly paused, and looked like a person in the greatest alarm. With
terror in his eyes did he gaze on his disciples; his glances pierced as
with arrows their thoughts and arrear-thoughts. But after a brief space
he again laughed, and said soothedly:

“It is difficult to live amongst men, because silence is so difficult—
especially for a babbler.”—

Thus spake Zarathustra. The hunchback, however, had listened to the
conversation and had covered his face during the time; but when he heard
Zarathustra laugh, he looked up with curiosity, and said slowly:

“But why doth Zarathustra speak otherwise unto us than unto his
disciples?”

Zarathustra answered: “What is there to be wondered at! With hunchbacks
one may well speak in a hunchbacked way!”

“Very good,” said the hunchback; “and with pupils one may well tell
tales out of school.

But why doth Zarathustra speak otherwise unto his pupils—than unto
himself?”—




XLIII. MANLY PRUDENCE.


Not the height, it is the declivity that is terrible!

The declivity, where the gaze shooteth DOWNWARDS, and the hand graspeth
UPWARDS. There doth the heart become giddy through its double will.

Ah, friends, do ye divine also my heart’s double will?

This, this is MY declivity and my danger, that my gaze shooteth towards
the summit, and my hand would fain clutch and lean—on the depth!

To man clingeth my will; with chains do I bind myself to man, because
I am pulled upwards to the Superman: for thither doth mine other will
tend.

And THEREFORE do I live blindly among men, as if I knew them not: that
my hand may not entirely lose belief in firmness.

I know not you men: this gloom and consolation is often spread around
me.

I sit at the gateway for every rogue, and ask: Who wisheth to deceive
me?

This is my first manly prudence, that I allow myself to be deceived, so
as not to be on my guard against deceivers.

Ah, if I were on my guard against man, how could man be an anchor to my
ball! Too easily would I be pulled upwards and away!

This providence is over my fate, that I have to be without foresight.

And he who would not languish amongst men, must learn to drink out of
all glasses; and he who would keep clean amongst men, must know how to
wash himself even with dirty water.

And thus spake I often to myself for consolation: “Courage! Cheer up!
old heart! An unhappiness hath failed to befall thee: enjoy that as
thy—happiness!”

This, however, is mine other manly prudence: I am more forbearing to the
VAIN than to the proud.

Is not wounded vanity the mother of all tragedies? Where, however, pride
is wounded, there groweth up something better than pride.

That life may be fair to behold, its game must be well played; for that
purpose, however, it needeth good actors.

Good actors have I found all the vain ones: they play, and wish people
to be fond of beholding them—all their spirit is in this wish.

They represent themselves, they invent themselves; in their
neighbourhood I like to look upon life—it cureth of melancholy.

Therefore am I forbearing to the vain, because they are the physicians
of my melancholy, and keep me attached to man as to a drama.

And further, who conceiveth the full depth of the modesty of the vain
man! I am favourable to him, and sympathetic on account of his modesty.

From you would he learn his belief in himself; he feedeth upon your
glances, he eateth praise out of your hands.

Your lies doth he even believe when you lie favourably about him: for in
its depths sigheth his heart: “What am _I_?”

And if that be the true virtue which is unconscious of itself—well, the
vain man is unconscious of his modesty!—

This is, however, my third manly prudence: I am not put out of conceit
with the WICKED by your timorousness.

I am happy to see the marvels the warm sun hatcheth: tigers and palms
and rattle-snakes.

Also amongst men there is a beautiful brood of the warm sun, and much
that is marvellous in the wicked.

In truth, as your wisest did not seem to me so very wise, so found I
also human wickedness below the fame of it.

And oft did I ask with a shake of the head: Why still rattle, ye
rattle-snakes?

Verily, there is still a future even for evil! And the warmest south is
still undiscovered by man.

How many things are now called the worst wickedness, which are only
twelve feet broad and three months long! Some day, however, will greater
dragons come into the world.

For that the Superman may not lack his dragon, the superdragon that
is worthy of him, there must still much warm sun glow on moist virgin
forests!

Out of your wild cats must tigers have evolved, and out of your
poison-toads, crocodiles: for the good hunter shall have a good hunt!

And verily, ye good and just! In you there is much to be laughed at, and
especially your fear of what hath hitherto been called “the devil!”

So alien are ye in your souls to what is great, that to you the Superman
would be FRIGHTFUL in his goodness!

And ye wise and knowing ones, ye would flee from the solar-glow of the
wisdom in which the Superman joyfully batheth his nakedness!

Ye highest men who have come within my ken! this is my doubt of you, and
my secret laughter: I suspect ye would call my Superman—a devil!

Ah, I became tired of those highest and best ones: from their “height”
 did I long to be up, out, and away to the Superman!

A horror came over me when I saw those best ones naked: then there grew
for me the pinions to soar away into distant futures.

Into more distant futures, into more southern souths than ever artist
dreamed of: thither, where Gods are ashamed of all clothes!

But disguised do I want to see YOU, ye neighbours and fellowmen, and
well-attired and vain and estimable, as “the good and just;”—

And disguised will I myself sit amongst you—that I may MISTAKE you and
myself: for that is my last manly prudence.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XLIV. THE STILLEST HOUR.


What hath happened unto me, my friends? Ye see me troubled, driven
forth, unwillingly obedient, ready to go—alas, to go away from YOU!

Yea, once more must Zarathustra retire to his solitude: but unjoyously
this time doth the bear go back to his cave!

What hath happened unto me? Who ordereth this?—Ah, mine angry mistress
wisheth it so; she spake unto me. Have I ever named her name to you?

Yesterday towards evening there spake unto me MY STILLEST HOUR: that is
the name of my terrible mistress.

And thus did it happen—for everything must I tell you, that your heart
may not harden against the suddenly departing one!

Do ye know the terror of him who falleth asleep?—

To the very toes he is terrified, because the ground giveth way under
him, and the dream beginneth.

This do I speak unto you in parable. Yesterday at the stillest hour did
the ground give way under me: the dream began.

The hour-hand moved on, the timepiece of my life drew breath—never did
I hear such stillness around me, so that my heart was terrified.

Then was there spoken unto me without voice: “THOU KNOWEST IT,
ZARATHUSTRA?”—

And I cried in terror at this whispering, and the blood left my face:
but I was silent.

Then was there once more spoken unto me without voice: “Thou knowest it,
Zarathustra, but thou dost not speak it!”—

And at last I answered, like one defiant: “Yea, I know it, but I will
not speak it!”

Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “Thou WILT not,
Zarathustra? Is this true? Conceal thyself not behind thy defiance!”—

And I wept and trembled like a child, and said: “Ah, I would indeed, but
how can I do it! Exempt me only from this! It is beyond my power!”

Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “What matter about
thyself, Zarathustra! Speak thy word, and succumb!”

And I answered: “Ah, is it MY word? Who am _I_? I await the worthier
one; I am not worthy even to succumb by it.”

Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “What matter about
thyself? Thou art not yet humble enough for me. Humility hath the
hardest skin.”—

And I answered: “What hath not the skin of my humility endured! At the
foot of my height do I dwell: how high are my summits, no one hath yet
told me. But well do I know my valleys.”

Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “O Zarathustra, he
who hath to remove mountains removeth also valleys and plains.”—

And I answered: “As yet hath my word not removed mountains, and what I
have spoken hath not reached man. I went, indeed, unto men, but not yet
have I attained unto them.”

Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “What knowest thou
THEREOF! The dew falleth on the grass when the night is most silent.”—

And I answered: “They mocked me when I found and walked in mine own
path; and certainly did my feet then tremble.

And thus did they speak unto me: Thou forgottest the path before, now
dost thou also forget how to walk!”

Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “What matter about
their mockery! Thou art one who hast unlearned to obey: now shalt thou
command!

Knowest thou not who is most needed by all? He who commandeth great
things.

To execute great things is difficult: but the more difficult task is to
command great things.

This is thy most unpardonable obstinacy: thou hast the power, and thou
wilt not rule.”—

And I answered: “I lack the lion’s voice for all commanding.”

Then was there again spoken unto me as a whispering: “It is the stillest
words which bring the storm. Thoughts that come with doves’ footsteps
guide the world.

O Zarathustra, thou shalt go as a shadow of that which is to come: thus
wilt thou command, and in commanding go foremost.”—

And I answered: “I am ashamed.”

Then was there again spoken unto me without voice: “Thou must yet become
a child, and be without shame.

The pride of youth is still upon thee; late hast thou become young: but
he who would become a child must surmount even his youth.”—

And I considered a long while, and trembled. At last, however, did I say
what I had said at first. “I will not.”

Then did a laughing take place all around me. Alas, how that laughing
lacerated my bowels and cut into my heart!

And there was spoken unto me for the last time: “O Zarathustra, thy
fruits are ripe, but thou art not ripe for thy fruits!

So must thou go again into solitude: for thou shalt yet become
mellow.”—

And again was there a laughing, and it fled: then did it become still
around me, as with a double stillness. I lay, however, on the ground,
and the sweat flowed from my limbs.

—Now have ye heard all, and why I have to return into my solitude.
Nothing have I kept hidden from you, my friends.

But even this have ye heard from me, WHO is still the most reserved of
men—and will be so!

Ah, my friends! I should have something more to say unto you! I should
have something more to give unto you! Why do I not give it? Am I then a
niggard?—

When, however, Zarathustra had spoken these words, the violence of his
pain, and a sense of the nearness of his departure from his friends came
over him, so that he wept aloud; and no one knew how to console him. In
the night, however, he went away alone and left his friends.





THIRD PART.


“Ye look aloft when ye long for exaltation, and I look downward because
I am exalted.

“Who among you can at the same time laugh and be exalted?

“He who climbeth on the highest mountains, laugheth at all tragic plays
and tragic realities.”—ZARATHUSTRA, I., “Reading and Writing.”




XLV. THE WANDERER.


Then, when it was about midnight, Zarathustra went his way over the
ridge of the isle, that he might arrive early in the morning at the
other coast; because there he meant to embark. For there was a good
roadstead there, in which foreign ships also liked to anchor: those
ships took many people with them, who wished to cross over from the
Happy Isles. So when Zarathustra thus ascended the mountain, he thought
on the way of his many solitary wanderings from youth onwards, and how
many mountains and ridges and summits he had already climbed.

I am a wanderer and mountain-climber, said he to his heart, I love not
the plains, and it seemeth I cannot long sit still.

And whatever may still overtake me as fate and experience—a wandering
will be therein, and a mountain-climbing: in the end one experienceth
only oneself.

The time is now past when accidents could befall me; and what COULD now
fall to my lot which would not already be mine own!

It returneth only, it cometh home to me at last—mine own Self, and
such of it as hath been long abroad, and scattered among things and
accidents.

And one thing more do I know: I stand now before my last summit, and
before that which hath been longest reserved for me. Ah, my hardest path
must I ascend! Ah, I have begun my lonesomest wandering!

He, however, who is of my nature doth not avoid such an hour: the hour
that saith unto him: Now only dost thou go the way to thy greatness!
Summit and abyss—these are now comprised together!

Thou goest the way to thy greatness: now hath it become thy last refuge,
what was hitherto thy last danger!

Thou goest the way to thy greatness: it must now be thy best courage
that there is no longer any path behind thee!

Thou goest the way to thy greatness: here shall no one steal after thee!
Thy foot itself hath effaced the path behind thee, and over it standeth
written: Impossibility.

And if all ladders henceforth fail thee, then must thou learn to mount
upon thine own head: how couldst thou mount upward otherwise?

Upon thine own head, and beyond thine own heart! Now must the gentlest
in thee become the hardest.

He who hath always much-indulged himself, sickeneth at last by his
much-indulgence. Praises on what maketh hardy! I do not praise the land
where butter and honey—flow!

To learn TO LOOK AWAY FROM oneself, is necessary in order to see MANY
THINGS:—this hardiness is needed by every mountain-climber.

He, however, who is obtrusive with his eyes as a discerner, how can he
ever see more of anything than its foreground!

But thou, O Zarathustra, wouldst view the ground of everything, and its
background: thus must thou mount even above thyself—up, upwards, until
thou hast even thy stars UNDER thee!

Yea! To look down upon myself, and even upon my stars: that only would I
call my SUMMIT, that hath remained for me as my LAST summit!—

Thus spake Zarathustra to himself while ascending, comforting his heart
with harsh maxims: for he was sore at heart as he had never been before.
And when he had reached the top of the mountain-ridge, behold, there
lay the other sea spread out before him: and he stood still and was
long silent. The night, however, was cold at this height, and clear and
starry.

I recognise my destiny, said he at last, sadly. Well! I am ready. Now
hath my last lonesomeness begun.

Ah, this sombre, sad sea, below me! Ah, this sombre nocturnal vexation!
Ah, fate and sea! To you must I now GO DOWN!

Before my highest mountain do I stand, and before my longest wandering:
therefore must I first go deeper down than I ever ascended:

—Deeper down into pain than I ever ascended, even into its darkest
flood! So willeth my fate. Well! I am ready.

Whence come the highest mountains? so did I once ask. Then did I learn
that they come out of the sea.

That testimony is inscribed on their stones, and on the walls of their
summits. Out of the deepest must the highest come to its height.—

Thus spake Zarathustra on the ridge of the mountain where it was cold:
when, however, he came into the vicinity of the sea, and at last stood
alone amongst the cliffs, then had he become weary on his way, and
eagerer than ever before.

Everything as yet sleepeth, said he; even the sea sleepeth. Drowsily and
strangely doth its eye gaze upon me.

But it breatheth warmly—I feel it. And I feel also that it dreameth. It
tosseth about dreamily on hard pillows.

Hark! Hark! How it groaneth with evil recollections! Or evil
expectations?

Ah, I am sad along with thee, thou dusky monster, and angry with myself
even for thy sake.

Ah, that my hand hath not strength enough! Gladly, indeed, would I free
thee from evil dreams!—

And while Zarathustra thus spake, he laughed at himself with melancholy
and bitterness. What! Zarathustra, said he, wilt thou even sing
consolation to the sea?

Ah, thou amiable fool, Zarathustra, thou too-blindly confiding one! But
thus hast thou ever been: ever hast thou approached confidently all that
is terrible.

Every monster wouldst thou caress. A whiff of warm breath, a little soft
tuft on its paw—: and immediately wert thou ready to love and lure it.

LOVE is the danger of the lonesomest one, love to anything, IF IT ONLY
LIVE! Laughable, verily, is my folly and my modesty in love!—

Thus spake Zarathustra, and laughed thereby a second time. Then,
however, he thought of his abandoned friends—and as if he had done them
a wrong with his thoughts, he upbraided himself because of his thoughts.
And forthwith it came to pass that the laugher wept—with anger and
longing wept Zarathustra bitterly.




XLVI. THE VISION AND THE ENIGMA.


1.

When it got abroad among the sailors that Zarathustra was on board the
ship—for a man who came from the Happy Isles had gone on board along
with him,—there was great curiosity and expectation. But Zarathustra
kept silent for two days, and was cold and deaf with sadness; so that he
neither answered looks nor questions. On the evening of the second day,
however, he again opened his ears, though he still kept silent: for
there were many curious and dangerous things to be heard on board the
ship, which came from afar, and was to go still further. Zarathustra,
however, was fond of all those who make distant voyages, and dislike to
live without danger. And behold! when listening, his own tongue was
at last loosened, and the ice of his heart broke. Then did he begin to
speak thus:

To you, the daring venturers and adventurers, and whoever hath embarked
with cunning sails upon frightful seas,—

To you the enigma-intoxicated, the twilight-enjoyers, whose souls are
allured by flutes to every treacherous gulf:

—For ye dislike to grope at a thread with cowardly hand; and where ye
can DIVINE, there do ye hate to CALCULATE—

To you only do I tell the enigma that I SAW—the vision of the
lonesomest one.—

Gloomily walked I lately in corpse-coloured twilight—gloomily and
sternly, with compressed lips. Not only one sun had set for me.

A path which ascended daringly among boulders, an evil, lonesome path,
which neither herb nor shrub any longer cheered, a mountain-path,
crunched under the daring of my foot.

Mutely marching over the scornful clinking of pebbles, trampling the
stone that let it slip: thus did my foot force its way upwards.

Upwards:—in spite of the spirit that drew it downwards, towards the
abyss, the spirit of gravity, my devil and arch-enemy.

Upwards:—although it sat upon me, half-dwarf, half-mole; paralysed,
paralysing; dripping lead in mine ear, and thoughts like drops of lead
into my brain.

“O Zarathustra,” it whispered scornfully, syllable by syllable, “thou
stone of wisdom! Thou threwest thyself high, but every thrown stone
must—fall!

O Zarathustra, thou stone of wisdom, thou sling-stone, thou
star-destroyer! Thyself threwest thou so high,—but every thrown
stone—must fall!

Condemned of thyself, and to thine own stoning: O Zarathustra, far
indeed threwest thou thy stone—but upon THYSELF will it recoil!”

Then was the dwarf silent; and it lasted long. The silence, however,
oppressed me; and to be thus in pairs, one is verily lonesomer than when
alone!

I ascended, I ascended, I dreamt, I thought,—but everything oppressed
me. A sick one did I resemble, whom bad torture wearieth, and a worse
dream reawakeneth out of his first sleep.—

But there is something in me which I call courage: it hath hitherto
slain for me every dejection. This courage at last bade me stand still
and say: “Dwarf! Thou! Or I!”—

For courage is the best slayer,—courage which ATTACKETH: for in every
attack there is sound of triumph.

Man, however, is the most courageous animal: thereby hath he overcome
every animal. With sound of triumph hath he overcome every pain; human
pain, however, is the sorest pain.

Courage slayeth also giddiness at abysses: and where doth man not stand
at abysses! Is not seeing itself—seeing abysses?

Courage is the best slayer: courage slayeth also fellow-suffering.
Fellow-suffering, however, is the deepest abyss: as deeply as man
looketh into life, so deeply also doth he look into suffering.

Courage, however, is the best slayer, courage which attacketh: it
slayeth even death itself; for it saith: “WAS THAT life? Well! Once
more!”

In such speech, however, there is much sound of triumph. He who hath
ears to hear, let him hear.—

2.

“Halt, dwarf!” said I. “Either I—or thou! I, however, am the stronger
of the two:—thou knowest not mine abysmal thought! IT—couldst thou not
endure!”

Then happened that which made me lighter: for the dwarf sprang from my
shoulder, the prying sprite! And it squatted on a stone in front of me.
There was however a gateway just where we halted.

“Look at this gateway! Dwarf!” I continued, “it hath two faces. Two
roads come together here: these hath no one yet gone to the end of.

This long lane backwards: it continueth for an eternity. And that long
lane forward—that is another eternity.

They are antithetical to one another, these roads; they directly abut on
one another:—and it is here, at this gateway, that they come together.
The name of the gateway is inscribed above: ‘This Moment.’

But should one follow them further—and ever further and further
on, thinkest thou, dwarf, that these roads would be eternally
antithetical?”—

“Everything straight lieth,” murmured the dwarf, contemptuously. “All
truth is crooked; time itself is a circle.”

“Thou spirit of gravity!” said I wrathfully, “do not take it too
lightly! Or I shall let thee squat where thou squattest, Haltfoot,—and
I carried thee HIGH!”

“Observe,” continued I, “This Moment! From the gateway, This Moment,
there runneth a long eternal lane BACKWARDS: behind us lieth an
eternity.

Must not whatever CAN run its course of all things, have already run
along that lane? Must not whatever CAN happen of all things have already
happened, resulted, and gone by?

And if everything have already existed, what thinkest thou, dwarf, of
This Moment? Must not this gateway also—have already existed?

And are not all things closely bound together in such wise that This
Moment draweth all coming things after it? CONSEQUENTLY—itself also?

For whatever CAN run its course of all things, also in this long lane
OUTWARD—MUST it once more run!—

And this slow spider which creepeth in the moonlight, and this moonlight
itself, and thou and I in this gateway whispering together, whispering
of eternal things—must we not all have already existed?

—And must we not return and run in that other lane out before us, that
long weird lane—must we not eternally return?”—

Thus did I speak, and always more softly: for I was afraid of mine own
thoughts, and arrear-thoughts. Then, suddenly did I hear a dog HOWL near
me.

Had I ever heard a dog howl thus? My thoughts ran back. Yes! When I was
a child, in my most distant childhood:

—Then did I hear a dog howl thus. And saw it also, with hair bristling,
its head upwards, trembling in the stillest midnight, when even dogs
believe in ghosts:

—So that it excited my commiseration. For just then went the full moon,
silent as death, over the house; just then did it stand still, a glowing
globe—at rest on the flat roof, as if on some one’s property:—

Thereby had the dog been terrified: for dogs believe in thieves and
ghosts. And when I again heard such howling, then did it excite my
commiseration once more.

Where was now the dwarf? And the gateway? And the spider? And all the
whispering? Had I dreamt? Had I awakened? ‘Twixt rugged rocks did I
suddenly stand alone, dreary in the dreariest moonlight.

BUT THERE LAY A MAN! And there! The dog leaping, bristling, whining—now
did it see me coming—then did it howl again, then did it CRY:—had I
ever heard a dog cry so for help?

And verily, what I saw, the like had I never seen. A young shepherd did
I see, writhing, choking, quivering, with distorted countenance, and
with a heavy black serpent hanging out of his mouth.

Had I ever seen so much loathing and pale horror on one countenance?
He had perhaps gone to sleep? Then had the serpent crawled into his
throat—there had it bitten itself fast.

My hand pulled at the serpent, and pulled:—in vain! I failed to pull
the serpent out of his throat. Then there cried out of me: “Bite! Bite!

Its head off! Bite!”—so cried it out of me; my horror, my hatred, my
loathing, my pity, all my good and my bad cried with one voice out of
me.—

Ye daring ones around me! Ye venturers and adventurers, and whoever
of you have embarked with cunning sails on unexplored seas! Ye
enigma-enjoyers!

Solve unto me the enigma that I then beheld, interpret unto me the
vision of the lonesomest one!

For it was a vision and a foresight:—WHAT did I then behold in parable?
And WHO is it that must come some day?

WHO is the shepherd into whose throat the serpent thus crawled? WHO is
the man into whose throat all the heaviest and blackest will thus crawl?

—The shepherd however bit as my cry had admonished him; he bit with a
strong bite! Far away did he spit the head of the serpent—: and sprang
up.—

No longer shepherd, no longer man—a transfigured being, a
light-surrounded being, that LAUGHED! Never on earth laughed a man as HE
laughed!

O my brethren, I heard a laughter which was no human laughter,—and now
gnaweth a thirst at me, a longing that is never allayed.

My longing for that laughter gnaweth at me: oh, how can I still endure
to live! And how could I endure to die at present!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XLVII. INVOLUNTARY BLISS.


With such enigmas and bitterness in his heart did Zarathustra sail o’er
the sea. When, however, he was four day-journeys from the Happy
Isles and from his friends, then had he surmounted all his pain—:
triumphantly and with firm foot did he again accept his fate. And then
talked Zarathustra in this wise to his exulting conscience:

Alone am I again, and like to be so, alone with the pure heaven, and the
open sea; and again is the afternoon around me.

On an afternoon did I find my friends for the first time; on an
afternoon, also, did I find them a second time:—at the hour when all
light becometh stiller.

For whatever happiness is still on its way ‘twixt heaven and earth, now
seeketh for lodging a luminous soul: WITH HAPPINESS hath all light now
become stiller.

O afternoon of my life! Once did my happiness also descend to the valley
that it might seek a lodging: then did it find those open hospitable
souls.

O afternoon of my life! What did I not surrender that I might have
one thing: this living plantation of my thoughts, and this dawn of my
highest hope!

Companions did the creating one once seek, and children of HIS hope: and
lo, it turned out that he could not find them, except he himself should
first create them.

Thus am I in the midst of my work, to my children going, and from
them returning: for the sake of his children must Zarathustra perfect
himself.

For in one’s heart one loveth only one’s child and one’s work; and where
there is great love to oneself, then is it the sign of pregnancy: so
have I found it.

Still are my children verdant in their first spring, standing nigh one
another, and shaken in common by the winds, the trees of my garden and
of my best soil.

And verily, where such trees stand beside one another, there ARE Happy
Isles!

But one day will I take them up, and put each by itself alone: that it
may learn lonesomeness and defiance and prudence.

Gnarled and crooked and with flexible hardness shall it then stand by
the sea, a living lighthouse of unconquerable life.

Yonder where the storms rush down into the sea, and the snout of the
mountain drinketh water, shall each on a time have his day and night
watches, for HIS testing and recognition.

Recognised and tested shall each be, to see if he be of my type and
lineage:—if he be master of a long will, silent even when he speaketh,
and giving in such wise that he TAKETH in giving:—

—So that he may one day become my companion, a fellow-creator and
fellow-enjoyer with Zarathustra:—such a one as writeth my will on my
tables, for the fuller perfection of all things.

And for his sake and for those like him, must I perfect MYSELF:
therefore do I now avoid my happiness, and present myself to every
misfortune—for MY final testing and recognition.

And verily, it were time that I went away; and the wanderer’s shadow and
the longest tedium and the stillest hour—have all said unto me: “It is
the highest time!”

The word blew to me through the keyhole and said “Come!” The door sprang
subtlely open unto me, and said “Go!”

But I lay enchained to my love for my children: desire spread this
snare for me—the desire for love—that I should become the prey of my
children, and lose myself in them.

Desiring—that is now for me to have lost myself. I POSSESS YOU, MY
CHILDREN! In this possessing shall everything be assurance and nothing
desire.

But brooding lay the sun of my love upon me, in his own juice stewed
Zarathustra,—then did shadows and doubts fly past me.

For frost and winter I now longed: “Oh, that frost and winter would
again make me crack and crunch!” sighed I:—then arose icy mist out of
me.

My past burst its tomb, many pains buried alive woke up—: fully slept
had they merely, concealed in corpse-clothes.

So called everything unto me in signs: “It is time!” But I—heard not,
until at last mine abyss moved, and my thought bit me.

Ah, abysmal thought, which art MY thought! When shall I find strength to
hear thee burrowing, and no longer tremble?

To my very throat throbbeth my heart when I hear thee burrowing! Thy
muteness even is like to strangle me, thou abysmal mute one!

As yet have I never ventured to call thee UP; it hath been enough that
I—have carried thee about with me! As yet have I not been strong
enough for my final lion-wantonness and playfulness.

Sufficiently formidable unto me hath thy weight ever been: but one day
shall I yet find the strength and the lion’s voice which will call thee
up!

When I shall have surmounted myself therein, then will I surmount myself
also in that which is greater; and a VICTORY shall be the seal of my
perfection!—

Meanwhile do I sail along on uncertain seas; chance flattereth me,
smooth-tongued chance; forward and backward do I gaze—, still see I no
end.

As yet hath the hour of my final struggle not come to me—or doth it
come to me perhaps just now? Verily, with insidious beauty do sea and
life gaze upon me round about:

O afternoon of my life! O happiness before eventide! O haven upon high
seas! O peace in uncertainty! How I distrust all of you!

Verily, distrustful am I of your insidious beauty! Like the lover am I,
who distrusteth too sleek smiling.

As he pusheth the best-beloved before him—tender even in severity, the
jealous one—, so do I push this blissful hour before me.

Away with thee, thou blissful hour! With thee hath there come to me an
involuntary bliss! Ready for my severest pain do I here stand:—at the
wrong time hast thou come!

Away with thee, thou blissful hour! Rather harbour there—with my
children! Hasten! and bless them before eventide with MY happiness!

There, already approacheth eventide: the sun sinketh. Away—my
happiness!—

Thus spake Zarathustra. And he waited for his misfortune the whole
night; but he waited in vain. The night remained clear and calm, and
happiness itself came nigher and nigher unto him. Towards morning,
however, Zarathustra laughed to his heart, and said mockingly:
“Happiness runneth after me. That is because I do not run after women.
Happiness, however, is a woman.”




XLVIII. BEFORE SUNRISE.


O heaven above me, thou pure, thou deep heaven! Thou abyss of light!
Gazing on thee, I tremble with divine desires.

Up to thy height to toss myself—that is MY depth! In thy purity to hide
myself—that is MINE innocence!

The God veileth his beauty: thus hidest thou thy stars. Thou speakest
not: THUS proclaimest thou thy wisdom unto me.

Mute o’er the raging sea hast thou risen for me to-day; thy love and thy
modesty make a revelation unto my raging soul.

In that thou camest unto me beautiful, veiled in thy beauty, in that
thou spakest unto me mutely, obvious in thy wisdom:

Oh, how could I fail to divine all the modesty of thy soul! BEFORE the
sun didst thou come unto me—the lonesomest one.

We have been friends from the beginning: to us are grief, gruesomeness,
and ground common; even the sun is common to us.

We do not speak to each other, because we know too much—: we keep
silent to each other, we smile our knowledge to each other.

Art thou not the light of my fire? Hast thou not the sister-soul of mine
insight?

Together did we learn everything; together did we learn to ascend beyond
ourselves to ourselves, and to smile uncloudedly:—

—Uncloudedly to smile down out of luminous eyes and out of miles of
distance, when under us constraint and purpose and guilt steam like
rain.

And wandered I alone, for WHAT did my soul hunger by night and in
labyrinthine paths? And climbed I mountains, WHOM did I ever seek, if
not thee, upon mountains?

And all my wandering and mountain-climbing: a necessity was it merely,
and a makeshift of the unhandy one:—to FLY only, wanteth mine entire
will, to fly into THEE!

And what have I hated more than passing clouds, and whatever tainteth
thee? And mine own hatred have I even hated, because it tainted thee!

The passing clouds I detest—those stealthy cats of prey: they take
from thee and me what is common to us—the vast unbounded Yea- and
Amen-saying.

These mediators and mixers we detest—the passing clouds: those
half-and-half ones, that have neither learned to bless nor to curse from
the heart.

Rather will I sit in a tub under a closed heaven, rather will I sit in
the abyss without heaven, than see thee, thou luminous heaven, tainted
with passing clouds!

And oft have I longed to pin them fast with the jagged gold-wires of
lightning, that I might, like the thunder, beat the drum upon their
kettle-bellies:—

—An angry drummer, because they rob me of thy Yea and Amen!—thou
heaven above me, thou pure, thou luminous heaven! Thou abyss of
light!—because they rob thee of MY Yea and Amen.

For rather will I have noise and thunders and tempest-blasts, than this
discreet, doubting cat-repose; and also amongst men do I hate most
of all the soft-treaders, and half-and-half ones, and the doubting,
hesitating, passing clouds.

And “he who cannot bless shall LEARN to curse!”—this clear teaching
dropt unto me from the clear heaven; this star standeth in my heaven
even in dark nights.

I, however, am a blesser and a Yea-sayer, if thou be but around me, thou
pure, thou luminous heaven! Thou abyss of light!—into all abysses do I
then carry my beneficent Yea-saying.

A blesser have I become and a Yea-sayer: and therefore strove I long and
was a striver, that I might one day get my hands free for blessing.

This, however, is my blessing: to stand above everything as its own
heaven, its round roof, its azure bell and eternal security: and blessed
is he who thus blesseth!

For all things are baptized at the font of eternity, and beyond good and
evil; good and evil themselves, however, are but fugitive shadows and
damp afflictions and passing clouds.

Verily, it is a blessing and not a blasphemy when I teach that “above
all things there standeth the heaven of chance, the heaven of innocence,
the heaven of hazard, the heaven of wantonness.”

“Of Hazard”—that is the oldest nobility in the world; that gave I back
to all things; I emancipated them from bondage under purpose.

This freedom and celestial serenity did I put like an azure bell above
all things, when I taught that over them and through them, no “eternal
Will”—willeth.

This wantonness and folly did I put in place of that Will, when I taught
that “In everything there is one thing impossible—rationality!”

A LITTLE reason, to be sure, a germ of wisdom scattered from star to
star—this leaven is mixed in all things: for the sake of folly, wisdom
is mixed in all things!

A little wisdom is indeed possible; but this blessed security have I
found in all things, that they prefer—_to dance_ on the feet of chance.

O heaven above me! thou pure, thou lofty heaven! This is now thy purity
unto me, that there is no eternal reason-spider and reason-cobweb:—

—That thou art to me a dancing-floor for divine chances, that thou art
to me a table of the Gods, for divine dice and dice-players!—

But thou blushest? Have I spoken unspeakable things? Have I abused, when
I meant to bless thee?

Or is it the shame of being two of us that maketh thee blush!—Dost thou
bid me go and be silent, because now—DAY cometh?

The world is deep:—and deeper than e’er the day could read. Not
everything may be uttered in presence of day. But day cometh: so let us
part!

O heaven above me, thou modest one! thou glowing one! O thou, my
happiness before sunrise! The day cometh: so let us part!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




XLIX. THE BEDWARFING VIRTUE.


1.

When Zarathustra was again on the continent, he did not go straightway
to his mountains and his cave, but made many wanderings and
questionings, and ascertained this and that; so that he said of himself
jestingly: “Lo, a river that floweth back unto its source in many
windings!” For he wanted to learn what had taken place AMONG MEN during
the interval: whether they had become greater or smaller. And once, when
he saw a row of new houses, he marvelled, and said:

“What do these houses mean? Verily, no great soul put them up as its
simile!

Did perhaps a silly child take them out of its toy-box? Would that
another child put them again into the box!

And these rooms and chambers—can MEN go out and in there? They seem to
be made for silk dolls; or for dainty-eaters, who perhaps let others eat
with them.”

And Zarathustra stood still and meditated. At last he said sorrowfully:
“There hath EVERYTHING become smaller!

Everywhere do I see lower doorways: he who is of MY type can still go
therethrough, but—he must stoop!

Oh, when shall I arrive again at my home, where I shall no longer have
to stoop—shall no longer have to stoop BEFORE THE SMALL ONES!”—And
Zarathustra sighed, and gazed into the distance.—

The same day, however, he gave his discourse on the bedwarfing virtue.

2.

I pass through this people and keep mine eyes open: they do not forgive
me for not envying their virtues.

They bite at me, because I say unto them that for small people, small
virtues are necessary—and because it is hard for me to understand that
small people are NECESSARY!

Here am I still like a cock in a strange farm-yard, at which even the
hens peck: but on that account I am not unfriendly to the hens.

I am courteous towards them, as towards all small annoyances; to be
prickly towards what is small, seemeth to me wisdom for hedgehogs.

They all speak of me when they sit around their fire in the
evening—they speak of me, but no one thinketh—of me!

This is the new stillness which I have experienced: their noise around
me spreadeth a mantle over my thoughts.

They shout to one another: “What is this gloomy cloud about to do to us?
Let us see that it doth not bring a plague upon us!”

And recently did a woman seize upon her child that was coming unto
me: “Take the children away,” cried she, “such eyes scorch children’s
souls.”

They cough when I speak: they think coughing an objection to strong
winds—they divine nothing of the boisterousness of my happiness!

“We have not yet time for Zarathustra”—so they object; but what matter
about a time that “hath no time” for Zarathustra?

And if they should altogether praise me, how could I go to sleep on
THEIR praise? A girdle of spines is their praise unto me: it scratcheth
me even when I take it off.

And this also did I learn among them: the praiser doeth as if he gave
back; in truth, however, he wanteth more to be given him!

Ask my foot if their lauding and luring strains please it! Verily,
to such measure and ticktack, it liketh neither to dance nor to stand
still.

To small virtues would they fain lure and laud me; to the ticktack of
small happiness would they fain persuade my foot.

I pass through this people and keep mine eyes open; they have become
SMALLER, and ever become smaller:—THE REASON THEREOF IS THEIR DOCTRINE
OF HAPPINESS AND VIRTUE.

For they are moderate also in virtue,—because they want comfort. With
comfort, however, moderate virtue only is compatible.

To be sure, they also learn in their way to stride on and stride
forward: that, I call their HOBBLING.—Thereby they become a hindrance
to all who are in haste.

And many of them go forward, and look backwards thereby, with stiffened
necks: those do I like to run up against.

Foot and eye shall not lie, nor give the lie to each other. But there is
much lying among small people.

Some of them WILL, but most of them are WILLED. Some of them are
genuine, but most of them are bad actors.

There are actors without knowing it amongst them, and actors without
intending it—, the genuine ones are always rare, especially the genuine
actors.

Of man there is little here: therefore do their women masculinise
themselves. For only he who is man enough, will—SAVE THE WOMAN in
woman.

And this hypocrisy found I worst amongst them, that even those who
command feign the virtues of those who serve.

“I serve, thou servest, we serve”—so chanteth here even the hypocrisy
of the rulers—and alas! if the first lord be ONLY the first servant!

Ah, even upon their hypocrisy did mine eyes’ curiosity alight; and well
did I divine all their fly-happiness, and their buzzing around sunny
window-panes.

So much kindness, so much weakness do I see. So much justice and pity,
so much weakness.

Round, fair, and considerate are they to one another, as grains of sand
are round, fair, and considerate to grains of sand.

Modestly to embrace a small happiness—that do they call “submission”!
and at the same time they peer modestly after a new small happiness.

In their hearts they want simply one thing most of all: that no one hurt
them. Thus do they anticipate every one’s wishes and do well unto every
one.

That, however, is COWARDICE, though it be called “virtue.”—

And when they chance to speak harshly, those small people, then do _I_
hear therein only their hoarseness—every draught of air maketh them
hoarse.

Shrewd indeed are they, their virtues have shrewd fingers. But they lack
fists: their fingers do not know how to creep behind fists.

Virtue for them is what maketh modest and tame: therewith have they made
the wolf a dog, and man himself man’s best domestic animal.

“We set our chair in the MIDST”—so saith their smirking unto me—“and
as far from dying gladiators as from satisfied swine.”

That, however, is—MEDIOCRITY, though it be called moderation.—

3.

I pass through this people and let fall many words: but they know
neither how to take nor how to retain them.

They wonder why I came not to revile venery and vice; and verily, I came
not to warn against pickpockets either!

They wonder why I am not ready to abet and whet their wisdom: as if they
had not yet enough of wiseacres, whose voices grate on mine ear like
slate-pencils!

And when I call out: “Curse all the cowardly devils in you, that
would fain whimper and fold the hands and adore”—then do they shout:
“Zarathustra is godless.”

And especially do their teachers of submission shout this;—but
precisely in their ears do I love to cry: “Yea! I AM Zarathustra, the
godless!”

Those teachers of submission! Wherever there is aught puny, or sickly,
or scabby, there do they creep like lice; and only my disgust preventeth
me from cracking them.

Well! This is my sermon for THEIR ears: I am Zarathustra the godless,
who saith: “Who is more godless than I, that I may enjoy his teaching?”

I am Zarathustra the godless: where do I find mine equal? And all
those are mine equals who give unto themselves their Will, and divest
themselves of all submission.

I am Zarathustra the godless! I cook every chance in MY pot. And only
when it hath been quite cooked do I welcome it as MY food.

And verily, many a chance came imperiously unto me: but still more
imperiously did my WILL speak unto it,—then did it lie imploringly upon
its knees—

—Imploring that it might find home and heart with me, and saying
flatteringly: “See, O Zarathustra, how friend only cometh unto
friend!”—

But why talk I, when no one hath MINE ears! And so will I shout it out
unto all the winds:

Ye ever become smaller, ye small people! Ye crumble away, ye comfortable
ones! Ye will yet perish—

—By your many small virtues, by your many small omissions, and by your
many small submissions!

Too tender, too yielding: so is your soil! But for a tree to become
GREAT, it seeketh to twine hard roots around hard rocks!

Also what ye omit weaveth at the web of all the human future; even your
naught is a cobweb, and a spider that liveth on the blood of the future.

And when ye take, then is it like stealing, ye small virtuous ones;
but even among knaves HONOUR saith that “one shall only steal when one
cannot rob.”

“It giveth itself”—that is also a doctrine of submission. But I say
unto you, ye comfortable ones, that IT TAKETH TO ITSELF, and will ever
take more and more from you!

Ah, that ye would renounce all HALF-willing, and would decide for
idleness as ye decide for action!

Ah, that ye understood my word: “Do ever what ye will—but first be such
as CAN WILL.

Love ever your neighbour as yourselves—but first be such as LOVE
THEMSELVES—

—Such as love with great love, such as love with great contempt!” Thus
speaketh Zarathustra the godless.—

But why talk I, when no one hath MINE ears! It is still an hour too
early for me here.

Mine own forerunner am I among this people, mine own cockcrow in dark
lanes.

But THEIR hour cometh! And there cometh also mine! Hourly do they become
smaller, poorer, unfruitfuller,—poor herbs! poor earth!

And SOON shall they stand before me like dry grass and prairie, and
verily, weary of themselves—and panting for FIRE, more than for water!

O blessed hour of the lightning! O mystery before noontide!—Running
fires will I one day make of them, and heralds with flaming tongues:—

—Herald shall they one day with flaming tongues: It cometh, it is nigh,
THE GREAT NOONTIDE!

Thus spake Zarathustra.




L. ON THE OLIVE-MOUNT.


Winter, a bad guest, sitteth with me at home; blue are my hands with his
friendly hand-shaking.

I honour him, that bad guest, but gladly leave him alone. Gladly do I
run away from him; and when one runneth WELL, then one escapeth him!

With warm feet and warm thoughts do I run where the wind is calm—to the
sunny corner of mine olive-mount.

There do I laugh at my stern guest, and am still fond of him; because he
cleareth my house of flies, and quieteth many little noises.

For he suffereth it not if a gnat wanteth to buzz, or even two of them;
also the lanes maketh he lonesome, so that the moonlight is afraid there
at night.

A hard guest is he,—but I honour him, and do not worship, like the
tenderlings, the pot-bellied fire-idol.

Better even a little teeth-chattering than idol-adoration!—so willeth
my nature. And especially have I a grudge against all ardent, steaming,
steamy fire-idols.

Him whom I love, I love better in winter than in summer; better do I
now mock at mine enemies, and more heartily, when winter sitteth in my
house.

Heartily, verily, even when I CREEP into bed—: there, still laugheth
and wantoneth my hidden happiness; even my deceptive dream laugheth.

I, a—creeper? Never in my life did I creep before the powerful; and if
ever I lied, then did I lie out of love. Therefore am I glad even in my
winter-bed.

A poor bed warmeth me more than a rich one, for I am jealous of my
poverty. And in winter she is most faithful unto me.

With a wickedness do I begin every day: I mock at the winter with a cold
bath: on that account grumbleth my stern house-mate.

Also do I like to tickle him with a wax-taper, that he may finally let
the heavens emerge from ashy-grey twilight.

For especially wicked am I in the morning: at the early hour when the
pail rattleth at the well, and horses neigh warmly in grey lanes:—

Impatiently do I then wait, that the clear sky may finally dawn for me,
the snow-bearded winter-sky, the hoary one, the whitehead,—

—The winter-sky, the silent winter-sky, which often stifleth even its
sun!

Did I perhaps learn from it the long clear silence? Or did it learn it
from me? Or hath each of us devised it himself?

Of all good things the origin is a thousandfold,—all good roguish
things spring into existence for joy: how could they always do so—for
once only!

A good roguish thing is also the long silence, and to look, like the
winter-sky, out of a clear, round-eyed countenance:—

—Like it to stifle one’s sun, and one’s inflexible solar will: verily,
this art and this winter-roguishness have I learnt WELL!

My best-loved wickedness and art is it, that my silence hath learned not
to betray itself by silence.

Clattering with diction and dice, I outwit the solemn assistants: all
those stern watchers, shall my will and purpose elude.

That no one might see down into my depth and into mine ultimate
will—for that purpose did I devise the long clear silence.

Many a shrewd one did I find: he veiled his countenance and made his
water muddy, that no one might see therethrough and thereunder.

But precisely unto him came the shrewder distrusters and nut-crackers:
precisely from him did they fish his best-concealed fish!

But the clear, the honest, the transparent—these are for me the wisest
silent ones: in them, so PROFOUND is the depth that even the clearest
water doth not—betray it.—

Thou snow-bearded, silent, winter-sky, thou round-eyed whitehead above
me! Oh, thou heavenly simile of my soul and its wantonness!

And MUST I not conceal myself like one who hath swallowed gold—lest my
soul should be ripped up?

MUST I not wear stilts, that they may OVERLOOK my long legs—all those
enviers and injurers around me?

Those dingy, fire-warmed, used-up, green-tinted, ill-natured souls—how
COULD their envy endure my happiness!

Thus do I show them only the ice and winter of my peaks—and NOT that my
mountain windeth all the solar girdles around it!

They hear only the whistling of my winter-storms: and know NOT that I
also travel over warm seas, like longing, heavy, hot south-winds.

They commiserate also my accidents and chances:—but MY word saith:
“Suffer the chance to come unto me: innocent is it as a little child!”

How COULD they endure my happiness, if I did not put around it
accidents, and winter-privations, and bear-skin caps, and enmantling
snowflakes!

—If I did not myself commiserate their PITY, the pity of those enviers
and injurers!

—If I did not myself sigh before them, and chatter with cold, and
patiently LET myself be swathed in their pity!

This is the wise waggish-will and good-will of my soul, that it
CONCEALETH NOT its winters and glacial storms; it concealeth not its
chilblains either.

To one man, lonesomeness is the flight of the sick one; to another, it
is the flight FROM the sick ones.

Let them HEAR me chattering and sighing with winter-cold, all those poor
squinting knaves around me! With such sighing and chattering do I flee
from their heated rooms.

Let them sympathise with me and sigh with me on account of my
chilblains: “At the ice of knowledge will he yet FREEZE TO DEATH!”—so
they mourn.

Meanwhile do I run with warm feet hither and thither on mine
olive-mount: in the sunny corner of mine olive-mount do I sing, and mock
at all pity.—

Thus sang Zarathustra.




LI. ON PASSING-BY.


Thus slowly wandering through many peoples and divers cities, did
Zarathustra return by round-about roads to his mountains and his cave.
And behold, thereby came he unawares also to the gate of the GREAT CITY.
Here, however, a foaming fool, with extended hands, sprang forward to
him and stood in his way. It was the same fool whom the people called
“the ape of Zarathustra:” for he had learned from him something of the
expression and modulation of language, and perhaps liked also to borrow
from the store of his wisdom. And the fool talked thus to Zarathustra:

O Zarathustra, here is the great city: here hast thou nothing to seek
and everything to lose.

Why wouldst thou wade through this mire? Have pity upon thy foot! Spit
rather on the gate of the city, and—turn back!

Here is the hell for anchorites’ thoughts: here are great thoughts
seethed alive and boiled small.

Here do all great sentiments decay: here may only rattle-boned
sensations rattle!

Smellest thou not already the shambles and cookshops of the spirit?
Steameth not this city with the fumes of slaughtered spirit?

Seest thou not the souls hanging like limp dirty rags?—And they make
newspapers also out of these rags!

Hearest thou not how spirit hath here become a verbal game? Loathsome
verbal swill doth it vomit forth!—And they make newspapers also out of
this verbal swill.

They hound one another, and know not whither! They inflame one another,
and know not why! They tinkle with their pinchbeck, they jingle with
their gold.

They are cold, and seek warmth from distilled waters: they are inflamed,
and seek coolness from frozen spirits; they are all sick and sore
through public opinion.

All lusts and vices are here at home; but here there are also the
virtuous; there is much appointable appointed virtue:—

Much appointable virtue with scribe-fingers, and hardy sitting-flesh and
waiting-flesh, blessed with small breast-stars, and padded, haunchless
daughters.

There is here also much piety, and much faithful spittle-licking and
spittle-backing, before the God of Hosts.

“From on high,” drippeth the star, and the gracious spittle; for the
high, longeth every starless bosom.

The moon hath its court, and the court hath its moon-calves: unto all,
however, that cometh from the court do the mendicant people pray, and
all appointable mendicant virtues.

“I serve, thou servest, we serve”—so prayeth all appointable virtue
to the prince: that the merited star may at last stick on the slender
breast!

But the moon still revolveth around all that is earthly: so revolveth
also the prince around what is earthliest of all—that, however, is the
gold of the shopman.

The God of the Hosts of war is not the God of the golden bar; the prince
proposeth, but the shopman—disposeth!

By all that is luminous and strong and good in thee, O Zarathustra! Spit
on this city of shopmen and return back!

Here floweth all blood putridly and tepidly and frothily through all
veins: spit on the great city, which is the great slum where all the
scum frotheth together!

Spit on the city of compressed souls and slender breasts, of pointed
eyes and sticky fingers—

—On the city of the obtrusive, the brazen-faced, the pen-demagogues and
tongue-demagogues, the overheated ambitious:—

Where everything maimed, ill-famed, lustful, untrustful, over-mellow,
sickly-yellow and seditious, festereth pernicious:—

—Spit on the great city and turn back!—

Here, however, did Zarathustra interrupt the foaming fool, and shut his
mouth.—

Stop this at once! called out Zarathustra, long have thy speech and thy
species disgusted me!

Why didst thou live so long by the swamp, that thou thyself hadst to
become a frog and a toad?

Floweth there not a tainted, frothy, swamp-blood in thine own veins,
when thou hast thus learned to croak and revile?

Why wentest thou not into the forest? Or why didst thou not till the
ground? Is the sea not full of green islands?

I despise thy contempt; and when thou warnedst me—why didst thou not
warn thyself?

Out of love alone shall my contempt and my warning bird take wing; but
not out of the swamp!—

They call thee mine ape, thou foaming fool: but I call thee my
grunting-pig,—by thy grunting, thou spoilest even my praise of folly.

What was it that first made thee grunt? Because no one sufficiently
FLATTERED thee:—therefore didst thou seat thyself beside this filth,
that thou mightest have cause for much grunting,—

—That thou mightest have cause for much VENGEANCE! For vengeance, thou
vain fool, is all thy foaming; I have divined thee well!

But thy fools’-word injureth ME, even when thou art right! And even if
Zarathustra’s word WERE a hundred times justified, thou wouldst ever—DO
wrong with my word!

Thus spake Zarathustra. Then did he look on the great city and sighed,
and was long silent. At last he spake thus:

I loathe also this great city, and not only this fool. Here and there—
there is nothing to better, nothing to worsen.

Woe to this great city!—And I would that I already saw the pillar of
fire in which it will be consumed!

For such pillars of fire must precede the great noontide. But this hath
its time and its own fate.—

This precept, however, give I unto thee, in parting, thou fool: Where
one can no longer love, there should one—PASS BY!—

Thus spake Zarathustra, and passed by the fool and the great city.




LII. THE APOSTATES.


1.

Ah, lieth everything already withered and grey which but lately stood
green and many-hued on this meadow! And how much honey of hope did I
carry hence into my beehives!

Those young hearts have already all become old—and not old even! only
weary, ordinary, comfortable:—they declare it: “We have again become
pious.”

Of late did I see them run forth at early morn with valorous steps: but
the feet of their knowledge became weary, and now do they malign even
their morning valour!

Verily, many of them once lifted their legs like the dancer; to them
winked the laughter of my wisdom:—then did they bethink themselves.
Just now have I seen them bent down—to creep to the cross.

Around light and liberty did they once flutter like gnats and young
poets. A little older, a little colder: and already are they mystifiers,
and mumblers and mollycoddles.

Did perhaps their hearts despond, because lonesomeness had swallowed me
like a whale? Did their ear perhaps hearken yearningly-long for me IN
VAIN, and for my trumpet-notes and herald-calls?

—Ah! Ever are there but few of those whose hearts have persistent
courage and exuberance; and in such remaineth also the spirit patient.
The rest, however, are COWARDLY.

The rest: these are always the great majority, the common-place, the
superfluous, the far too many—those all are cowardly!—

Him who is of my type, will also the experiences of my type meet on the
way: so that his first companions must be corpses and buffoons.

His second companions, however—they will call themselves his
BELIEVERS,—will be a living host, with much love, much folly, much
unbearded veneration.

To those believers shall he who is of my type among men not bind his
heart; in those spring-times and many-hued meadows shall he not believe,
who knoweth the fickly faint-hearted human species!

COULD they do otherwise, then would they also WILL otherwise. The
half-and-half spoil every whole. That leaves become withered,—what is
there to lament about that!

Let them go and fall away, O Zarathustra, and do not lament! Better even
to blow amongst them with rustling winds,—

—Blow amongst those leaves, O Zarathustra, that everything WITHERED may
run away from thee the faster!—

2.

“We have again become pious”—so do those apostates confess; and some of
them are still too pusillanimous thus to confess.

Unto them I look into the eye,—before them I say it unto their face and
unto the blush on their cheeks: Ye are those who again PRAY!

It is however a shame to pray! Not for all, but for thee, and me, and
whoever hath his conscience in his head. For THEE it is a shame to pray!

Thou knowest it well: the faint-hearted devil in thee, which would
fain fold its arms, and place its hands in its bosom, and take it
easier:—this faint-hearted devil persuadeth thee that “there IS a God!”

THEREBY, however, dost thou belong to the light-dreading type, to whom
light never permitteth repose: now must thou daily thrust thy head
deeper into obscurity and vapour!

And verily, thou choosest the hour well: for just now do the nocturnal
birds again fly abroad. The hour hath come for all light-dreading
people, the vesper hour and leisure hour, when they do not—“take
leisure.”

I hear it and smell it: it hath come—their hour for hunt and
procession, not indeed for a wild hunt, but for a tame, lame, snuffling,
soft-treaders’, soft-prayers’ hunt,—

—For a hunt after susceptible simpletons: all mouse-traps for the heart
have again been set! And whenever I lift a curtain, a night-moth rusheth
out of it.

Did it perhaps squat there along with another night-moth? For everywhere
do I smell small concealed communities; and wherever there are closets
there are new devotees therein, and the atmosphere of devotees.

They sit for long evenings beside one another, and say: “Let us again
become like little children and say, ‘good God!’”—ruined in mouths and
stomachs by the pious confectioners.

Or they look for long evenings at a crafty, lurking cross-spider, that
preacheth prudence to the spiders themselves, and teacheth that “under
crosses it is good for cobweb-spinning!”

Or they sit all day at swamps with angle-rods, and on that account think
themselves PROFOUND; but whoever fisheth where there are no fish, I do
not even call him superficial!

Or they learn in godly-gay style to play the harp with a hymn-poet,
who would fain harp himself into the heart of young girls:—for he hath
tired of old girls and their praises.

Or they learn to shudder with a learned semi-madcap, who waiteth in
darkened rooms for spirits to come to him—and the spirit runneth away
entirely!

Or they listen to an old roving howl- and growl-piper, who hath learnt
from the sad winds the sadness of sounds; now pipeth he as the wind, and
preacheth sadness in sad strains.

And some of them have even become night-watchmen: they know now how to
blow horns, and go about at night and awaken old things which have long
fallen asleep.

Five words about old things did I hear yester-night at the garden-wall:
they came from such old, sorrowful, arid night-watchmen.

“For a father he careth not sufficiently for his children: human fathers
do this better!”—

“He is too old! He now careth no more for his children,”—answered the
other night-watchman.

“HATH he then children? No one can prove it unless he himself prove it!
I have long wished that he would for once prove it thoroughly.”

“Prove? As if HE had ever proved anything! Proving is difficult to him;
he layeth great stress on one’s BELIEVING him.”

“Ay! Ay! Belief saveth him; belief in him. That is the way with old
people! So it is with us also!”—

—Thus spake to each other the two old night-watchmen and light-scarers,
and tooted thereupon sorrowfully on their horns: so did it happen
yester-night at the garden-wall.

To me, however, did the heart writhe with laughter, and was like to
break; it knew not where to go, and sunk into the midriff.

Verily, it will be my death yet—to choke with laughter when I see asses
drunken, and hear night-watchmen thus doubt about God.

Hath the time not LONG since passed for all such doubts? Who may
nowadays awaken such old slumbering, light-shunning things!

With the old Deities hath it long since come to an end:—and verily, a
good joyful Deity-end had they!

They did not “begloom” themselves to death—that do people fabricate! On
the contrary, they—LAUGHED themselves to death once on a time!

That took place when the unGodliest utterance came from a God
himself—the utterance: “There is but one God! Thou shalt have no other
Gods before me!”—

—An old grim-beard of a God, a jealous one, forgot himself in such
wise:—

And all the Gods then laughed, and shook upon their thrones, and
exclaimed: “Is it not just divinity that there are Gods, but no God?”

He that hath an ear let him hear.—

Thus talked Zarathustra in the city he loved, which is surnamed “The
Pied Cow.” For from here he had but two days to travel to reach once
more his cave and his animals; his soul, however, rejoiced unceasingly
on account of the nighness of his return home.




LIII. THE RETURN HOME.


O lonesomeness! My HOME, lonesomeness! Too long have I lived wildly in
wild remoteness, to return to thee without tears!

Now threaten me with the finger as mothers threaten; now smile upon me
as mothers smile; now say just: “Who was it that like a whirlwind once
rushed away from me?—

—Who when departing called out: ‘Too long have I sat with lonesomeness;
there have I unlearned silence!’ THAT hast thou learned now—surely?

O Zarathustra, everything do I know; and that thou wert MORE FORSAKEN
amongst the many, thou unique one, than thou ever wert with me!

One thing is forsakenness, another matter is lonesomeness: THAT hast
thou now learned! And that amongst men thou wilt ever be wild and
strange:

—Wild and strange even when they love thee: for above all they want to
be TREATED INDULGENTLY!

Here, however, art thou at home and house with thyself; here canst thou
utter everything, and unbosom all motives; nothing is here ashamed of
concealed, congealed feelings.

Here do all things come caressingly to thy talk and flatter thee: for
they want to ride upon thy back. On every simile dost thou here ride to
every truth.

Uprightly and openly mayest thou here talk to all things: and verily,
it soundeth as praise in their ears, for one to talk to all
things—directly!

Another matter, however, is forsakenness. For, dost thou remember, O
Zarathustra? When thy bird screamed overhead, when thou stoodest in the
forest, irresolute, ignorant where to go, beside a corpse:—

—When thou spakest: ‘Let mine animals lead me! More dangerous have I
found it among men than among animals:’—THAT was forsakenness!

And dost thou remember, O Zarathustra? When thou sattest in thine isle,
a well of wine giving and granting amongst empty buckets, bestowing and
distributing amongst the thirsty:

—Until at last thou alone sattest thirsty amongst the drunken ones, and
wailedst nightly: ‘Is taking not more blessed than giving? And stealing
yet more blessed than taking?’—THAT was forsakenness!

And dost thou remember, O Zarathustra? When thy stillest hour came and
drove thee forth from thyself, when with wicked whispering it said:
‘Speak and succumb!’—

—When it disgusted thee with all thy waiting and silence, and
discouraged thy humble courage: THAT was forsakenness!”—

O lonesomeness! My home, lonesomeness! How blessedly and tenderly
speaketh thy voice unto me!

We do not question each other, we do not complain to each other; we go
together openly through open doors.

For all is open with thee and clear; and even the hours run here on
lighter feet. For in the dark, time weigheth heavier upon one than in
the light.

Here fly open unto me all being’s words and word-cabinets: here all
being wanteth to become words, here all becoming wanteth to learn of me
how to talk.

Down there, however—all talking is in vain! There, forgetting and
passing-by are the best wisdom: THAT have I learned now!

He who would understand everything in man must handle everything. But
for that I have too clean hands.

I do not like even to inhale their breath; alas! that I have lived so
long among their noise and bad breaths!

O blessed stillness around me! O pure odours around me! How from a deep
breast this stillness fetcheth pure breath! How it hearkeneth, this
blessed stillness!

But down there—there speaketh everything, there is everything misheard.
If one announce one’s wisdom with bells, the shopmen in the market-place
will out-jingle it with pennies!

Everything among them talketh; no one knoweth any longer how to
understand. Everything falleth into the water; nothing falleth any
longer into deep wells.

Everything among them talketh, nothing succeedeth any longer and
accomplisheth itself. Everything cackleth, but who will still sit
quietly on the nest and hatch eggs?

Everything among them talketh, everything is out-talked. And that which
yesterday was still too hard for time itself and its tooth, hangeth
to-day, outchamped and outchewed, from the mouths of the men of to-day.

Everything among them talketh, everything is betrayed. And what was once
called the secret and secrecy of profound souls, belongeth to-day to the
street-trumpeters and other butterflies.

O human hubbub, thou wonderful thing! Thou noise in dark streets! Now
art thou again behind me:—my greatest danger lieth behind me!

In indulging and pitying lay ever my greatest danger; and all human
hubbub wisheth to be indulged and tolerated.

With suppressed truths, with fool’s hand and befooled heart, and rich in
petty lies of pity:—thus have I ever lived among men.

Disguised did I sit amongst them, ready to misjudge MYSELF that I might
endure THEM, and willingly saying to myself: “Thou fool, thou dost not
know men!”

One unlearneth men when one liveth amongst them: there is too much
foreground in all men—what can far-seeing, far-longing eyes do THERE!

And, fool that I was, when they misjudged me, I indulged them on that
account more than myself, being habitually hard on myself, and often
even taking revenge on myself for the indulgence.

Stung all over by poisonous flies, and hollowed like the stone by
many drops of wickedness: thus did I sit among them, and still said to
myself: “Innocent is everything petty of its pettiness!”

Especially did I find those who call themselves “the good,” the most
poisonous flies; they sting in all innocence, they lie in all innocence;
how COULD they—be just towards me!

He who liveth amongst the good—pity teacheth him to lie. Pity maketh
stifling air for all free souls. For the stupidity of the good is
unfathomable.

To conceal myself and my riches—THAT did I learn down there: for every
one did I still find poor in spirit. It was the lie of my pity, that I
knew in every one,

—That I saw and scented in every one, what was ENOUGH of spirit for
him, and what was TOO MUCH!

Their stiff wise men: I call them wise, not stiff—thus did I learn to
slur over words.

The grave-diggers dig for themselves diseases. Under old rubbish rest
bad vapours. One should not stir up the marsh. One should live on
mountains.

With blessed nostrils do I again breathe mountain-freedom. Freed at last
is my nose from the smell of all human hubbub!

With sharp breezes tickled, as with sparkling wine, SNEEZETH my soul—
sneezeth, and shouteth self-congratulatingly: “Health to thee!”

Thus spake Zarathustra.




LIV. THE THREE EVIL THINGS.


1.

In my dream, in my last morning-dream, I stood to-day on a promontory—
beyond the world; I held a pair of scales, and WEIGHED the world.

Alas, that the rosy dawn came too early to me: she glowed me awake, the
jealous one! Jealous is she always of the glows of my morning-dream.

Measurable by him who hath time, weighable by a good weigher, attainable
by strong pinions, divinable by divine nut-crackers: thus did my dream
find the world:—

My dream, a bold sailor, half-ship, half-hurricane, silent as the
butterfly, impatient as the falcon: how had it the patience and leisure
to-day for world-weighing!

Did my wisdom perhaps speak secretly to it, my laughing, wide-awake
day-wisdom, which mocketh at all “infinite worlds”? For it saith: “Where
force is, there becometh NUMBER the master: it hath more force.”

How confidently did my dream contemplate this finite world, not
new-fangledly, not old-fangledly, not timidly, not entreatingly:—

—As if a big round apple presented itself to my hand, a ripe golden
apple, with a coolly-soft, velvety skin:—thus did the world present
itself unto me:—

—As if a tree nodded unto me, a broad-branched, strong-willed tree,
curved as a recline and a foot-stool for weary travellers: thus did the
world stand on my promontory:—

—As if delicate hands carried a casket towards me—a casket open for
the delectation of modest adoring eyes: thus did the world present
itself before me to-day:—

—Not riddle enough to scare human love from it, not solution enough
to put to sleep human wisdom:—a humanly good thing was the world to me
to-day, of which such bad things are said!

How I thank my morning-dream that I thus at to-day’s dawn, weighed
the world! As a humanly good thing did it come unto me, this dream and
heart-comforter!

And that I may do the like by day, and imitate and copy its best, now
will I put the three worst things on the scales, and weigh them humanly
well.—

He who taught to bless taught also to curse: what are the three best
cursed things in the world? These will I put on the scales.

VOLUPTUOUSNESS, PASSION FOR POWER, and SELFISHNESS: these three things
have hitherto been best cursed, and have been in worst and falsest
repute—these three things will I weigh humanly well.

Well! Here is my promontory, and there is the sea—IT rolleth hither
unto me, shaggily and fawningly, the old, faithful, hundred-headed
dog-monster that I love!—

Well! Here will I hold the scales over the weltering sea: and also a
witness do I choose to look on—thee, the anchorite-tree, thee, the
strong-odoured, broad-arched tree that I love!—

On what bridge goeth the now to the hereafter? By what constraint doth
the high stoop to the low? And what enjoineth even the highest still—to
grow upwards?—

Now stand the scales poised and at rest: three heavy questions have I
thrown in; three heavy answers carrieth the other scale.

2.

Voluptuousness: unto all hair-shirted despisers of the body, a sting and
stake; and, cursed as “the world,” by all backworldsmen: for it mocketh
and befooleth all erring, misinferring teachers.

Voluptuousness: to the rabble, the slow fire at which it is burnt;
to all wormy wood, to all stinking rags, the prepared heat and stew
furnace.

Voluptuousness: to free hearts, a thing innocent and free, the
garden-happiness of the earth, all the future’s thanks-overflow to the
present.

Voluptuousness: only to the withered a sweet poison; to the lion-willed,
however, the great cordial, and the reverently saved wine of wines.

Voluptuousness: the great symbolic happiness of a higher happiness
and highest hope. For to many is marriage promised, and more than
marriage,—

—To many that are more unknown to each other than man and woman:—and
who hath fully understood HOW UNKNOWN to each other are man and woman!

Voluptuousness:—but I will have hedges around my thoughts, and
even around my words, lest swine and libertine should break into my
gardens!—

Passion for power: the glowing scourge of the hardest of the heart-hard;
the cruel torture reserved for the cruellest themselves; the gloomy
flame of living pyres.

Passion for power: the wicked gadfly which is mounted on the vainest
peoples; the scorner of all uncertain virtue; which rideth on every
horse and on every pride.

Passion for power: the earthquake which breaketh and upbreaketh all
that is rotten and hollow; the rolling, rumbling, punitive demolisher
of whited sepulchres; the flashing interrogative-sign beside premature
answers.

Passion for power: before whose glance man creepeth and croucheth and
drudgeth, and becometh lower than the serpent and the swine:—until at
last great contempt crieth out of him—,

Passion for power: the terrible teacher of great contempt, which
preacheth to their face to cities and empires: “Away with thee!”—until
a voice crieth out of themselves: “Away with ME!”

Passion for power: which, however, mounteth alluringly even to the pure
and lonesome, and up to self-satisfied elevations, glowing like a love
that painteth purple felicities alluringly on earthly heavens.

Passion for power: but who would call it PASSION, when the height
longeth to stoop for power! Verily, nothing sick or diseased is there in
such longing and descending!

That the lonesome height may not for ever remain lonesome and
self-sufficing; that the mountains may come to the valleys and the winds
of the heights to the plains:—

Oh, who could find the right prenomen and honouring name for such
longing! “Bestowing virtue”—thus did Zarathustra once name the
unnamable.

And then it happened also,—and verily, it happened for the first
time!—that his word blessed SELFISHNESS, the wholesome, healthy
selfishness, that springeth from the powerful soul:—

—From the powerful soul, to which the high body appertaineth, the
handsome, triumphing, refreshing body, around which everything becometh
a mirror:

—The pliant, persuasive body, the dancer, whose symbol and epitome
is the self-enjoying soul. Of such bodies and souls the self-enjoyment
calleth itself “virtue.”

With its words of good and bad doth such self-enjoyment shelter itself
as with sacred groves; with the names of its happiness doth it banish
from itself everything contemptible.

Away from itself doth it banish everything cowardly; it saith:
“Bad—THAT IS cowardly!” Contemptible seem to it the ever-solicitous,
the sighing, the complaining, and whoever pick up the most trifling
advantage.

It despiseth also all bitter-sweet wisdom: for verily, there is also
wisdom that bloometh in the dark, a night-shade wisdom, which ever
sigheth: “All is vain!”

Shy distrust is regarded by it as base, and every one who wanteth oaths
instead of looks and hands: also all over-distrustful wisdom,—for such
is the mode of cowardly souls.

Baser still it regardeth the obsequious, doggish one, who immediately
lieth on his back, the submissive one; and there is also wisdom that is
submissive, and doggish, and pious, and obsequious.

Hateful to it altogether, and a loathing, is he who will never defend
himself, he who swalloweth down poisonous spittle and bad looks, the
all-too-patient one, the all-endurer, the all-satisfied one: for that is
the mode of slaves.

Whether they be servile before Gods and divine spurnings, or before men
and stupid human opinions: at ALL kinds of slaves doth it spit, this
blessed selfishness!

Bad: thus doth it call all that is spirit-broken, and
sordidly-servile—constrained, blinking eyes, depressed hearts, and the
false submissive style, which kisseth with broad cowardly lips.

And spurious wisdom: so doth it call all the wit that slaves, and
hoary-headed and weary ones affect; and especially all the cunning,
spurious-witted, curious-witted foolishness of priests!

The spurious wise, however, all the priests, the world-weary, and those
whose souls are of feminine and servile nature—oh, how hath their game
all along abused selfishness!

And precisely THAT was to be virtue and was to be called virtue—to
abuse selfishness! And “selfless”—so did they wish themselves with good
reason, all those world-weary cowards and cross-spiders!

But to all those cometh now the day, the change, the sword of judgment,
THE GREAT NOONTIDE: then shall many things be revealed!

And he who proclaimeth the EGO wholesome and holy, and selfishness
blessed, verily, he, the prognosticator, speaketh also what he knoweth:
“BEHOLD, IT COMETH, IT IS NIGH, THE GREAT NOONTIDE!”

Thus spake Zarathustra.




LV. THE SPIRIT OF GRAVITY.


1.

My mouthpiece—is of the people: too coarsely and cordially do I
talk for Angora rabbits. And still stranger soundeth my word unto all
ink-fish and pen-foxes.

My hand—is a fool’s hand: woe unto all tables and walls, and whatever
hath room for fool’s sketching, fool’s scrawling!

My foot—is a horse-foot; therewith do I trample and trot over stick and
stone, in the fields up and down, and am bedevilled with delight in all
fast racing.

My stomach—is surely an eagle’s stomach? For it preferreth lamb’s
flesh. Certainly it is a bird’s stomach.

Nourished with innocent things, and with few, ready and impatient
to fly, to fly away—that is now my nature: why should there not be
something of bird-nature therein!

And especially that I am hostile to the spirit of gravity, that is
bird-nature:—verily, deadly hostile, supremely hostile, originally
hostile! Oh, whither hath my hostility not flown and misflown!

Thereof could I sing a song—and WILL sing it: though I be alone in an
empty house, and must sing it to mine own ears.

Other singers are there, to be sure, to whom only the full house
maketh the voice soft, the hand eloquent, the eye expressive, the heart
wakeful:—those do I not resemble.—

2.

He who one day teacheth men to fly will have shifted all landmarks; to
him will all landmarks themselves fly into the air; the earth will he
christen anew—as “the light body.”

The ostrich runneth faster than the fastest horse, but it also thrusteth
its head heavily into the heavy earth: thus is it with the man who
cannot yet fly.

Heavy unto him are earth and life, and so WILLETH the spirit of gravity!
But he who would become light, and be a bird, must love himself:—thus
do _I_ teach.

Not, to be sure, with the love of the sick and infected, for with them
stinketh even self-love!

One must learn to love oneself—thus do I teach—with a wholesome and
healthy love: that one may endure to be with oneself, and not go roving
about.

Such roving about christeneth itself “brotherly love”; with these words
hath there hitherto been the best lying and dissembling, and especially
by those who have been burdensome to every one.

And verily, it is no commandment for to-day and to-morrow to LEARN to
love oneself. Rather is it of all arts the finest, subtlest, last and
patientest.

For to its possessor is all possession well concealed, and of all
treasure-pits one’s own is last excavated—so causeth the spirit of
gravity.

Almost in the cradle are we apportioned with heavy words and worths:
“good” and “evil”—so calleth itself this dowry. For the sake of it we
are forgiven for living.

And therefore suffereth one little children to come unto one, to forbid
them betimes to love themselves—so causeth the spirit of gravity.

And we—we bear loyally what is apportioned unto us, on hard shoulders,
over rugged mountains! And when we sweat, then do people say to us:
“Yea, life is hard to bear!”

But man himself only is hard to bear! The reason thereof is that he
carrieth too many extraneous things on his shoulders. Like the camel
kneeleth he down, and letteth himself be well laden.

Especially the strong load-bearing man in whom reverence resideth. Too
many EXTRANEOUS heavy words and worths loadeth he upon himself—then
seemeth life to him a desert!

And verily! Many a thing also that is OUR OWN is hard to bear! And many
internal things in man are like the oyster—repulsive and slippery and
hard to grasp;—

So that an elegant shell, with elegant adornment, must plead for
them. But this art also must one learn: to HAVE a shell, and a fine
appearance, and sagacious blindness!

Again, it deceiveth about many things in man, that many a shell is poor
and pitiable, and too much of a shell. Much concealed goodness and power
is never dreamt of; the choicest dainties find no tasters!

Women know that, the choicest of them: a little fatter a little leaner—
oh, how much fate is in so little!

Man is difficult to discover, and unto himself most difficult of all;
often lieth the spirit concerning the soul. So causeth the spirit of
gravity.

He, however, hath discovered himself who saith: This is MY good and
evil: therewith hath he silenced the mole and the dwarf, who say: “Good
for all, evil for all.”

Verily, neither do I like those who call everything good, and this world
the best of all. Those do I call the all-satisfied.

All-satisfiedness, which knoweth how to taste everything,—that is
not the best taste! I honour the refractory, fastidious tongues and
stomachs, which have learned to say “I” and “Yea” and “Nay.”

To chew and digest everything, however—that is the genuine
swine-nature! Ever to say YE-A—that hath only the ass learnt, and those
like it!—

Deep yellow and hot red—so wanteth MY taste—it mixeth blood with all
colours. He, however, who whitewasheth his house, betrayeth unto me a
whitewashed soul.

With mummies, some fall in love; others with phantoms: both alike
hostile to all flesh and blood—oh, how repugnant are both to my taste!
For I love blood.

And there will I not reside and abide where every one spitteth and
speweth: that is now MY taste,—rather would I live amongst thieves and
perjurers. Nobody carrieth gold in his mouth.

Still more repugnant unto me, however, are all lickspittles; and the
most repugnant animal of man that I found, did I christen “parasite”: it
would not love, and would yet live by love.

Unhappy do I call all those who have only one choice: either to become
evil beasts, or evil beast-tamers. Amongst such would I not build my
tabernacle.

Unhappy do I also call those who have ever to WAIT,—they are repugnant
to my taste—all the toll-gatherers and traders, and kings, and other
landkeepers and shopkeepers.

Verily, I learned waiting also, and thoroughly so,—but only waiting for
MYSELF. And above all did I learn standing and walking and running and
leaping and climbing and dancing.

This however is my teaching: he who wisheth one day to fly, must first
learn standing and walking and running and climbing and dancing:—one
doth not fly into flying!

With rope-ladders learned I to reach many a window, with nimble legs did
I climb high masts: to sit on high masts of perception seemed to me no
small bliss;—

—To flicker like small flames on high masts: a small light, certainly,
but a great comfort to cast-away sailors and shipwrecked ones!

By divers ways and wendings did I arrive at my truth; not by one ladder
did I mount to the height where mine eye roveth into my remoteness.

And unwillingly only did I ask my way—that was always counter to my
taste! Rather did I question and test the ways themselves.

A testing and a questioning hath been all my travelling:—and verily,
one must also LEARN to answer such questioning! That, however,—is my
taste:

—Neither a good nor a bad taste, but MY taste, of which I have no
longer either shame or secrecy.

“This—is now MY way,—where is yours?” Thus did I answer those who
asked me “the way.” For THE way—it doth not exist!

Thus spake Zarathustra.




LVI. OLD AND NEW TABLES.


1.

Here do I sit and wait, old broken tables around me and also new
half-written tables. When cometh mine hour?

—The hour of my descent, of my down-going: for once more will I go unto
men.

For that hour do I now wait: for first must the signs come unto me that
it is MINE hour—namely, the laughing lion with the flock of doves.

Meanwhile do I talk to myself as one who hath time. No one telleth me
anything new, so I tell myself mine own story.

2.

When I came unto men, then found I them resting on an old infatuation:
all of them thought they had long known what was good and bad for men.

An old wearisome business seemed to them all discourse about virtue; and
he who wished to sleep well spake of “good” and “bad” ere retiring to
rest.

This somnolence did I disturb when I taught that NO ONE YET KNOWETH what
is good and bad:—unless it be the creating one!

—It is he, however, who createth man’s goal, and giveth to the earth
its meaning and its future: he only EFFECTETH it THAT aught is good or
bad.

And I bade them upset their old academic chairs, and wherever that old
infatuation had sat; I bade them laugh at their great moralists, their
saints, their poets, and their Saviours.

At their gloomy sages did I bid them laugh, and whoever had sat
admonishing as a black scarecrow on the tree of life.

On their great grave-highway did I seat myself, and even beside the
carrion and vultures—and I laughed at all their bygone and its mellow
decaying glory.

Verily, like penitential preachers and fools did I cry wrath and shame
on all their greatness and smallness. Oh, that their best is so very
small! Oh, that their worst is so very small! Thus did I laugh.

Thus did my wise longing, born in the mountains, cry and laugh in me; a
wild wisdom, verily!—my great pinion-rustling longing.

And oft did it carry me off and up and away and in the midst of
laughter; then flew I quivering like an arrow with sun-intoxicated
rapture:

—Out into distant futures, which no dream hath yet seen, into warmer
souths than ever sculptor conceived,—where gods in their dancing are
ashamed of all clothes:

(That I may speak in parables and halt and stammer like the poets: and
verily I am ashamed that I have still to be a poet!)

Where all becoming seemed to me dancing of Gods, and wantoning of Gods,
and the world unloosed and unbridled and fleeing back to itself:—

—As an eternal self-fleeing and re-seeking of one another of many Gods,
as the blessed self-contradicting, recommuning, and refraternising with
one another of many Gods:—

Where all time seemed to me a blessed mockery of moments, where
necessity was freedom itself, which played happily with the goad of
freedom:—

Where I also found again mine old devil and arch-enemy, the spirit
of gravity, and all that it created: constraint, law, necessity and
consequence and purpose and will and good and evil:—

For must there not be that which is danced OVER, danced beyond? Must
there not, for the sake of the nimble, the nimblest,—be moles and
clumsy dwarfs?—

3.

There was it also where I picked up from the path the word “Superman,”
 and that man is something that must be surpassed.

—That man is a bridge and not a goal—rejoicing over his noontides and
evenings, as advances to new rosy dawns:

—The Zarathustra word of the great noontide, and whatever else I have
hung up over men like purple evening-afterglows.

Verily, also new stars did I make them see, along with new nights;
and over cloud and day and night, did I spread out laughter like a
gay-coloured canopy.

I taught them all MY poetisation and aspiration: to compose and collect
into unity what is fragment in man, and riddle and fearful chance;—

—As composer, riddle-reader, and redeemer of chance, did I teach them
to create the future, and all that HATH BEEN—to redeem by creating.

The past of man to redeem, and every “It was” to transform, until the
Will saith: “But so did I will it! So shall I will it—”

—This did I call redemption; this alone taught I them to call
redemption.—

Now do I await MY redemption—that I may go unto them for the last time.

For once more will I go unto men: AMONGST them will my sun set; in dying
will I give them my choicest gift!

From the sun did I learn this, when it goeth down, the exuberant one:
gold doth it then pour into the sea, out of inexhaustible riches,—

—So that the poorest fisherman roweth even with GOLDEN oars! For this
did I once see, and did not tire of weeping in beholding it.—

Like the sun will also Zarathustra go down: now sitteth he here
and waiteth, old broken tables around him, and also new
tables—half-written.

4.

Behold, here is a new table; but where are my brethren who will carry it
with me to the valley and into hearts of flesh?—

Thus demandeth my great love to the remotest ones: BE NOT CONSIDERATE OF
THY NEIGHBOUR! Man is something that must be surpassed.

There are many divers ways and modes of surpassing: see THOU thereto!
But only a buffoon thinketh: “man can also be OVERLEAPT.”

Surpass thyself even in thy neighbour: and a right which thou canst
seize upon, shalt thou not allow to be given thee!

What thou doest can no one do to thee again. Lo, there is no requital.

He who cannot command himself shall obey. And many a one CAN command
himself, but still sorely lacketh self-obedience!

5.

Thus wisheth the type of noble souls: they desire to have nothing
GRATUITOUSLY, least of all, life.

He who is of the populace wisheth to live gratuitously; we others,
however, to whom life hath given itself—we are ever considering WHAT we
can best give IN RETURN!

And verily, it is a noble dictum which saith: “What life promiseth US,
that promise will WE keep—to life!”

One should not wish to enjoy where one doth not contribute to the
enjoyment. And one should not WISH to enjoy!

For enjoyment and innocence are the most bashful things. Neither like
to be sought for. One should HAVE them,—but one should rather SEEK for
guilt and pain!—

6.

O my brethren, he who is a firstling is ever sacrificed. Now, however,
are we firstlings!

We all bleed on secret sacrificial altars, we all burn and broil in
honour of ancient idols.

Our best is still young: this exciteth old palates. Our flesh is tender,
our skin is only lambs’ skin:—how could we not excite old idol-priests!

IN OURSELVES dwelleth he still, the old idol-priest, who broileth our
best for his banquet. Ah, my brethren, how could firstlings fail to be
sacrifices!

But so wisheth our type; and I love those who do not wish to preserve
themselves, the down-going ones do I love with mine entire love: for
they go beyond.—

7.

To be true—that CAN few be! And he who can, will not! Least of all,
however, can the good be true.

Oh, those good ones! GOOD MEN NEVER SPEAK THE TRUTH. For the spirit,
thus to be good, is a malady.

They yield, those good ones, they submit themselves; their heart
repeateth, their soul obeyeth: HE, however, who obeyeth, DOTH NOT LISTEN
TO HIMSELF!

All that is called evil by the good, must come together in order that
one truth may be born. O my brethren, are ye also evil enough for THIS
truth?

The daring venture, the prolonged distrust, the cruel Nay, the tedium,
the cutting-into-the-quick—how seldom do THESE come together! Out of
such seed, however—is truth produced!

BESIDE the bad conscience hath hitherto grown all KNOWLEDGE! Break up,
break up, ye discerning ones, the old tables!

8.

When the water hath planks, when gangways and railings o’erspan the
stream, verily, he is not believed who then saith: “All is in flux.”

But even the simpletons contradict him. “What?” say the simpletons, “all
in flux? Planks and railings are still OVER the stream!

“OVER the stream all is stable, all the values of things, the bridges
and bearings, all ‘good’ and ‘evil’: these are all STABLE!”—

Cometh, however, the hard winter, the stream-tamer, then learn even the
wittiest distrust, and verily, not only the simpletons then say: “Should
not everything—STAND STILL?”

“Fundamentally standeth everything still”—that is an appropriate winter
doctrine, good cheer for an unproductive period, a great comfort for
winter-sleepers and fireside-loungers.

“Fundamentally standeth everything still”—: but CONTRARY thereto,
preacheth the thawing wind!

The thawing wind, a bullock, which is no ploughing bullock—a furious
bullock, a destroyer, which with angry horns breaketh the ice! The ice
however—BREAKETH GANGWAYS!

O my brethren, is not everything AT PRESENT IN FLUX? Have not all
railings and gangways fallen into the water? Who would still HOLD ON to
“good” and “evil”?

“Woe to us! Hail to us! The thawing wind bloweth!”—Thus preach, my
brethren, through all the streets!

9.

There is an old illusion—it is called good and evil. Around soothsayers
and astrologers hath hitherto revolved the orbit of this illusion.

Once did one BELIEVE in soothsayers and astrologers; and THEREFORE did
one believe, “Everything is fate: thou shalt, for thou must!”

Then again did one distrust all soothsayers and astrologers; and
THEREFORE did one believe, “Everything is freedom: thou canst, for thou
willest!”

O my brethren, concerning the stars and the future there hath hitherto
been only illusion, and not knowledge; and THEREFORE concerning good and
evil there hath hitherto been only illusion and not knowledge!

10.

“Thou shalt not rob! Thou shalt not slay!”—such precepts were once
called holy; before them did one bow the knee and the head, and take off
one’s shoes.

But I ask you: Where have there ever been better robbers and slayers in
the world than such holy precepts?

Is there not even in all life—robbing and slaying? And for such
precepts to be called holy, was not TRUTH itself thereby—slain?

—Or was it a sermon of death that called holy what contradicted and
dissuaded from life?—O my brethren, break up, break up for me the old
tables!

11.

It is my sympathy with all the past that I see it is abandoned,—

—Abandoned to the favour, the spirit and the madness of every
generation that cometh, and reinterpreteth all that hath been as its
bridge!

A great potentate might arise, an artful prodigy, who with approval and
disapproval could strain and constrain all the past, until it became for
him a bridge, a harbinger, a herald, and a cock-crowing.

This however is the other danger, and mine other sympathy:—he who is
of the populace, his thoughts go back to his grandfather,—with his
grandfather, however, doth time cease.

Thus is all the past abandoned: for it might some day happen for the
populace to become master, and drown all time in shallow waters.

Therefore, O my brethren, a NEW NOBILITY is needed, which shall be the
adversary of all populace and potentate rule, and shall inscribe anew
the word “noble” on new tables.

For many noble ones are needed, and many kinds of noble ones, FOR A NEW
NOBILITY! Or, as I once said in parable: “That is just divinity, that
there are Gods, but no God!”

12.

O my brethren, I consecrate you and point you to a new nobility: ye
shall become procreators and cultivators and sowers of the future;—

—Verily, not to a nobility which ye could purchase like traders with
traders’ gold; for little worth is all that hath its price.

Let it not be your honour henceforth whence ye come, but whither ye go!
Your Will and your feet which seek to surpass you—let these be your new
honour!

Verily, not that ye have served a prince—of what account are princes
now!—nor that ye have become a bulwark to that which standeth, that it
may stand more firmly.

Not that your family have become courtly at courts, and that ye have
learned—gay-coloured, like the flamingo—to stand long hours in shallow
pools:

(For ABILITY-to-stand is a merit in courtiers; and all courtiers believe
that unto blessedness after death pertaineth—PERMISSION-to-sit!)

Nor even that a Spirit called Holy, led your forefathers into promised
lands, which I do not praise: for where the worst of all trees grew—the
cross,—in that land there is nothing to praise!—

—And verily, wherever this “Holy Spirit” led its knights, always in
such campaigns did—goats and geese, and wryheads and guyheads run
FOREMOST!—

O my brethren, not backward shall your nobility gaze, but OUTWARD!
Exiles shall ye be from all fatherlands and forefather-lands!

Your CHILDREN’S LAND shall ye love: let this love be your new
nobility,—the undiscovered in the remotest seas! For it do I bid your
sails search and search!

Unto your children shall ye MAKE AMENDS for being the children of your
fathers: all the past shall ye THUS redeem! This new table do I place
over you!

13.

“Why should one live? All is vain! To live—that is to thrash straw; to
live—that is to burn oneself and yet not get warm.”—

Such ancient babbling still passeth for “wisdom”; because it is old,
however, and smelleth mustily, THEREFORE is it the more honoured. Even
mould ennobleth.—

Children might thus speak: they SHUN the fire because it hath burnt
them! There is much childishness in the old books of wisdom.

And he who ever “thrasheth straw,” why should he be allowed to rail at
thrashing! Such a fool one would have to muzzle!

Such persons sit down to the table and bring nothing with them, not even
good hunger:—and then do they rail: “All is vain!”

But to eat and drink well, my brethren, is verily no vain art! Break up,
break up for me the tables of the never-joyous ones!

14.

“To the clean are all things clean”—thus say the people. I, however,
say unto you: To the swine all things become swinish!

Therefore preach the visionaries and bowed-heads (whose hearts are also
bowed down): “The world itself is a filthy monster.”

For these are all unclean spirits; especially those, however, who have
no peace or rest, unless they see the world FROM THE BACKSIDE—the
backworldsmen!

TO THOSE do I say it to the face, although it sound unpleasantly: the
world resembleth man, in that it hath a backside,—SO MUCH is true!

There is in the world much filth: SO MUCH is true! But the world itself
is not therefore a filthy monster!

There is wisdom in the fact that much in the world smelleth badly:
loathing itself createth wings, and fountain-divining powers!

In the best there is still something to loathe; and the best is still
something that must be surpassed!—

O my brethren, there is much wisdom in the fact that much filth is in
the world!—

15.

Such sayings did I hear pious backworldsmen speak to their consciences,
and verily without wickedness or guile,—although there is nothing more
guileful in the world, or more wicked.

“Let the world be as it is! Raise not a finger against it!”

“Let whoever will choke and stab and skin and scrape the people: raise
not a finger against it! Thereby will they learn to renounce the world.”

“And thine own reason—this shalt thou thyself stifle and choke; for it
is a reason of this world,—thereby wilt thou learn thyself to renounce
the world.”—

—Shatter, shatter, O my brethren, those old tables of the pious! Tatter
the maxims of the world-maligners!—

16.

“He who learneth much unlearneth all violent cravings”—that do people
now whisper to one another in all the dark lanes.

“Wisdom wearieth, nothing is worth while; thou shalt not crave!”—this
new table found I hanging even in the public markets.

Break up for me, O my brethren, break up also that NEW table! The
weary-o’-the-world put it up, and the preachers of death and the jailer:
for lo, it is also a sermon for slavery:—

Because they learned badly and not the best, and everything too early
and everything too fast; because they ATE badly: from thence hath
resulted their ruined stomach;—

—For a ruined stomach, is their spirit: IT persuadeth to death! For
verily, my brethren, the spirit IS a stomach!

Life is a well of delight, but to him in whom the ruined stomach
speaketh, the father of affliction, all fountains are poisoned.

To discern: that is DELIGHT to the lion-willed! But he who hath become
weary, is himself merely “willed”; with him play all the waves.

And such is always the nature of weak men: they lose themselves on their
way. And at last asketh their weariness: “Why did we ever go on the way?
All is indifferent!”

TO THEM soundeth it pleasant to have preached in their ears: “Nothing is
worth while! Ye shall not will!” That, however, is a sermon for slavery.

O my brethren, a fresh blustering wind cometh Zarathustra unto all
way-weary ones; many noses will he yet make sneeze!

Even through walls bloweth my free breath, and in into prisons and
imprisoned spirits!

Willing emancipateth: for willing is creating: so do I teach. And ONLY
for creating shall ye learn!

And also the learning shall ye LEARN only from me, the learning
well!—He who hath ears let him hear!

17.

There standeth the boat—thither goeth it over, perhaps into vast
nothingness—but who willeth to enter into this “Perhaps”?

None of you want to enter into the death-boat! How should ye then be
WORLD-WEARY ones!

World-weary ones! And have not even withdrawn from the earth! Eager
did I ever find you for the earth, amorous still of your own
earth-weariness!

Not in vain doth your lip hang down:—a small worldly wish still sitteth
thereon! And in your eye—floateth there not a cloudlet of unforgotten
earthly bliss?

There are on the earth many good inventions, some useful, some pleasant:
for their sake is the earth to be loved.

And many such good inventions are there, that they are like woman’s
breasts: useful at the same time, and pleasant.

Ye world-weary ones, however! Ye earth-idlers! You, shall one beat with
stripes! With stripes shall one again make you sprightly limbs.

For if ye be not invalids, or decrepit creatures, of whom the earth is
weary, then are ye sly sloths, or dainty, sneaking pleasure-cats. And if
ye will not again RUN gaily, then shall ye—pass away!

To the incurable shall one not seek to be a physician: thus teacheth
Zarathustra:—so shall ye pass away!

But more COURAGE is needed to make an end than to make a new verse: that
do all physicians and poets know well.—

18.

O my brethren, there are tables which weariness framed, and tables
which slothfulness framed, corrupt slothfulness: although they speak
similarly, they want to be heard differently.—

See this languishing one! Only a span-breadth is he from his goal; but
from weariness hath he lain down obstinately in the dust, this brave
one!

From weariness yawneth he at the path, at the earth, at the goal, and at
himself: not a step further will he go,—this brave one!

Now gloweth the sun upon him, and the dogs lick at his sweat: but he
lieth there in his obstinacy and preferreth to languish:—

—A span-breadth from his goal, to languish! Verily, ye will have to
drag him into his heaven by the hair of his head—this hero!

Better still that ye let him lie where he hath lain down, that sleep may
come unto him, the comforter, with cooling patter-rain.

Let him lie, until of his own accord he awakeneth,—until of his own
accord he repudiateth all weariness, and what weariness hath taught
through him!

Only, my brethren, see that ye scare the dogs away from him, the idle
skulkers, and all the swarming vermin:—

—All the swarming vermin of the “cultured,” that—feast on the sweat of
every hero!—

19.

I form circles around me and holy boundaries; ever fewer ascend with
me ever higher mountains: I build a mountain-range out of ever holier
mountains.—

But wherever ye would ascend with me, O my brethren, take care lest a
PARASITE ascend with you!

A parasite: that is a reptile, a creeping, cringing reptile, that trieth
to fatten on your infirm and sore places.

And THIS is its art: it divineth where ascending souls are weary, in
your trouble and dejection, in your sensitive modesty, doth it build its
loathsome nest.

Where the strong are weak, where the noble are all-too-gentle—there
buildeth it its loathsome nest; the parasite liveth where the great have
small sore places.

What is the highest of all species of being, and what is the lowest?
The parasite is the lowest species; he, however, who is of the highest
species feedeth most parasites.

For the soul which hath the longest ladder, and can go deepest down: how
could there fail to be most parasites upon it?—

—The most comprehensive soul, which can run and stray and rove furthest
in itself; the most necessary soul, which out of joy flingeth itself
into chance:—

—The soul in Being, which plungeth into Becoming; the possessing soul,
which SEEKETH to attain desire and longing:—

—The soul fleeing from itself, which overtaketh itself in the widest
circuit; the wisest soul, unto which folly speaketh most sweetly:—

—The soul most self-loving, in which all things have their current and
counter-current, their ebb and their flow:—oh, how could THE LOFTIEST
SOUL fail to have the worst parasites?

20.

O my brethren, am I then cruel? But I say: What falleth, that shall one
also push!

Everything of to-day—it falleth, it decayeth; who would preserve it!
But I—I wish also to push it!

Know ye the delight which rolleth stones into precipitous depths?—Those
men of to-day, see just how they roll into my depths!

A prelude am I to better players, O my brethren! An example! DO
according to mine example!

And him whom ye do not teach to fly, teach I pray you—TO FALL FASTER!—

21.

I love the brave: but it is not enough to be a swordsman,—one must also
know WHEREON to use swordsmanship!

And often is it greater bravery to keep quiet and pass by, that THEREBY
one may reserve oneself for a worthier foe!

Ye shall only have foes to be hated; but not foes to be despised: ye
must be proud of your foes. Thus have I already taught.

For the worthier foe, O my brethren, shall ye reserve yourselves:
therefore must ye pass by many a one,—

—Especially many of the rabble, who din your ears with noise about
people and peoples.

Keep your eye clear of their For and Against! There is there much right,
much wrong: he who looketh on becometh wroth.

Therein viewing, therein hewing—they are the same thing: therefore
depart into the forests and lay your sword to sleep!

Go YOUR ways! and let the people and peoples go theirs!—gloomy ways,
verily, on which not a single hope glinteth any more!

Let there the trader rule, where all that still glittereth is—traders’
gold. It is the time of kings no longer: that which now calleth itself
the people is unworthy of kings.

See how these peoples themselves now do just like the traders: they pick
up the smallest advantage out of all kinds of rubbish!

They lay lures for one another, they lure things out of one
another,—that they call “good neighbourliness.” O blessed remote period
when a people said to itself: “I will be—MASTER over peoples!”

For, my brethren, the best shall rule, the best also WILLETH to rule!
And where the teaching is different, there—the best is LACKING.

22.

If THEY had—bread for nothing, alas! for what would THEY cry! Their
maintainment—that is their true entertainment; and they shall have it
hard!

Beasts of prey, are they: in their “working”—there is even plundering,
in their “earning”—there is even overreaching! Therefore shall they
have it hard!

Better beasts of prey shall they thus become, subtler, cleverer, MORE
MAN-LIKE: for man is the best beast of prey.

All the animals hath man already robbed of their virtues: that is why of
all animals it hath been hardest for man.

Only the birds are still beyond him. And if man should yet learn to fly,
alas! TO WHAT HEIGHT—would his rapacity fly!

23.

Thus would I have man and woman: fit for war, the one; fit for
maternity, the other; both, however, fit for dancing with head and legs.

And lost be the day to us in which a measure hath not been danced. And
false be every truth which hath not had laughter along with it!

24.

Your marriage-arranging: see that it be not a bad ARRANGING! Ye have
arranged too hastily: so there FOLLOWETH therefrom—marriage-breaking!

And better marriage-breaking than marriage-bending,
marriage-lying!—Thus spake a woman unto me: “Indeed, I broke the
marriage, but first did the marriage break—me!”

The badly paired found I ever the most revengeful: they make every one
suffer for it that they no longer run singly.

On that account want I the honest ones to say to one another: “We love
each other: let us SEE TO IT that we maintain our love! Or shall our
pledging be blundering?”

—“Give us a set term and a small marriage, that we may see if we are
fit for the great marriage! It is a great matter always to be twain.”

Thus do I counsel all honest ones; and what would be my love to the
Superman, and to all that is to come, if I should counsel and speak
otherwise!

Not only to propagate yourselves onwards but UPWARDS—thereto, O my
brethren, may the garden of marriage help you!

25.

He who hath grown wise concerning old origins, lo, he will at last seek
after the fountains of the future and new origins.—

O my brethren, not long will it be until NEW PEOPLES shall arise and new
fountains shall rush down into new depths.

For the earthquake—it choketh up many wells, it causeth much
languishing: but it bringeth also to light inner powers and secrets.

The earthquake discloseth new fountains. In the earthquake of old
peoples new fountains burst forth.

And whoever calleth out: “Lo, here is a well for many thirsty ones, one
heart for many longing ones, one will for many instruments”:—around him
collecteth a PEOPLE, that is to say, many attempting ones.

Who can command, who must obey—THAT IS THERE ATTEMPTED! Ah, with what
long seeking and solving and failing and learning and re-attempting!

Human society: it is an attempt—so I teach—a long seeking: it seeketh
however the ruler!—

—An attempt, my brethren! And NO “contract”! Destroy, I pray you,
destroy that word of the soft-hearted and half-and-half!

26.

O my brethren! With whom lieth the greatest danger to the whole human
future? Is it not with the good and just?—

—As those who say and feel in their hearts: “We already know what
is good and just, we possess it also; woe to those who still seek
thereafter!”

And whatever harm the wicked may do, the harm of the good is the
harmfulest harm!

And whatever harm the world-maligners may do, the harm of the good is
the harmfulest harm!

O my brethren, into the hearts of the good and just looked some one
once on a time, who said: “They are the Pharisees.” But people did not
understand him.

The good and just themselves were not free to understand him; their
spirit was imprisoned in their good conscience. The stupidity of the
good is unfathomably wise.

It is the truth, however, that the good MUST be Pharisees—they have no
choice!

The good MUST crucify him who deviseth his own virtue! That IS the
truth!

The second one, however, who discovered their country—the country,
heart and soil of the good and just,—it was he who asked: “Whom do they
hate most?”

The CREATOR, hate they most, him who breaketh the tables and old values,
the breaker,—him they call the law-breaker.

For the good—they CANNOT create; they are always the beginning of the
end:—

—They crucify him who writeth new values on new tables, they sacrifice
UNTO THEMSELVES the future—they crucify the whole human future!

The good—they have always been the beginning of the end.—

27.

O my brethren, have ye also understood this word? And what I once said
of the “last man”?—

With whom lieth the greatest danger to the whole human future? Is it not
with the good and just?

BREAK UP, BREAK UP, I PRAY YOU, THE GOOD AND JUST!—O my brethren, have
ye understood also this word?

28.

Ye flee from me? Ye are frightened? Ye tremble at this word?

O my brethren, when I enjoined you to break up the good, and the tables
of the good, then only did I embark man on his high seas.

And now only cometh unto him the great terror, the great outlook, the
great sickness, the great nausea, the great sea-sickness.

False shores and false securities did the good teach you; in the lies of
the good were ye born and bred. Everything hath been radically contorted
and distorted by the good.

But he who discovered the country of “man,” discovered also the country
of “man’s future.” Now shall ye be sailors for me, brave, patient!

Keep yourselves up betimes, my brethren, learn to keep yourselves up!
The sea stormeth: many seek to raise themselves again by you.

The sea stormeth: all is in the sea. Well! Cheer up! Ye old
seaman-hearts!

What of fatherland! THITHER striveth our helm where our CHILDREN’S LAND
is! Thitherwards, stormier than the sea, stormeth our great longing!—

29.

“Why so hard!”—said to the diamond one day the charcoal; “are we then
not near relatives?”—

Why so soft? O my brethren; thus do _I_ ask you: are ye then not—my
brethren?

Why so soft, so submissive and yielding? Why is there so much negation
and abnegation in your hearts? Why is there so little fate in your
looks?

And if ye will not be fates and inexorable ones, how can ye one day—
conquer with me?

And if your hardness will not glance and cut and chip to pieces, how can
ye one day—create with me?

For the creators are hard. And blessedness must it seem to you to press
your hand upon millenniums as upon wax,—

—Blessedness to write upon the will of millenniums as upon
brass,—harder than brass, nobler than brass. Entirely hard is only the
noblest.

This new table, O my brethren, put I up over you: BECOME HARD!—

30.

O thou, my Will! Thou change of every need, MY needfulness! Preserve me
from all small victories!

Thou fatedness of my soul, which I call fate! Thou In-me! Over-me!
Preserve and spare me for one great fate!

And thy last greatness, my Will, spare it for thy last—that thou mayest
be inexorable IN thy victory! Ah, who hath not succumbed to his victory!

Ah, whose eye hath not bedimmed in this intoxicated twilight! Ah, whose
foot hath not faltered and forgotten in victory—how to stand!—

—That I may one day be ready and ripe in the great noontide: ready and
ripe like the glowing ore, the lightning-bearing cloud, and the swelling
milk-udder:—

—Ready for myself and for my most hidden Will: a bow eager for its
arrow, an arrow eager for its star:—

—A star, ready and ripe in its noontide, glowing, pierced, blessed, by
annihilating sun-arrows:—

—A sun itself, and an inexorable sun-will, ready for annihilation in
victory!

O Will, thou change of every need, MY needfulness! Spare me for one
great victory!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




LVII. THE CONVALESCENT.


1.

One morning, not long after his return to his cave, Zarathustra sprang
up from his couch like a madman, crying with a frightful voice, and
acting as if some one still lay on the couch who did not wish to rise.
Zarathustra’s voice also resounded in such a manner that his animals
came to him frightened, and out of all the neighbouring caves and
lurking-places all the creatures slipped away—flying, fluttering,
creeping or leaping, according to their variety of foot or wing.
Zarathustra, however, spake these words:

Up, abysmal thought out of my depth! I am thy cock and morning dawn,
thou overslept reptile: Up! Up! My voice shall soon crow thee awake!

Unbind the fetters of thine ears: listen! For I wish to hear thee! Up!
Up! There is thunder enough to make the very graves listen!

And rub the sleep and all the dimness and blindness out of thine eyes!
Hear me also with thine eyes: my voice is a medicine even for those born
blind.

And once thou art awake, then shalt thou ever remain awake. It is not
MY custom to awake great-grandmothers out of their sleep that I may bid
them—sleep on!

Thou stirrest, stretchest thyself, wheezest? Up! Up! Not wheeze, shalt
thou,—but speak unto me! Zarathustra calleth thee, Zarathustra the
godless!

I, Zarathustra, the advocate of living, the advocate of suffering, the
advocate of the circuit—thee do I call, my most abysmal thought!

Joy to me! Thou comest,—I hear thee! Mine abyss SPEAKETH, my lowest
depth have I turned over into the light!

Joy to me! Come hither! Give me thy hand—ha! let be! aha!—Disgust,
disgust, disgust—alas to me!

2.

Hardly, however, had Zarathustra spoken these words, when he fell down
as one dead, and remained long as one dead. When however he again came
to himself, then was he pale and trembling, and remained lying; and for
long he would neither eat nor drink. This condition continued for seven
days; his animals, however, did not leave him day nor night, except that
the eagle flew forth to fetch food. And what it fetched and foraged,
it laid on Zarathustra’s couch: so that Zarathustra at last lay among
yellow and red berries, grapes, rosy apples, sweet-smelling herbage, and
pine-cones. At his feet, however, two lambs were stretched, which the
eagle had with difficulty carried off from their shepherds.

At last, after seven days, Zarathustra raised himself upon his couch,
took a rosy apple in his hand, smelt it and found its smell pleasant.
Then did his animals think the time had come to speak unto him.

“O Zarathustra,” said they, “now hast thou lain thus for seven days with
heavy eyes: wilt thou not set thyself again upon thy feet?

Step out of thy cave: the world waiteth for thee as a garden. The wind
playeth with heavy fragrance which seeketh for thee; and all brooks
would like to run after thee.

All things long for thee, since thou hast remained alone for seven
days—step forth out of thy cave! All things want to be thy physicians!

Did perhaps a new knowledge come to thee, a bitter, grievous knowledge?
Like leavened dough layest thou, thy soul arose and swelled beyond all
its bounds.—”

—O mine animals, answered Zarathustra, talk on thus and let me listen!
It refresheth me so to hear your talk: where there is talk, there is the
world as a garden unto me.

How charming it is that there are words and tones; are not words and
tones rainbows and seeming bridges ‘twixt the eternally separated?

To each soul belongeth another world; to each soul is every other soul a
back-world.

Among the most alike doth semblance deceive most delightfully: for the
smallest gap is most difficult to bridge over.

For me—how could there be an outside-of-me? There is no outside! But
this we forget on hearing tones; how delightful it is that we forget!

Have not names and tones been given unto things that man may refresh
himself with them? It is a beautiful folly, speaking; therewith danceth
man over everything.

How lovely is all speech and all falsehoods of tones! With tones danceth
our love on variegated rainbows.—

—“O Zarathustra,” said then his animals, “to those who think like us,
things all dance themselves: they come and hold out the hand and laugh
and flee—and return.

Everything goeth, everything returneth; eternally rolleth the wheel
of existence. Everything dieth, everything blossometh forth again;
eternally runneth on the year of existence.

Everything breaketh, everything is integrated anew; eternally buildeth
itself the same house of existence. All things separate, all things
again greet one another; eternally true to itself remaineth the ring of
existence.

Every moment beginneth existence, around every ‘Here’ rolleth the ball
‘There.’ The middle is everywhere. Crooked is the path of eternity.”—

—O ye wags and barrel-organs! answered Zarathustra, and smiled once
more, how well do ye know what had to be fulfilled in seven days:—

—And how that monster crept into my throat and choked me! But I bit off
its head and spat it away from me.

And ye—ye have made a lyre-lay out of it? Now, however, do I lie here,
still exhausted with that biting and spitting-away, still sick with mine
own salvation.

AND YE LOOKED ON AT IT ALL? O mine animals, are ye also cruel? Did
ye like to look at my great pain as men do? For man is the cruellest
animal.

At tragedies, bull-fights, and crucifixions hath he hitherto been
happiest on earth; and when he invented his hell, behold, that was his
heaven on earth.

When the great man crieth—: immediately runneth the little man thither,
and his tongue hangeth out of his mouth for very lusting. He, however,
calleth it his “pity.”

The little man, especially the poet—how passionately doth he accuse
life in words! Hearken to him, but do not fail to hear the delight which
is in all accusation!

Such accusers of life—them life overcometh with a glance of the eye.
“Thou lovest me?” saith the insolent one; “wait a little, as yet have I
no time for thee.”

Towards himself man is the cruellest animal; and in all who call
themselves “sinners” and “bearers of the cross” and “penitents,” do not
overlook the voluptuousness in their plaints and accusations!

And I myself—do I thereby want to be man’s accuser? Ah, mine animals,
this only have I learned hitherto, that for man his baddest is necessary
for his best,—

—That all that is baddest is the best POWER, and the hardest stone for
the highest creator; and that man must become better AND badder:—

Not to THIS torture-stake was I tied, that I know man is bad,—but I
cried, as no one hath yet cried:

“Ah, that his baddest is so very small! Ah, that his best is so very
small!”

The great disgust at man—IT strangled me and had crept into my throat:
and what the soothsayer had presaged: “All is alike, nothing is worth
while, knowledge strangleth.”

A long twilight limped on before me, a fatally weary, fatally
intoxicated sadness, which spake with yawning mouth.

“Eternally he returneth, the man of whom thou art weary, the small
man”—so yawned my sadness, and dragged its foot and could not go to
sleep.

A cavern, became the human earth to me; its breast caved in; everything
living became to me human dust and bones and mouldering past.

My sighing sat on all human graves, and could no longer arise: my
sighing and questioning croaked and choked, and gnawed and nagged day
and night:

—“Ah, man returneth eternally! The small man returneth eternally!”

Naked had I once seen both of them, the greatest man and the smallest
man: all too like one another—all too human, even the greatest man!

All too small, even the greatest man!—that was my disgust at man! And
the eternal return also of the smallest man!—that was my disgust at all
existence!

Ah, Disgust! Disgust! Disgust!—Thus spake Zarathustra, and sighed and
shuddered; for he remembered his sickness. Then did his animals prevent
him from speaking further.

“Do not speak further, thou convalescent!”—so answered his animals,
“but go out where the world waiteth for thee like a garden.

Go out unto the roses, the bees, and the flocks of doves! Especially,
however, unto the singing birds, to learn SINGING from them!

For singing is for the convalescent; the sound ones may talk. And
when the sound also want songs, then want they other songs than the
convalescent.”

—“O ye wags and barrel-organs, do be silent!” answered Zarathustra, and
smiled at his animals. “How well ye know what consolation I devised for
myself in seven days!

That I have to sing once more—THAT consolation did I devise for myself,
and THIS convalescence: would ye also make another lyre-lay thereof?”

—“Do not talk further,” answered his animals once more; “rather, thou
convalescent, prepare for thyself first a lyre, a new lyre!

For behold, O Zarathustra! For thy new lays there are needed new lyres.

Sing and bubble over, O Zarathustra, heal thy soul with new lays: that
thou mayest bear thy great fate, which hath not yet been any one’s fate!

For thine animals know it well, O Zarathustra, who thou art and must
become: behold, THOU ART THE TEACHER OF THE ETERNAL RETURN,—that is now
THY fate!

That thou must be the first to teach this teaching—how could this great
fate not be thy greatest danger and infirmity!

Behold, we know what thou teachest: that all things eternally return,
and ourselves with them, and that we have already existed times without
number, and all things with us.

Thou teachest that there is a great year of Becoming, a prodigy of a
great year; it must, like a sand-glass, ever turn up anew, that it may
anew run down and run out:—

—So that all those years are like one another in the greatest and also
in the smallest, so that we ourselves, in every great year, are like
ourselves in the greatest and also in the smallest.

And if thou wouldst now die, O Zarathustra, behold, we know also how
thou wouldst then speak to thyself:—but thine animals beseech thee not
to die yet!

Thou wouldst speak, and without trembling, buoyant rather with bliss,
for a great weight and worry would be taken from thee, thou patientest
one!—

‘Now do I die and disappear,’ wouldst thou say, ‘and in a moment I am
nothing. Souls are as mortal as bodies.

But the plexus of causes returneth in which I am intertwined,—it will
again create me! I myself pertain to the causes of the eternal return.

I come again with this sun, with this earth, with this eagle, with this
serpent—NOT to a new life, or a better life, or a similar life:

—I come again eternally to this identical and selfsame life, in its
greatest and its smallest, to teach again the eternal return of all
things,—

—To speak again the word of the great noontide of earth and man, to
announce again to man the Superman.

I have spoken my word. I break down by my word: so willeth mine eternal
fate—as announcer do I succumb!

The hour hath now come for the down-goer to bless himself. Thus—ENDETH
Zarathustra’s down-going.’”—

When the animals had spoken these words they were silent and waited, so
that Zarathustra might say something to them: but Zarathustra did not
hear that they were silent. On the contrary, he lay quietly with closed
eyes like a person sleeping, although he did not sleep; for he communed
just then with his soul. The serpent, however, and the eagle, when they
found him silent in such wise, respected the great stillness around him,
and prudently retired.




LVIII. THE GREAT LONGING.


O my soul, I have taught thee to say “to-day” as “once on a time” and
“formerly,” and to dance thy measure over every Here and There and
Yonder.

O my soul, I delivered thee from all by-places, I brushed down from thee
dust and spiders and twilight.

O my soul, I washed the petty shame and the by-place virtue from thee,
and persuaded thee to stand naked before the eyes of the sun.

With the storm that is called “spirit” did I blow over thy surging
sea; all clouds did I blow away from it; I strangled even the strangler
called “sin.”

O my soul, I gave thee the right to say Nay like the storm, and to say
Yea as the open heaven saith Yea: calm as the light remainest thou, and
now walkest through denying storms.

O my soul, I restored to thee liberty over the created and the
uncreated; and who knoweth, as thou knowest, the voluptuousness of the
future?

O my soul, I taught thee the contempt which doth not come like
worm-eating, the great, the loving contempt, which loveth most where it
contemneth most.

O my soul, I taught thee so to persuade that thou persuadest even the
grounds themselves to thee: like the sun, which persuadeth even the sea
to its height.

O my soul, I have taken from thee all obeying and knee-bending and
homage-paying; I have myself given thee the names, “Change of need” and
“Fate.”

O my soul, I have given thee new names and gay-coloured playthings,
I have called thee “Fate” and “the Circuit of circuits” and “the
Navel-string of time” and “the Azure bell.”

O my soul, to thy domain gave I all wisdom to drink, all new wines, and
also all immemorially old strong wines of wisdom.

O my soul, every sun shed I upon thee, and every night and every silence
and every longing:—then grewest thou up for me as a vine.

O my soul, exuberant and heavy dost thou now stand forth, a vine with
swelling udders and full clusters of brown golden grapes:—

—Filled and weighted by thy happiness, waiting from superabundance, and
yet ashamed of thy waiting.

O my soul, there is nowhere a soul which could be more loving and more
comprehensive and more extensive! Where could future and past be closer
together than with thee?

O my soul, I have given thee everything, and all my hands have become
empty by thee:—and now! Now sayest thou to me, smiling and full of
melancholy: “Which of us oweth thanks?—

—Doth the giver not owe thanks because the receiver received? Is
bestowing not a necessity? Is receiving not—pitying?”—

O my soul, I understand the smiling of thy melancholy: thine
over-abundance itself now stretcheth out longing hands!

Thy fulness looketh forth over raging seas, and seeketh and waiteth: the
longing of over-fulness looketh forth from the smiling heaven of thine
eyes!

And verily, O my soul! Who could see thy smiling and not melt
into tears? The angels themselves melt into tears through the
over-graciousness of thy smiling.

Thy graciousness and over-graciousness, is it which will not complain
and weep: and yet, O my soul, longeth thy smiling for tears, and thy
trembling mouth for sobs.

“Is not all weeping complaining? And all complaining, accusing?” Thus
speakest thou to thyself; and therefore, O my soul, wilt thou rather
smile than pour forth thy grief—

—Than in gushing tears pour forth all thy grief concerning thy
fulness, and concerning the craving of the vine for the vintager and
vintage-knife!

But wilt thou not weep, wilt thou not weep forth thy purple melancholy,
then wilt thou have to SING, O my soul!—Behold, I smile myself, who
foretell thee this:

—Thou wilt have to sing with passionate song, until all seas turn calm
to hearken unto thy longing,—

—Until over calm longing seas the bark glideth, the golden marvel,
around the gold of which all good, bad, and marvellous things frisk:—

—Also many large and small animals, and everything that hath light
marvellous feet, so that it can run on violet-blue paths,—

—Towards the golden marvel, the spontaneous bark, and its master: he,
however, is the vintager who waiteth with the diamond vintage-knife,—

—Thy great deliverer, O my soul, the nameless one—for whom future
songs only will find names! And verily, already hath thy breath the
fragrance of future songs,—

—Already glowest thou and dreamest, already drinkest thou thirstily at
all deep echoing wells of consolation, already reposeth thy melancholy
in the bliss of future songs!—

O my soul, now have I given thee all, and even my last possession, and
all my hands have become empty by thee:—THAT I BADE THEE SING, behold,
that was my last thing to give!

That I bade thee sing,—say now, say: WHICH of us now—oweth thanks?—
Better still, however: sing unto me, sing, O my soul! And let me thank
thee!—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




LIX. THE SECOND DANCE-SONG.


1.

“Into thine eyes gazed I lately, O Life: gold saw I gleam in thy
night-eyes,—my heart stood still with delight:

—A golden bark saw I gleam on darkened waters, a sinking, drinking,
reblinking, golden swing-bark!

At my dance-frantic foot, dost thou cast a glance, a laughing,
questioning, melting, thrown glance:

Twice only movedst thou thy rattle with thy little hands—then did my
feet swing with dance-fury.—

My heels reared aloft, my toes they hearkened,—thee they would know:
hath not the dancer his ear—in his toe!

Unto thee did I spring: then fledst thou back from my bound; and towards
me waved thy fleeing, flying tresses round!

Away from thee did I spring, and from thy snaky tresses: then stoodst
thou there half-turned, and in thine eye caresses.

With crooked glances—dost thou teach me crooked courses; on crooked
courses learn my feet—crafty fancies!

I fear thee near, I love thee far; thy flight allureth me, thy seeking
secureth me:—I suffer, but for thee, what would I not gladly bear!

For thee, whose coldness inflameth, whose hatred misleadeth, whose
flight enchaineth, whose mockery—pleadeth:

—Who would not hate thee, thou great bindress, inwindress, temptress,
seekress, findress! Who would not love thee, thou innocent, impatient,
wind-swift, child-eyed sinner!

Whither pullest thou me now, thou paragon and tomboy? And now foolest
thou me fleeing; thou sweet romp dost annoy!

I dance after thee, I follow even faint traces lonely. Where art thou?
Give me thy hand! Or thy finger only!

Here are caves and thickets: we shall go astray!—Halt! Stand still!
Seest thou not owls and bats in fluttering fray?

Thou bat! Thou owl! Thou wouldst play me foul? Where are we? From the
dogs hast thou learned thus to bark and howl.

Thou gnashest on me sweetly with little white teeth; thine evil eyes
shoot out upon me, thy curly little mane from underneath!

This is a dance over stock and stone: I am the hunter,—wilt thou be my
hound, or my chamois anon?

Now beside me! And quickly, wickedly springing! Now up! And over!—Alas!
I have fallen myself overswinging!

Oh, see me lying, thou arrogant one, and imploring grace! Gladly would I
walk with thee—in some lovelier place!

—In the paths of love, through bushes variegated, quiet, trim! Or there
along the lake, where gold-fishes dance and swim!

Thou art now aweary? There above are sheep and sun-set stripes: is it
not sweet to sleep—the shepherd pipes?

Thou art so very weary? I carry thee thither; let just thine arm sink!
And art thou thirsty—I should have something; but thy mouth would not
like it to drink!—

—Oh, that cursed, nimble, supple serpent and lurking-witch! Where art
thou gone? But in my face do I feel through thy hand, two spots and red
blotches itch!

I am verily weary of it, ever thy sheepish shepherd to be. Thou witch,
if I have hitherto sung unto thee, now shalt THOU—cry unto me!

To the rhythm of my whip shalt thou dance and cry! I forget not my
whip?—Not I!”—

2.

Then did Life answer me thus, and kept thereby her fine ears closed:

“O Zarathustra! Crack not so terribly with thy whip! Thou knowest surely
that noise killeth thought,—and just now there came to me such delicate
thoughts.

We are both of us genuine ne’er-do-wells and ne’er-do-ills. Beyond
good and evil found we our island and our green meadow—we two alone!
Therefore must we be friendly to each other!

And even should we not love each other from the bottom of our
hearts,—must we then have a grudge against each other if we do not love
each other perfectly?

And that I am friendly to thee, and often too friendly, that knowest
thou: and the reason is that I am envious of thy Wisdom. Ah, this mad
old fool, Wisdom!

If thy Wisdom should one day run away from thee, ah! then would also my
love run away from thee quickly.”—

Thereupon did Life look thoughtfully behind and around, and said softly:
“O Zarathustra, thou art not faithful enough to me!

Thou lovest me not nearly so much as thou sayest; I know thou thinkest
of soon leaving me.

There is an old heavy, heavy, booming-clock: it boometh by night up to
thy cave:—

—When thou hearest this clock strike the hours at midnight, then
thinkest thou between one and twelve thereon—

—Thou thinkest thereon, O Zarathustra, I know it—of soon leaving
me!”—

“Yea,” answered I, hesitatingly, “but thou knowest it also”—And I
said something into her ear, in amongst her confused, yellow, foolish
tresses.

“Thou KNOWEST that, O Zarathustra? That knoweth no one—”

And we gazed at each other, and looked at the green meadow o’er which
the cool evening was just passing, and we wept together.—Then, however,
was Life dearer unto me than all my Wisdom had ever been.—

Thus spake Zarathustra.

3.

_One!_

O man! Take heed!

_Two!_

What saith deep midnight’s voice indeed?

_Three!_

“I slept my sleep—

_Four!_

“From deepest dream I’ve woke and plead:—

_Five!_

“The world is deep,

_Six!_

“And deeper than the day could read.

_Seven!_

“Deep is its woe—

_Eight!_

“Joy—deeper still than grief can be:

_Nine!_

“Woe saith: Hence! Go!

_Ten!_

“But joys all want eternity—

_Eleven!_

“Want deep profound eternity!”

_Twelve!_




LX. THE SEVEN SEALS.

(OR THE YE-A AND AMEN LAY.)


1.

If I be a diviner and full of the divining spirit which wandereth on
high mountain-ridges, ‘twixt two seas,—

Wandereth ‘twixt the past and the future as a heavy cloud—hostile to
sultry plains, and to all that is weary and can neither die nor live:

Ready for lightning in its dark bosom, and for the redeeming flash of
light, charged with lightnings which say Yea! which laugh Yea! ready for
divining flashes of lightning:—

—Blessed, however, is he who is thus charged! And verily, long must he
hang like a heavy tempest on the mountain, who shall one day kindle the
light of the future!—

Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity and for the marriage-ring of
rings—the ring of the return?

Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

2.

If ever my wrath hath burst graves, shifted landmarks, or rolled old
shattered tables into precipitous depths:

If ever my scorn hath scattered mouldered words to the winds, and if I
have come like a besom to cross-spiders, and as a cleansing wind to old
charnel-houses:

If ever I have sat rejoicing where old Gods lie buried, world-blessing,
world-loving, beside the monuments of old world-maligners:—

—For even churches and Gods’-graves do I love, if only heaven looketh
through their ruined roofs with pure eyes; gladly do I sit like grass
and red poppies on ruined churches—

Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings—the ring of the return?

Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

3.

If ever a breath hath come to me of the creative breath, and of the
heavenly necessity which compelleth even chances to dance star-dances:

If ever I have laughed with the laughter of the creative lightning,
to which the long thunder of the deed followeth, grumblingly, but
obediently:

If ever I have played dice with the Gods at the divine table of
the earth, so that the earth quaked and ruptured, and snorted forth
fire-streams:—

—For a divine table is the earth, and trembling with new creative
dictums and dice-casts of the Gods:

Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings—the ring of the return?

Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

4.

If ever I have drunk a full draught of the foaming spice- and
confection-bowl in which all things are well mixed:

If ever my hand hath mingled the furthest with the nearest, fire with
spirit, joy with sorrow, and the harshest with the kindest:

If I myself am a grain of the saving salt which maketh everything in the
confection-bowl mix well:—

—For there is a salt which uniteth good with evil; and even the evilest
is worthy, as spicing and as final over-foaming:—

Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings—the ring of the return?

Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

5.

If I be fond of the sea, and all that is sealike, and fondest of it when
it angrily contradicteth me:

If the exploring delight be in me, which impelleth sails to the
undiscovered, if the seafarer’s delight be in my delight:

If ever my rejoicing hath called out: “The shore hath vanished,—now
hath fallen from me the last chain—

The boundless roareth around me, far away sparkle for me space and
time,—well! cheer up! old heart!”—

Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings—the ring of the return?

Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

6.

If my virtue be a dancer’s virtue, and if I have often sprung with both
feet into golden-emerald rapture:

If my wickedness be a laughing wickedness, at home among rose-banks and
hedges of lilies:

—For in laughter is all evil present, but it is sanctified and absolved
by its own bliss:—

And if it be my Alpha and Omega that everything heavy shall become
light, every body a dancer, and every spirit a bird: and verily, that is
my Alpha and Omega!—

Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings—the ring of the return?

Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!

7.

If ever I have spread out a tranquil heaven above me, and have flown
into mine own heaven with mine own pinions:

If I have swum playfully in profound luminous distances, and if my
freedom’s avian wisdom hath come to me:—

—Thus however speaketh avian wisdom:—“Lo, there is no above and no
below! Throw thyself about,—outward, backward, thou light one! Sing!
speak no more!

—Are not all words made for the heavy? Do not all words lie to the
light ones? Sing! speak no more!”—

Oh, how could I not be ardent for Eternity, and for the marriage-ring of
rings—the ring of the return?

Never yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have children,
unless it be this woman whom I love: for I love thee, O Eternity!

FOR I LOVE THEE, O ETERNITY!




FOURTH AND LAST PART.


Ah, where in the world have there been greater follies than with the
pitiful? And what in the world hath caused more suffering than the
follies of the pitiful?

Woe unto all loving ones who have not an elevation which is above their
pity!

Thus spake the devil unto me, once on a time: “Even God hath his hell:
it is his love for man.”

And lately did I hear him say these words: “God is dead: of his pity for
man hath God died.”—ZARATHUSTRA, II., “The Pitiful.”




LXI. THE HONEY SACRIFICE.


—And again passed moons and years over Zarathustra’s soul, and he
heeded it not; his hair, however, became white. One day when he sat on
a stone in front of his cave, and gazed calmly into the distance—one
there gazeth out on the sea, and away beyond sinuous abysses,—then went
his animals thoughtfully round about him, and at last set themselves in
front of him.

“O Zarathustra,” said they, “gazest thou out perhaps for thy
happiness?”—“Of what account is my happiness!” answered he, “I have
long ceased to strive any more for happiness, I strive for my work.”—“O
Zarathustra,” said the animals once more, “that sayest thou as one
who hath overmuch of good things. Liest thou not in a sky-blue lake of
happiness?”—“Ye wags,” answered Zarathustra, and smiled, “how well did
ye choose the simile! But ye know also that my happiness is heavy, and
not like a fluid wave of water: it presseth me and will not leave me,
and is like molten pitch.”—

Then went his animals again thoughtfully around him, and placed
themselves once more in front of him. “O Zarathustra,” said they, “it is
consequently FOR THAT REASON that thou thyself always becometh yellower
and darker, although thy hair looketh white and flaxen? Lo, thou sittest
in thy pitch!”—“What do ye say, mine animals?” said Zarathustra,
laughing; “verily I reviled when I spake of pitch. As it happeneth with
me, so is it with all fruits that turn ripe. It is the HONEY in my veins
that maketh my blood thicker, and also my soul stiller.”—“So will it
be, O Zarathustra,” answered his animals, and pressed up to him; “but
wilt thou not to-day ascend a high mountain? The air is pure, and to-day
one seeth more of the world than ever.”—“Yea, mine animals,” answered
he, “ye counsel admirably and according to my heart: I will to-day
ascend a high mountain! But see that honey is there ready to hand,
yellow, white, good, ice-cool, golden-comb-honey. For know that when
aloft I will make the honey sacrifice.”—

When Zarathustra, however, was aloft on the summit, he sent his animals
home that had accompanied him, and found that he was now alone:—then he
laughed from the bottom of his heart, looked around him, and spake thus:

That I spake of sacrifices and honey-sacrifices, it was merely a ruse
in talking and verily, a useful folly! Here aloft can I now speak freer
than in front of mountain-caves and anchorites’ domestic animals.

What to sacrifice! I squander what is given me, a squanderer with a
thousand hands: how could I call that—sacrificing?

And when I desired honey I only desired bait, and sweet mucus and
mucilage, for which even the mouths of growling bears, and strange,
sulky, evil birds, water:

—The best bait, as huntsmen and fishermen require it. For if the world
be as a gloomy forest of animals, and a pleasure-ground for all wild
huntsmen, it seemeth to me rather—and preferably—a fathomless, rich
sea;

—A sea full of many-hued fishes and crabs, for which even the Gods
might long, and might be tempted to become fishers in it, and casters of
nets,—so rich is the world in wonderful things, great and small!

Especially the human world, the human sea:—towards IT do I now throw
out my golden angle-rod and say: Open up, thou human abyss!

Open up, and throw unto me thy fish and shining crabs! With my best bait
shall I allure to myself to-day the strangest human fish!

—My happiness itself do I throw out into all places far and wide ‘twixt
orient, noontide, and occident, to see if many human fish will not learn
to hug and tug at my happiness;—

Until, biting at my sharp hidden hooks, they have to come up unto MY
height, the motleyest abyss-groundlings, to the wickedest of all fishers
of men.

For THIS am I from the heart and from the beginning—drawing,
hither-drawing, upward-drawing, upbringing; a drawer, a trainer, a
training-master, who not in vain counselled himself once on a time:
“Become what thou art!”

Thus may men now come UP to me; for as yet do I await the signs that it
is time for my down-going; as yet do I not myself go down, as I must do,
amongst men.

Therefore do I here wait, crafty and scornful upon high mountains,
no impatient one, no patient one; rather one who hath even unlearnt
patience,—because he no longer “suffereth.”

For my fate giveth me time: it hath forgotten me perhaps? Or doth it sit
behind a big stone and catch flies?

And verily, I am well disposed to mine eternal fate, because it doth not
hound and hurry me, but leaveth me time for merriment and mischief; so
that I have to-day ascended this high mountain to catch fish.

Did ever any one catch fish upon high mountains? And though it be a
folly what I here seek and do, it is better so than that down below I
should become solemn with waiting, and green and yellow—

—A posturing wrath-snorter with waiting, a holy howl-storm from
the mountains, an impatient one that shouteth down into the valleys:
“Hearken, else I will scourge you with the scourge of God!”

Not that I would have a grudge against such wrathful ones on that
account: they are well enough for laughter to me! Impatient must they
now be, those big alarm-drums, which find a voice now or never!

Myself, however, and my fate—we do not talk to the Present, neither
do we talk to the Never: for talking we have patience and time and more
than time. For one day must it yet come, and may not pass by.

What must one day come and may not pass by? Our great Hazar, that is
to say, our great, remote human-kingdom, the Zarathustra-kingdom of a
thousand years—

How remote may such “remoteness” be? What doth it concern me? But on
that account it is none the less sure unto me—, with both feet stand I
secure on this ground;

—On an eternal ground, on hard primary rock, on this highest, hardest,
primary mountain-ridge, unto which all winds come, as unto the
storm-parting, asking Where? and Whence? and Whither?

Here laugh, laugh, my hearty, healthy wickedness! From high mountains
cast down thy glittering scorn-laughter! Allure for me with thy
glittering the finest human fish!

And whatever belongeth unto ME in all seas, my in-and-for-me in all
things—fish THAT out for me, bring THAT up to me: for that do I wait,
the wickedest of all fish-catchers.

Out! out! my fishing-hook! In and down, thou bait of my happiness! Drip
thy sweetest dew, thou honey of my heart! Bite, my fishing-hook, into
the belly of all black affliction!

Look out, look out, mine eye! Oh, how many seas round about me, what
dawning human futures! And above me—what rosy red stillness! What
unclouded silence!




LXII. THE CRY OF DISTRESS.


The next day sat Zarathustra again on the stone in front of his cave,
whilst his animals roved about in the world outside to bring home new
food,—also new honey: for Zarathustra had spent and wasted the old
honey to the very last particle. When he thus sat, however, with a
stick in his hand, tracing the shadow of his figure on the earth, and
reflecting—verily! not upon himself and his shadow,—all at once he
startled and shrank back: for he saw another shadow beside his own.
And when he hastily looked around and stood up, behold, there stood the
soothsayer beside him, the same whom he had once given to eat and drink
at his table, the proclaimer of the great weariness, who taught: “All is
alike, nothing is worth while, the world is without meaning, knowledge
strangleth.” But his face had changed since then; and when Zarathustra
looked into his eyes, his heart was startled once more: so much evil
announcement and ashy-grey lightnings passed over that countenance.

The soothsayer, who had perceived what went on in Zarathustra’s soul,
wiped his face with his hand, as if he would wipe out the impression;
the same did also Zarathustra. And when both of them had thus silently
composed and strengthened themselves, they gave each other the hand, as
a token that they wanted once more to recognise each other.

“Welcome hither,” said Zarathustra, “thou soothsayer of the great
weariness, not in vain shalt thou once have been my messmate and guest.
Eat and drink also with me to-day, and forgive it that a cheerful old
man sitteth with thee at table!”—“A cheerful old man?” answered the
soothsayer, shaking his head, “but whoever thou art, or wouldst be, O
Zarathustra, thou hast been here aloft the longest time,—in a little
while thy bark shall no longer rest on dry land!”—“Do I then rest
on dry land?”—asked Zarathustra, laughing.—“The waves around thy
mountain,” answered the soothsayer, “rise and rise, the waves of great
distress and affliction: they will soon raise thy bark also and carry
thee away.”—Thereupon was Zarathustra silent and wondered.—“Dost thou
still hear nothing?” continued the soothsayer: “doth it not rush and
roar out of the depth?”—Zarathustra was silent once more and listened:
then heard he a long, long cry, which the abysses threw to one another
and passed on; for none of them wished to retain it: so evil did it
sound.

“Thou ill announcer,” said Zarathustra at last, “that is a cry of
distress, and the cry of a man; it may come perhaps out of a black sea.
But what doth human distress matter to me! My last sin which hath been
reserved for me,—knowest thou what it is called?”

—“PITY!” answered the soothsayer from an overflowing heart, and raised
both his hands aloft—“O Zarathustra, I have come that I may seduce thee
to thy last sin!”—

And hardly had those words been uttered when there sounded the cry
once more, and longer and more alarming than before—also much nearer.
“Hearest thou? Hearest thou, O Zarathustra?” called out the soothsayer,
“the cry concerneth thee, it calleth thee: Come, come, come; it is time,
it is the highest time!”—

Zarathustra was silent thereupon, confused and staggered; at last he
asked, like one who hesitateth in himself: “And who is it that there
calleth me?”

“But thou knowest it, certainly,” answered the soothsayer warmly, “why
dost thou conceal thyself? It is THE HIGHER MAN that crieth for thee!”

“The higher man?” cried Zarathustra, horror-stricken: “what wanteth HE?
What wanteth HE? The higher man! What wanteth he here?”—and his skin
covered with perspiration.

The soothsayer, however, did not heed Zarathustra’s alarm, but listened
and listened in the downward direction. When, however, it had been still
there for a long while, he looked behind, and saw Zarathustra standing
trembling.

“O Zarathustra,” he began, with sorrowful voice, “thou dost not stand
there like one whose happiness maketh him giddy: thou wilt have to dance
lest thou tumble down!

But although thou shouldst dance before me, and leap all thy side-leaps,
no one may say unto me: ‘Behold, here danceth the last joyous man!’

In vain would any one come to this height who sought HIM here: caves
would he find, indeed, and back-caves, hiding-places for hidden ones;
but not lucky mines, nor treasure-chambers, nor new gold-veins of
happiness.

Happiness—how indeed could one find happiness among such buried-alive
and solitary ones! Must I yet seek the last happiness on the Happy
Isles, and far away among forgotten seas?

But all is alike, nothing is worth while, no seeking is of service,
there are no longer any Happy Isles!”—

Thus sighed the soothsayer; with his last sigh, however, Zarathustra
again became serene and assured, like one who hath come out of a deep
chasm into the light. “Nay! Nay! Three times Nay!” exclaimed he with a
strong voice, and stroked his beard—“THAT do I know better! There are
still Happy Isles! Silence THEREON, thou sighing sorrow-sack!

Cease to splash THEREON, thou rain-cloud of the forenoon! Do I not
already stand here wet with thy misery, and drenched like a dog?

Now do I shake myself and run away from thee, that I may again become
dry: thereat mayest thou not wonder! Do I seem to thee discourteous?
Here however is MY court.

But as regards the higher man: well! I shall seek him at once in those
forests: FROM THENCE came his cry. Perhaps he is there hard beset by an
evil beast.

He is in MY domain: therein shall he receive no scath! And verily, there
are many evil beasts about me.”—

With those words Zarathustra turned around to depart. Then said the
soothsayer: “O Zarathustra, thou art a rogue!

I know it well: thou wouldst fain be rid of me! Rather wouldst thou run
into the forest and lay snares for evil beasts!

But what good-will it do thee? In the evening wilt thou have me again:
in thine own cave will I sit, patient and heavy like a block—and wait
for thee!”

“So be it!” shouted back Zarathustra, as he went away: “and what is mine
in my cave belongeth also unto thee, my guest!

Shouldst thou however find honey therein, well! just lick it up, thou
growling bear, and sweeten thy soul! For in the evening we want both to
be in good spirits;

—In good spirits and joyful, because this day hath come to an end! And
thou thyself shalt dance to my lays, as my dancing-bear.

Thou dost not believe this? Thou shakest thy head? Well! Cheer up, old
bear! But I also—am a soothsayer.”

Thus spake Zarathustra.




LXIII. TALK WITH THE KINGS.


1.

Ere Zarathustra had been an hour on his way in the mountains and
forests, he saw all at once a strange procession. Right on the path
which he was about to descend came two kings walking, bedecked with
crowns and purple girdles, and variegated like flamingoes: they drove
before them a laden ass. “What do these kings want in my domain?” said
Zarathustra in astonishment to his heart, and hid himself hastily behind
a thicket. When however the kings approached to him, he said half-aloud,
like one speaking only to himself: “Strange! Strange! How doth this
harmonise? Two kings do I see—and only one ass!”

Thereupon the two kings made a halt; they smiled and looked towards the
spot whence the voice proceeded, and afterwards looked into each other’s
faces. “Such things do we also think among ourselves,” said the king on
the right, “but we do not utter them.”

The king on the left, however, shrugged his shoulders and answered:
“That may perhaps be a goat-herd. Or an anchorite who hath lived too
long among rocks and trees. For no society at all spoileth also good
manners.”

“Good manners?” replied angrily and bitterly the other king: “what
then do we run out of the way of? Is it not ‘good manners’? Our ‘good
society’?

Better, verily, to live among anchorites and goatherds, than with
our gilded, false, over-rouged populace—though it call itself ‘good
society.’

—Though it call itself ‘nobility.’ But there all is false and foul,
above all the blood—thanks to old evil diseases and worse curers.

The best and dearest to me at present is still a sound peasant, coarse,
artful, obstinate and enduring: that is at present the noblest type.

The peasant is at present the best; and the peasant type should be
master! But it is the kingdom of the populace—I no longer allow
anything to be imposed upon me. The populace, however—that meaneth,
hodgepodge.

Populace-hodgepodge: therein is everything mixed with everything, saint
and swindler, gentleman and Jew, and every beast out of Noah’s ark.

Good manners! Everything is false and foul with us. No one knoweth any
longer how to reverence: it is THAT precisely that we run away from.
They are fulsome obtrusive dogs; they gild palm-leaves.

This loathing choketh me, that we kings ourselves have become false,
draped and disguised with the old faded pomp of our ancestors,
show-pieces for the stupidest, the craftiest, and whosoever at present
trafficketh for power.

We ARE NOT the first men—and have nevertheless to STAND FOR them: of
this imposture have we at last become weary and disgusted.

From the rabble have we gone out of the way, from all those bawlers and
scribe-blowflies, from the trader-stench, the ambition-fidgeting, the
bad breath—: fie, to live among the rabble;

—Fie, to stand for the first men among the rabble! Ah, loathing!
Loathing! Loathing! What doth it now matter about us kings!”—

“Thine old sickness seizeth thee,” said here the king on the left, “thy
loathing seizeth thee, my poor brother. Thou knowest, however, that some
one heareth us.”

Immediately thereupon, Zarathustra, who had opened ears and eyes to this
talk, rose from his hiding-place, advanced towards the kings, and thus
began:

“He who hearkeneth unto you, he who gladly hearkeneth unto you, is
called Zarathustra.

I am Zarathustra who once said: ‘What doth it now matter about kings!’
Forgive me; I rejoiced when ye said to each other: ‘What doth it matter
about us kings!’

Here, however, is MY domain and jurisdiction: what may ye be seeking in
my domain? Perhaps, however, ye have FOUND on your way what _I_ seek:
namely, the higher man.”

When the kings heard this, they beat upon their breasts and said with
one voice: “We are recognised!

With the sword of thine utterance severest thou the thickest darkness of
our hearts. Thou hast discovered our distress; for lo! we are on our way
to find the higher man—

—The man that is higher than we, although we are kings. To him do we
convey this ass. For the highest man shall also be the highest lord on
earth.

There is no sorer misfortune in all human destiny, than when the mighty
of the earth are not also the first men. Then everything becometh false
and distorted and monstrous.

And when they are even the last men, and more beast than man, then
riseth and riseth the populace in honour, and at last saith even the
populace-virtue: ‘Lo, I alone am virtue!’”—

What have I just heard? answered Zarathustra. What wisdom in kings! I
am enchanted, and verily, I have already promptings to make a rhyme
thereon:—

—Even if it should happen to be a rhyme not suited for every one’s
ears. I unlearned long ago to have consideration for long ears. Well
then! Well now!

(Here, however, it happened that the ass also found utterance: it said
distinctly and with malevolence, Y-E-A.)

‘Twas once—methinks year one of our blessed Lord,—Drunk without wine,
the Sybil thus deplored:—“How ill things go! Decline! Decline! Ne’er
sank the world so low! Rome now hath turned harlot and harlot-stew,
Rome’s Caesar a beast, and God—hath turned Jew!”

2.

With those rhymes of Zarathustra the kings were delighted; the king on
the right, however, said: “O Zarathustra, how well it was that we set
out to see thee!

For thine enemies showed us thy likeness in their mirror: there lookedst
thou with the grimace of a devil, and sneeringly: so that we were afraid
of thee.

But what good did it do! Always didst thou prick us anew in heart and
ear with thy sayings. Then did we say at last: What doth it matter how
he look!

We must HEAR him; him who teacheth: ‘Ye shall love peace as a means to
new wars, and the short peace more than the long!’

No one ever spake such warlike words: ‘What is good? To be brave is
good. It is the good war that halloweth every cause.’

O Zarathustra, our fathers’ blood stirred in our veins at such words: it
was like the voice of spring to old wine-casks.

When the swords ran among one another like red-spotted serpents, then
did our fathers become fond of life; the sun of every peace seemed to
them languid and lukewarm, the long peace, however, made them ashamed.

How they sighed, our fathers, when they saw on the wall brightly
furbished, dried-up swords! Like those they thirsted for war. For a
sword thirsteth to drink blood, and sparkleth with desire.”—

—When the kings thus discoursed and talked eagerly of the happiness of
their fathers, there came upon Zarathustra no little desire to mock at
their eagerness: for evidently they were very peaceable kings whom he
saw before him, kings with old and refined features. But he restrained
himself. “Well!” said he, “thither leadeth the way, there lieth the
cave of Zarathustra; and this day is to have a long evening! At present,
however, a cry of distress calleth me hastily away from you.

It will honour my cave if kings want to sit and wait in it: but, to be
sure, ye will have to wait long!

Well! What of that! Where doth one at present learn better to wait
than at courts? And the whole virtue of kings that hath remained unto
them—is it not called to-day: ABILITY to wait?”

Thus spake Zarathustra.




LXIV. THE LEECH.


And Zarathustra went thoughtfully on, further and lower down, through
forests and past moory bottoms; as it happeneth, however, to every one
who meditateth upon hard matters, he trod thereby unawares upon a man.
And lo, there spurted into his face all at once a cry of pain, and two
curses and twenty bad invectives, so that in his fright he raised his
stick and also struck the trodden one. Immediately afterwards, however,
he regained his composure, and his heart laughed at the folly he had
just committed.

“Pardon me,” said he to the trodden one, who had got up enraged, and had
seated himself, “pardon me, and hear first of all a parable.

As a wanderer who dreameth of remote things on a lonesome highway,
runneth unawares against a sleeping dog, a dog which lieth in the sun:

—As both of them then start up and snap at each other, like deadly
enemies, those two beings mortally frightened—so did it happen unto us.

And yet! And yet—how little was lacking for them to caress each other,
that dog and that lonesome one! Are they not both—lonesome ones!”

—“Whoever thou art,” said the trodden one, still enraged, “thou
treadest also too nigh me with thy parable, and not only with thy foot!

Lo! am I then a dog?”—And thereupon the sitting one got up, and pulled
his naked arm out of the swamp. For at first he had lain outstretched
on the ground, hidden and indiscernible, like those who lie in wait for
swamp-game.

“But whatever art thou about!” called out Zarathustra in alarm, for he
saw a deal of blood streaming over the naked arm,—“what hath hurt thee?
Hath an evil beast bit thee, thou unfortunate one?”

The bleeding one laughed, still angry, “What matter is it to thee!” said
he, and was about to go on. “Here am I at home and in my province.
Let him question me whoever will: to a dolt, however, I shall hardly
answer.”

“Thou art mistaken,” said Zarathustra sympathetically, and held him
fast; “thou art mistaken. Here thou art not at home, but in my domain,
and therein shall no one receive any hurt.

Call me however what thou wilt—I am who I must be. I call myself
Zarathustra.

Well! Up thither is the way to Zarathustra’s cave: it is not far,—wilt
thou not attend to thy wounds at my home?

It hath gone badly with thee, thou unfortunate one, in this life: first
a beast bit thee, and then—a man trod upon thee!”—

When however the trodden one had heard the name of Zarathustra he was
transformed. “What happeneth unto me!” he exclaimed, “WHO preoccupieth
me so much in this life as this one man, namely Zarathustra, and that
one animal that liveth on blood, the leech?

For the sake of the leech did I lie here by this swamp, like a fisher,
and already had mine outstretched arm been bitten ten times, when there
biteth a still finer leech at my blood, Zarathustra himself!

O happiness! O miracle! Praised be this day which enticed me into the
swamp! Praised be the best, the livest cupping-glass, that at present
liveth; praised be the great conscience-leech Zarathustra!”—

Thus spake the trodden one, and Zarathustra rejoiced at his words and
their refined reverential style. “Who art thou?” asked he, and gave
him his hand, “there is much to clear up and elucidate between us, but
already methinketh pure clear day is dawning.”

“I am THE SPIRITUALLY CONSCIENTIOUS ONE,” answered he who was asked,
“and in matters of the spirit it is difficult for any one to take it
more rigorously, more restrictedly, and more severely than I, except him
from whom I learnt it, Zarathustra himself.

Better know nothing than half-know many things! Better be a fool on
one’s own account, than a sage on other people’s approbation! I—go to
the basis:

—What matter if it be great or small? If it be called swamp or sky?
A handbreadth of basis is enough for me, if it be actually basis and
ground!

—A handbreadth of basis: thereon can one stand. In the true
knowing-knowledge there is nothing great and nothing small.”

“Then thou art perhaps an expert on the leech?” asked Zarathustra; “and
thou investigatest the leech to its ultimate basis, thou conscientious
one?”

“O Zarathustra,” answered the trodden one, “that would be something
immense; how could I presume to do so!

That, however, of which I am master and knower, is the BRAIN of the
leech:—that is MY world!

And it is also a world! Forgive it, however, that my pride here findeth
expression, for here I have not mine equal. Therefore said I: ‘here am I
at home.’

How long have I investigated this one thing, the brain of the leech, so
that here the slippery truth might no longer slip from me! Here is MY
domain!

—For the sake of this did I cast everything else aside, for the sake of
this did everything else become indifferent to me; and close beside my
knowledge lieth my black ignorance.

My spiritual conscience requireth from me that it should be so—that I
should know one thing, and not know all else: they are a loathing unto
me, all the semi-spiritual, all the hazy, hovering, and visionary.

Where mine honesty ceaseth, there am I blind, and want also to be blind.
Where I want to know, however, there want I also to be honest—namely,
severe, rigorous, restricted, cruel and inexorable.

Because THOU once saidest, O Zarathustra: ‘Spirit is life which itself
cutteth into life’;—that led and allured me to thy doctrine. And
verily, with mine own blood have I increased mine own knowledge!”

—“As the evidence indicateth,” broke in Zarathustra; for still was the
blood flowing down on the naked arm of the conscientious one. For there
had ten leeches bitten into it.

“O thou strange fellow, how much doth this very evidence teach
me—namely, thou thyself! And not all, perhaps, might I pour into thy
rigorous ear!

Well then! We part here! But I would fain find thee again. Up thither is
the way to my cave: to-night shalt thou there be my welcome guest!

Fain would I also make amends to thy body for Zarathustra treading upon
thee with his feet: I think about that. Just now, however, a cry of
distress calleth me hastily away from thee.”

Thus spake Zarathustra.




LXV. THE MAGICIAN.


1.

When however Zarathustra had gone round a rock, then saw he on the same
path, not far below him, a man who threw his limbs about like a maniac,
and at last tumbled to the ground on his belly. “Halt!” said then
Zarathustra to his heart, “he there must surely be the higher man, from
him came that dreadful cry of distress,—I will see if I can help him.”
 When, however, he ran to the spot where the man lay on the ground,
he found a trembling old man, with fixed eyes; and in spite of all
Zarathustra’s efforts to lift him and set him again on his feet, it was
all in vain. The unfortunate one, also, did not seem to notice that some
one was beside him; on the contrary, he continually looked around with
moving gestures, like one forsaken and isolated from all the world.
At last, however, after much trembling, and convulsion, and
curling-himself-up, he began to lament thus:

     Who warm’th me, who lov’th me still?
     Give ardent fingers!
     Give heartening charcoal-warmers!
     Prone, outstretched, trembling,
     Like him, half dead and cold, whose feet one warm’th—
     And shaken, ah! by unfamiliar fevers,
     Shivering with sharpened, icy-cold frost-arrows,
     By thee pursued, my fancy!
     Ineffable!  Recondite!  Sore-frightening!
     Thou huntsman ’hind the cloud-banks!
     Now lightning-struck by thee,
     Thou mocking eye that me in darkness watcheth:
     —Thus do I lie,
     Bend myself, twist myself, convulsed
     With all eternal torture,
     And smitten
     By thee, cruellest huntsman,
     Thou unfamiliar—GOD...

     Smite deeper!
     Smite yet once more!
     Pierce through and rend my heart!
     What mean’th this torture
     With dull, indented arrows?
     Why look’st thou hither,
     Of human pain not weary,
     With mischief-loving, godly flash-glances?
     Not murder wilt thou,
     But torture, torture?
     For why—ME torture,
     Thou mischief-loving, unfamiliar God?—

     Ha!  Ha!
     Thou stealest nigh
     In midnight’s gloomy hour?...
     What wilt thou?
     Speak!
     Thou crowdst me, pressest—
     Ha! now far too closely!
     Thou hearst me breathing,
     Thou o’erhearst my heart,
     Thou ever jealous one!
     —Of what, pray, ever jealous?
     Off!  Off!
     For why the ladder?
     Wouldst thou GET IN?
     To heart in-clamber?
     To mine own secretest
     Conceptions in-clamber?
     Shameless one!  Thou unknown one!—Thief!
     What seekst thou by thy stealing?
     What seekst thou by thy hearkening?
     What seekst thou by thy torturing?
     Thou torturer!
     Thou—hangman-God!
     Or shall I, as the mastiffs do,
     Roll me before thee?
     And cringing, enraptured, frantical,
     My tail friendly—waggle!

     In vain!
     Goad further!
     Cruellest goader!
     No dog—thy game just am I,
     Cruellest huntsman!
     Thy proudest of captives,
     Thou robber ’hind the cloud-banks ...
     Speak finally!
     Thou lightning-veiled one!  Thou unknown one!  Speak!
     What wilt thou, highway-ambusher, from—ME?
     What WILT thou, unfamiliar—God?
     What?
     Ransom-gold?
     How much of ransom-gold?
     Solicit much—that bid’th my pride!
     And be concise—that bid’th mine other pride!

     Ha!  Ha!
     ME—wantest thou?  me?
     —Entire?...

     Ha!  Ha!
     And torturest me, fool that thou art,
     Dead-torturest quite my pride?
     Give LOVE to me—who warm’th me still?
     Who lov’th me still?—
     Give ardent fingers,
     Give heartening charcoal-warmers,
     Give me, the lonesomest,
     The ice (ah! seven-fold frozen ice,
     For very enemies,
     For foes, doth make one thirst),
     Give, yield to me,
     Cruellest foe,
     —THYSELF!—

     Away!
     There fled he surely,
     My final, only comrade,
     My greatest foe,
     Mine unfamiliar—
     My hangman-God!...

     —Nay!
     Come thou back!
     WITH all of thy great tortures!
     To me the last of lonesome ones,
     Oh, come thou back!
     All my hot tears in streamlets trickle
     Their course to thee!
     And all my final hearty fervour—
     Up-glow’th to THEE!
     Oh, come thou back,
     Mine unfamiliar God! my PAIN!
     My final bliss!

2.

—Here, however, Zarathustra could no longer restrain himself; he took
his staff and struck the wailer with all his might. “Stop this,” cried
he to him with wrathful laughter, “stop this, thou stage-player! Thou
false coiner! Thou liar from the very heart! I know thee well!

I will soon make warm legs to thee, thou evil magician: I know well
how—to make it hot for such as thou!”

—“Leave off,” said the old man, and sprang up from the ground, “strike
me no more, O Zarathustra! I did it only for amusement!

That kind of thing belongeth to mine art. Thee thyself, I wanted to put
to the proof when I gave this performance. And verily, thou hast well
detected me!

But thou thyself—hast given me no small proof of thyself: thou art
HARD, thou wise Zarathustra! Hard strikest thou with thy ‘truths,’ thy
cudgel forceth from me—THIS truth!”

—“Flatter not,” answered Zarathustra, still excited and frowning,
“thou stage-player from the heart! Thou art false: why speakest thou—of
truth!

Thou peacock of peacocks, thou sea of vanity; WHAT didst thou represent
before me, thou evil magician; WHOM was I meant to believe in when thou
wailedst in such wise?”

“THE PENITENT IN SPIRIT,” said the old man, “it was him—I represented;
thou thyself once devisedst this expression—

—The poet and magician who at last turneth his spirit against himself,
the transformed one who freezeth to death by his bad science and
conscience.

And just acknowledge it: it was long, O Zarathustra, before thou
discoveredst my trick and lie! Thou BELIEVEDST in my distress when thou
heldest my head with both thy hands,—

—I heard thee lament ‘we have loved him too little, loved him too
little!’ Because I so far deceived thee, my wickedness rejoiced in me.”

“Thou mayest have deceived subtler ones than I,” said Zarathustra
sternly. “I am not on my guard against deceivers; I HAVE TO BE without
precaution: so willeth my lot.

Thou, however,—MUST deceive: so far do I know thee! Thou must ever be
equivocal, trivocal, quadrivocal, and quinquivocal! Even what thou hast
now confessed, is not nearly true enough nor false enough for me!

Thou bad false coiner, how couldst thou do otherwise! Thy very malady
wouldst thou whitewash if thou showed thyself naked to thy physician.

Thus didst thou whitewash thy lie before me when thou saidst: ‘I did
so ONLY for amusement!’ There was also SERIOUSNESS therein, thou ART
something of a penitent-in-spirit!

I divine thee well: thou hast become the enchanter of all the world; but
for thyself thou hast no lie or artifice left,—thou art disenchanted to
thyself!

Thou hast reaped disgust as thy one truth. No word in thee is any longer
genuine, but thy mouth is so: that is to say, the disgust that cleaveth
unto thy mouth.”—

—“Who art thou at all!” cried here the old magician with defiant voice,
“who dareth to speak thus unto ME, the greatest man now living?”—and a
green flash shot from his eye at Zarathustra. But immediately after he
changed, and said sadly:

“O Zarathustra, I am weary of it, I am disgusted with mine arts, I am
not GREAT, why do I dissemble! But thou knowest it well—I sought for
greatness!

A great man I wanted to appear, and persuaded many; but the lie hath
been beyond my power. On it do I collapse.

O Zarathustra, everything is a lie in me; but that I collapse—this my
collapsing is GENUINE!”—

“It honoureth thee,” said Zarathustra gloomily, looking down with
sidelong glance, “it honoureth thee that thou soughtest for greatness,
but it betrayeth thee also. Thou art not great.

Thou bad old magician, THAT is the best and the honestest thing I honour
in thee, that thou hast become weary of thyself, and hast expressed it:
‘I am not great.’

THEREIN do I honour thee as a penitent-in-spirit, and although only for
the twinkling of an eye, in that one moment wast thou—genuine.

But tell me, what seekest thou here in MY forests and rocks? And if thou
hast put thyself in MY way, what proof of me wouldst thou have?—

—Wherein didst thou put ME to the test?”

Thus spake Zarathustra, and his eyes sparkled. But the old magician kept
silence for a while; then said he: “Did I put thee to the test? I—seek
only.

O Zarathustra, I seek a genuine one, a right one, a simple one, an
unequivocal one, a man of perfect honesty, a vessel of wisdom, a saint
of knowledge, a great man!

Knowest thou it not, O Zarathustra? I SEEK ZARATHUSTRA.”

—And here there arose a long silence between them: Zarathustra,
however, became profoundly absorbed in thought, so that he shut his
eyes. But afterwards coming back to the situation, he grasped the hand
of the magician, and said, full of politeness and policy:

“Well! Up thither leadeth the way, there is the cave of Zarathustra. In
it mayest thou seek him whom thou wouldst fain find.

And ask counsel of mine animals, mine eagle and my serpent: they shall
help thee to seek. My cave however is large.

I myself, to be sure—I have as yet seen no great man. That which is
great, the acutest eye is at present insensible to it. It is the kingdom
of the populace.

Many a one have I found who stretched and inflated himself, and the
people cried: ‘Behold; a great man!’ But what good do all bellows do!
The wind cometh out at last.

At last bursteth the frog which hath inflated itself too long: then
cometh out the wind. To prick a swollen one in the belly, I call good
pastime. Hear that, ye boys!

Our to-day is of the populace: who still KNOWETH what is great and what
is small! Who could there seek successfully for greatness! A fool only:
it succeedeth with fools.

Thou seekest for great men, thou strange fool? Who TAUGHT that to thee?
Is to-day the time for it? Oh, thou bad seeker, why dost thou—tempt
me?”—

Thus spake Zarathustra, comforted in his heart, and went laughing on his
way.




LXVI. OUT OF SERVICE.


Not long, however, after Zarathustra had freed himself from the
magician, he again saw a person sitting beside the path which he
followed, namely a tall, black man, with a haggard, pale countenance:
THIS MAN grieved him exceedingly. “Alas,” said he to his heart, “there
sitteth disguised affliction; methinketh he is of the type of the
priests: what do THEY want in my domain?

What! Hardly have I escaped from that magician, and must another
necromancer again run across my path,—

—Some sorcerer with laying-on-of-hands, some sombre wonder-worker by
the grace of God, some anointed world-maligner, whom, may the devil
take!

But the devil is never at the place which would be his right place: he
always cometh too late, that cursed dwarf and club-foot!”—

Thus cursed Zarathustra impatiently in his heart, and considered how
with averted look he might slip past the black man. But behold, it came
about otherwise. For at the same moment had the sitting one already
perceived him; and not unlike one whom an unexpected happiness
overtaketh, he sprang to his feet, and went straight towards
Zarathustra.

“Whoever thou art, thou traveller,” said he, “help a strayed one, a
seeker, an old man, who may here easily come to grief!

The world here is strange to me, and remote; wild beasts also did I hear
howling; and he who could have given me protection—he is himself no
more.

I was seeking the pious man, a saint and an anchorite, who, alone in his
forest, had not yet heard of what all the world knoweth at present.”

“WHAT doth all the world know at present?” asked Zarathustra. “Perhaps
that the old God no longer liveth, in whom all the world once believed?”

“Thou sayest it,” answered the old man sorrowfully. “And I served that
old God until his last hour.

Now, however, am I out of service, without master, and yet not free;
likewise am I no longer merry even for an hour, except it be in
recollections.

Therefore did I ascend into these mountains, that I might finally have
a festival for myself once more, as becometh an old pope and
church-father: for know it, that I am the last pope!—a festival of
pious recollections and divine services.

Now, however, is he himself dead, the most pious of men, the saint in
the forest, who praised his God constantly with singing and mumbling.

He himself found I no longer when I found his cot—but two wolves found
I therein, which howled on account of his death,—for all animals loved
him. Then did I haste away.

Had I thus come in vain into these forests and mountains? Then did my
heart determine that I should seek another, the most pious of all
those who believe not in God—, my heart determined that I should seek
Zarathustra!”

Thus spake the hoary man, and gazed with keen eyes at him who stood
before him. Zarathustra however seized the hand of the old pope and
regarded it a long while with admiration.

“Lo! thou venerable one,” said he then, “what a fine and long hand! That
is the hand of one who hath ever dispensed blessings. Now, however, doth
it hold fast him whom thou seekest, me, Zarathustra.

It is I, the ungodly Zarathustra, who saith: ‘Who is ungodlier than I,
that I may enjoy his teaching?’”—

Thus spake Zarathustra, and penetrated with his glances the thoughts and
arrear-thoughts of the old pope. At last the latter began:

“He who most loved and possessed him hath now also lost him most—:

—Lo, I myself am surely the most godless of us at present? But who
could rejoice at that!”—

—“Thou servedst him to the last?” asked Zarathustra thoughtfully, after
a deep silence, “thou knowest HOW he died? Is it true what they say,
that sympathy choked him;

—That he saw how MAN hung on the cross, and could not endure it;—that
his love to man became his hell, and at last his death?”—

The old pope however did not answer, but looked aside timidly, with a
painful and gloomy expression.

“Let him go,” said Zarathustra, after prolonged meditation, still
looking the old man straight in the eye.

“Let him go, he is gone. And though it honoureth thee that thou speakest
only in praise of this dead one, yet thou knowest as well as I WHO he
was, and that he went curious ways.”

“To speak before three eyes,” said the old pope cheerfully (he was blind
of one eye), “in divine matters I am more enlightened than Zarathustra
himself—and may well be so.

My love served him long years, my will followed all his will. A good
servant, however, knoweth everything, and many a thing even which a
master hideth from himself.

He was a hidden God, full of secrecy. Verily, he did not come by his
son otherwise than by secret ways. At the door of his faith standeth
adultery.

Whoever extolleth him as a God of love, doth not think highly enough of
love itself. Did not that God want also to be judge? But the loving one
loveth irrespective of reward and requital.

When he was young, that God out of the Orient, then was he harsh and
revengeful, and built himself a hell for the delight of his favourites.

At last, however, he became old and soft and mellow and pitiful,
more like a grandfather than a father, but most like a tottering old
grandmother.

There did he sit shrivelled in his chimney-corner, fretting on account
of his weak legs, world-weary, will-weary, and one day he suffocated of
his all-too-great pity.”—

“Thou old pope,” said here Zarathustra interposing, “hast thou seen THAT
with thine eyes? It could well have happened in that way: in that way,
AND also otherwise. When Gods die they always die many kinds of death.

Well! At all events, one way or other—he is gone! He was counter to the
taste of mine ears and eyes; worse than that I should not like to say
against him.

I love everything that looketh bright and speaketh honestly. But
he—thou knowest it, forsooth, thou old priest, there was something of
thy type in him, the priest-type—he was equivocal.

He was also indistinct. How he raged at us, this wrath-snorter, because
we understood him badly! But why did he not speak more clearly?

And if the fault lay in our ears, why did he give us ears that heard him
badly? If there was dirt in our ears, well! who put it in them?

Too much miscarried with him, this potter who had not learned
thoroughly! That he took revenge on his pots and creations, however,
because they turned out badly—that was a sin against GOOD TASTE.

There is also good taste in piety: THIS at last said: ‘Away with SUCH
a God! Better to have no God, better to set up destiny on one’s own
account, better to be a fool, better to be God oneself!’”

—“What do I hear!” said then the old pope, with intent ears; “O
Zarathustra, thou art more pious than thou believest, with such an
unbelief! Some God in thee hath converted thee to thine ungodliness.

Is it not thy piety itself which no longer letteth thee believe in a
God? And thine over-great honesty will yet lead thee even beyond good
and evil!

Behold, what hath been reserved for thee? Thou hast eyes and hands and
mouth, which have been predestined for blessing from eternity. One doth
not bless with the hand alone.

Nigh unto thee, though thou professest to be the ungodliest one, I feel
a hale and holy odour of long benedictions: I feel glad and grieved
thereby.

Let me be thy guest, O Zarathustra, for a single night! Nowhere on earth
shall I now feel better than with thee!”—

“Amen! So shall it be!” said Zarathustra, with great astonishment; “up
thither leadeth the way, there lieth the cave of Zarathustra.

Gladly, forsooth, would I conduct thee thither myself, thou venerable
one; for I love all pious men. But now a cry of distress calleth me
hastily away from thee.

In my domain shall no one come to grief; my cave is a good haven. And
best of all would I like to put every sorrowful one again on firm land
and firm legs.

Who, however, could take THY melancholy off thy shoulders? For that I am
too weak. Long, verily, should we have to wait until some one re-awoke
thy God for thee.

For that old God liveth no more: he is indeed dead.”—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




LXVII. THE UGLIEST MAN.


—And again did Zarathustra’s feet run through mountains and forests,
and his eyes sought and sought, but nowhere was he to be seen whom they
wanted to see—the sorely distressed sufferer and crier. On the whole
way, however, he rejoiced in his heart and was full of gratitude. “What
good things,” said he, “hath this day given me, as amends for its bad
beginning! What strange interlocutors have I found!

At their words will I now chew a long while as at good corn; small
shall my teeth grind and crush them, until they flow like milk into my
soul!”—

When, however, the path again curved round a rock, all at once the
landscape changed, and Zarathustra entered into a realm of death. Here
bristled aloft black and red cliffs, without any grass, tree, or bird’s
voice. For it was a valley which all animals avoided, even the beasts of
prey, except that a species of ugly, thick, green serpent came here to
die when they became old. Therefore the shepherds called this valley:
“Serpent-death.”

Zarathustra, however, became absorbed in dark recollections, for it
seemed to him as if he had once before stood in this valley. And much
heaviness settled on his mind, so that he walked slowly and always more
slowly, and at last stood still. Then, however, when he opened his eyes,
he saw something sitting by the wayside shaped like a man, and hardly
like a man, something nondescript. And all at once there came over
Zarathustra a great shame, because he had gazed on such a thing.
Blushing up to the very roots of his white hair, he turned aside his
glance, and raised his foot that he might leave this ill-starred place.
Then, however, became the dead wilderness vocal: for from the ground a
noise welled up, gurgling and rattling, as water gurgleth and rattleth
at night through stopped-up water-pipes; and at last it turned into
human voice and human speech:—it sounded thus:

“Zarathustra! Zarathustra! Read my riddle! Say, say! WHAT IS THE REVENGE
ON THE WITNESS?

I entice thee back; here is smooth ice! See to it, see to it, that thy
pride doth not here break its legs!

Thou thinkest thyself wise, thou proud Zarathustra! Read then the
riddle, thou hard nut-cracker,—the riddle that I am! Say then: who am
_I_!”

—When however Zarathustra had heard these words,—what think ye then
took place in his soul? PITY OVERCAME HIM; and he sank down all at
once, like an oak that hath long withstood many tree-fellers,—heavily,
suddenly, to the terror even of those who meant to fell it. But
immediately he got up again from the ground, and his countenance became
stern.

“I know thee well,” said he, with a brazen voice, “THOU ART THE MURDERER
OF GOD! Let me go.

Thou couldst not ENDURE him who beheld THEE,—who ever beheld thee
through and through, thou ugliest man. Thou tookest revenge on this
witness!”

Thus spake Zarathustra and was about to go; but the nondescript grasped
at a corner of his garment and began anew to gurgle and seek for words.
“Stay,” said he at last—

—“Stay! Do not pass by! I have divined what axe it was that struck thee
to the ground: hail to thee, O Zarathustra, that thou art again upon thy
feet!

Thou hast divined, I know it well, how the man feeleth who killed
him,—the murderer of God. Stay! Sit down here beside me; it is not to
no purpose.

To whom would I go but unto thee? Stay, sit down! Do not however look at
me! Honour thus—mine ugliness!

They persecute me: now art THOU my last refuge. NOT with their hatred,
NOT with their bailiffs;—Oh, such persecution would I mock at, and be
proud and cheerful!

Hath not all success hitherto been with the well-persecuted ones? And
he who persecuteth well learneth readily to be OBSEQUENT—when once he
is—put behind! But it is their PITY—

—Their pity is it from which I flee away and flee to thee. O
Zarathustra, protect me, thou, my last refuge, thou sole one who
divinedst me:

—Thou hast divined how the man feeleth who killed HIM. Stay! And if
thou wilt go, thou impatient one, go not the way that I came. THAT way
is bad.

Art thou angry with me because I have already racked language too long?
Because I have already counselled thee? But know that it is I, the
ugliest man,

—Who have also the largest, heaviest feet. Where _I_ have gone, the way
is bad. I tread all paths to death and destruction.

But that thou passedst me by in silence, that thou blushedst—I saw it
well: thereby did I know thee as Zarathustra.

Every one else would have thrown to me his alms, his pity, in look and
speech. But for that—I am not beggar enough: that didst thou divine.

For that I am too RICH, rich in what is great, frightful, ugliest, most
unutterable! Thy shame, O Zarathustra, HONOURED me!

With difficulty did I get out of the crowd of the pitiful,—that I might
find the only one who at present teacheth that ‘pity is obtrusive’—
thyself, O Zarathustra!

—Whether it be the pity of a God, or whether it be human pity, it is
offensive to modesty. And unwillingness to help may be nobler than the
virtue that rusheth to do so.

THAT however—namely, pity—is called virtue itself at present by
all petty people:—they have no reverence for great misfortune, great
ugliness, great failure.

Beyond all these do I look, as a dog looketh over the backs of thronging
flocks of sheep. They are petty, good-wooled, good-willed, grey people.

As the heron looketh contemptuously at shallow pools, with backward-bent
head, so do I look at the throng of grey little waves and wills and
souls.

Too long have we acknowledged them to be right, those petty people: SO
we have at last given them power as well;—and now do they teach that
‘good is only what petty people call good.’

And ‘truth’ is at present what the preacher spake who himself sprang
from them, that singular saint and advocate of the petty people, who
testified of himself: ‘I—am the truth.’

That immodest one hath long made the petty people greatly puffed up,—he
who taught no small error when he taught: ‘I—am the truth.’

Hath an immodest one ever been answered more courteously?—Thou,
however, O Zarathustra, passedst him by, and saidst: ‘Nay! Nay! Three
times Nay!’

Thou warnedst against his error; thou warnedst—the first to do
so—against pity:—not every one, not none, but thyself and thy type.

Thou art ashamed of the shame of the great sufferer; and verily when
thou sayest: ‘From pity there cometh a heavy cloud; take heed, ye men!’

—When thou teachest: ‘All creators are hard, all great love is beyond
their pity:’ O Zarathustra, how well versed dost thou seem to me in
weather-signs!

Thou thyself, however,—warn thyself also against THY pity! For many are
on their way to thee, many suffering, doubting, despairing, drowning,
freezing ones—

I warn thee also against myself. Thou hast read my best, my worst
riddle, myself, and what I have done. I know the axe that felleth thee.

But he—HAD TO die: he looked with eyes which beheld EVERYTHING,—he
beheld men’s depths and dregs, all his hidden ignominy and ugliness.

His pity knew no modesty: he crept into my dirtiest corners. This most
prying, over-intrusive, over-pitiful one had to die.

He ever beheld ME: on such a witness I would have revenge—or not live
myself.

The God who beheld everything, AND ALSO MAN: that God had to die! Man
cannot ENDURE it that such a witness should live.”

Thus spake the ugliest man. Zarathustra however got up, and prepared to
go on: for he felt frozen to the very bowels.

“Thou nondescript,” said he, “thou warnedst me against thy path. As
thanks for it I praise mine to thee. Behold, up thither is the cave of
Zarathustra.

My cave is large and deep and hath many corners; there findeth he
that is most hidden his hiding-place. And close beside it, there are
a hundred lurking-places and by-places for creeping, fluttering, and
hopping creatures.

Thou outcast, who hast cast thyself out, thou wilt not live amongst men
and men’s pity? Well then, do like me! Thus wilt thou learn also from
me; only the doer learneth.

And talk first and foremost to mine animals! The proudest animal and the
wisest animal—they might well be the right counsellors for us both!”—

Thus spake Zarathustra and went his way, more thoughtfully and slowly
even than before: for he asked himself many things, and hardly knew what
to answer.

“How poor indeed is man,” thought he in his heart, “how ugly, how
wheezy, how full of hidden shame!

They tell me that man loveth himself. Ah, how great must that self-love
be! How much contempt is opposed to it!

Even this man hath loved himself, as he hath despised himself,—a great
lover methinketh he is, and a great despiser.

No one have I yet found who more thoroughly despised himself: even THAT
is elevation. Alas, was THIS perhaps the higher man whose cry I heard?

I love the great despisers. Man is something that hath to be
surpassed.”—




LXVIII. THE VOLUNTARY BEGGAR.


When Zarathustra had left the ugliest man, he was chilled and felt
lonesome: for much coldness and lonesomeness came over his spirit, so
that even his limbs became colder thereby. When, however, he wandered
on and on, uphill and down, at times past green meadows, though also
sometimes over wild stony couches where formerly perhaps an impatient
brook had made its bed, then he turned all at once warmer and heartier
again.

“What hath happened unto me?” he asked himself, “something warm and
living quickeneth me; it must be in the neighbourhood.

Already am I less alone; unconscious companions and brethren rove around
me; their warm breath toucheth my soul.”

When, however, he spied about and sought for the comforters of his
lonesomeness, behold, there were kine there standing together on an
eminence, whose proximity and smell had warmed his heart. The kine,
however, seemed to listen eagerly to a speaker, and took no heed of him
who approached. When, however, Zarathustra was quite nigh unto them,
then did he hear plainly that a human voice spake in the midst of the
kine, and apparently all of them had turned their heads towards the
speaker.

Then ran Zarathustra up speedily and drove the animals aside; for he
feared that some one had here met with harm, which the pity of the
kine would hardly be able to relieve. But in this he was deceived; for
behold, there sat a man on the ground who seemed to be persuading
the animals to have no fear of him, a peaceable man and
Preacher-on-the-Mount, out of whose eyes kindness itself preached. “What
dost thou seek here?” called out Zarathustra in astonishment.

“What do I here seek?” answered he: “the same that thou seekest, thou
mischief-maker; that is to say, happiness upon earth.

To that end, however, I would fain learn of these kine. For I tell thee
that I have already talked half a morning unto them, and just now were
they about to give me their answer. Why dost thou disturb them?

Except we be converted and become as kine, we shall in no wise enter
into the kingdom of heaven. For we ought to learn from them one thing:
ruminating.

And verily, although a man should gain the whole world, and yet not
learn one thing, ruminating, what would it profit him! He would not be
rid of his affliction,

—His great affliction: that, however, is at present called DISGUST. Who
hath not at present his heart, his mouth and his eyes full of disgust?
Thou also! Thou also! But behold these kine!”—

Thus spake the Preacher-on-the-Mount, and turned then his own look
towards Zarathustra—for hitherto it had rested lovingly on the kine—:
then, however, he put on a different expression. “Who is this with whom
I talk?” he exclaimed frightened, and sprang up from the ground.

“This is the man without disgust, this is Zarathustra himself, the
surmounter of the great disgust, this is the eye, this is the mouth,
this is the heart of Zarathustra himself.”

And whilst he thus spake he kissed with o’erflowing eyes the hands
of him with whom he spake, and behaved altogether like one to whom a
precious gift and jewel hath fallen unawares from heaven. The kine,
however, gazed at it all and wondered.

“Speak not of me, thou strange one; thou amiable one!” said Zarathustra,
and restrained his affection, “speak to me firstly of thyself! Art thou
not the voluntary beggar who once cast away great riches,—

—Who was ashamed of his riches and of the rich, and fled to the poorest
to bestow upon them his abundance and his heart? But they received him
not.”

“But they received me not,” said the voluntary beggar, “thou knowest it,
forsooth. So I went at last to the animals and to those kine.”

“Then learnedst thou,” interrupted Zarathustra, “how much harder it is
to give properly than to take properly, and that bestowing well is an
ART—the last, subtlest master-art of kindness.”

“Especially nowadays,” answered the voluntary beggar: “at present, that
is to say, when everything low hath become rebellious and exclusive and
haughty in its manner—in the manner of the populace.

For the hour hath come, thou knowest it forsooth, for the great, evil,
long, slow mob-and-slave-insurrection: it extendeth and extendeth!

Now doth it provoke the lower classes, all benevolence and petty giving;
and the over-rich may be on their guard!

Whoever at present drip, like bulgy bottles out of all-too-small
necks:—of such bottles at present one willingly breaketh the necks.

Wanton avidity, bilious envy, careworn revenge, populace-pride: all
these struck mine eye. It is no longer true that the poor are blessed.
The kingdom of heaven, however, is with the kine.”

“And why is it not with the rich?” asked Zarathustra temptingly, while
he kept back the kine which sniffed familiarly at the peaceful one.

“Why dost thou tempt me?” answered the other. “Thou knowest it thyself
better even than I. What was it drove me to the poorest, O Zarathustra?
Was it not my disgust at the richest?

—At the culprits of riches, with cold eyes and rank thoughts, who pick
up profit out of all kinds of rubbish—at this rabble that stinketh to
heaven,

—At this gilded, falsified populace, whose fathers were pickpockets,
or carrion-crows, or rag-pickers, with wives compliant, lewd and
forgetful:—for they are all of them not far different from harlots—

Populace above, populace below! What are ‘poor’ and ‘rich’ at present!
That distinction did I unlearn,—then did I flee away further and ever
further, until I came to those kine.”

Thus spake the peaceful one, and puffed himself and perspired with
his words: so that the kine wondered anew. Zarathustra, however, kept
looking into his face with a smile, all the time the man talked so
severely—and shook silently his head.

“Thou doest violence to thyself, thou Preacher-on-the-Mount, when thou
usest such severe words. For such severity neither thy mouth nor thine
eye have been given thee.

Nor, methinketh, hath thy stomach either: unto IT all such rage and
hatred and foaming-over is repugnant. Thy stomach wanteth softer things:
thou art not a butcher.

Rather seemest thou to me a plant-eater and a root-man. Perhaps thou
grindest corn. Certainly, however, thou art averse to fleshly joys, and
thou lovest honey.”

“Thou hast divined me well,” answered the voluntary beggar, with
lightened heart. “I love honey, I also grind corn; for I have sought out
what tasteth sweetly and maketh pure breath:

—Also what requireth a long time, a day’s-work and a mouth’s-work for
gentle idlers and sluggards.

Furthest, to be sure, have those kine carried it: they have devised
ruminating and lying in the sun. They also abstain from all heavy
thoughts which inflate the heart.”

—“Well!” said Zarathustra, “thou shouldst also see MINE animals, mine
eagle and my serpent,—their like do not at present exist on earth.

Behold, thither leadeth the way to my cave: be to-night its guest. And
talk to mine animals of the happiness of animals,—

—Until I myself come home. For now a cry of distress calleth me hastily
away from thee. Also, shouldst thou find new honey with me, ice-cold,
golden-comb-honey, eat it!

Now, however, take leave at once of thy kine, thou strange one! thou
amiable one! though it be hard for thee. For they are thy warmest
friends and preceptors!”—

—“One excepted, whom I hold still dearer,” answered the voluntary
beggar. “Thou thyself art good, O Zarathustra, and better even than a
cow!”

“Away, away with thee! thou evil flatterer!” cried Zarathustra
mischievously, “why dost thou spoil me with such praise and
flattery-honey?

“Away, away from me!” cried he once more, and heaved his stick at the
fond beggar, who, however, ran nimbly away.




LXIX. THE SHADOW.


Scarcely however was the voluntary beggar gone in haste, and Zarathustra
again alone, when he heard behind him a new voice which called out:
“Stay! Zarathustra! Do wait! It is myself, forsooth, O Zarathustra,
myself, thy shadow!” But Zarathustra did not wait; for a sudden
irritation came over him on account of the crowd and the crowding in his
mountains. “Whither hath my lonesomeness gone?” spake he.

“It is verily becoming too much for me; these mountains swarm; my
kingdom is no longer of THIS world; I require new mountains.

My shadow calleth me? What matter about my shadow! Let it run after me!
I—run away from it.”

Thus spake Zarathustra to his heart and ran away. But the one behind
followed after him, so that immediately there were three runners,
one after the other—namely, foremost the voluntary beggar, then
Zarathustra, and thirdly, and hindmost, his shadow. But not long had
they run thus when Zarathustra became conscious of his folly, and shook
off with one jerk all his irritation and detestation.

“What!” said he, “have not the most ludicrous things always happened to
us old anchorites and saints?

Verily, my folly hath grown big in the mountains! Now do I hear six old
fools’ legs rattling behind one another!

But doth Zarathustra need to be frightened by his shadow? Also,
methinketh that after all it hath longer legs than mine.”

Thus spake Zarathustra, and, laughing with eyes and entrails, he stood
still and turned round quickly—and behold, he almost thereby threw his
shadow and follower to the ground, so closely had the latter followed at
his heels, and so weak was he. For when Zarathustra scrutinised him
with his glance he was frightened as by a sudden apparition, so slender,
swarthy, hollow and worn-out did this follower appear.

“Who art thou?” asked Zarathustra vehemently, “what doest thou here? And
why callest thou thyself my shadow? Thou art not pleasing unto me.”

“Forgive me,” answered the shadow, “that it is I; and if I please thee
not—well, O Zarathustra! therein do I admire thee and thy good taste.

A wanderer am I, who have walked long at thy heels; always on the way,
but without a goal, also without a home: so that verily, I lack little
of being the eternally Wandering Jew, except that I am not eternal and
not a Jew.

What? Must I ever be on the way? Whirled by every wind, unsettled,
driven about? O earth, thou hast become too round for me!

On every surface have I already sat, like tired dust have I fallen
asleep on mirrors and window-panes: everything taketh from me, nothing
giveth; I become thin—I am almost equal to a shadow.

After thee, however, O Zarathustra, did I fly and hie longest; and
though I hid myself from thee, I was nevertheless thy best shadow:
wherever thou hast sat, there sat I also.

With thee have I wandered about in the remotest, coldest worlds, like a
phantom that voluntarily haunteth winter roofs and snows.

With thee have I pushed into all the forbidden, all the worst and the
furthest: and if there be anything of virtue in me, it is that I have
had no fear of any prohibition.

With thee have I broken up whatever my heart revered; all
boundary-stones and statues have I o’erthrown; the most dangerous wishes
did I pursue,—verily, beyond every crime did I once go.

With thee did I unlearn the belief in words and worths and in great
names. When the devil casteth his skin, doth not his name also fall
away? It is also skin. The devil himself is perhaps—skin.

‘Nothing is true, all is permitted’: so said I to myself. Into the
coldest water did I plunge with head and heart. Ah, how oft did I stand
there naked on that account, like a red crab!

Ah, where have gone all my goodness and all my shame and all my belief
in the good! Ah, where is the lying innocence which I once possessed,
the innocence of the good and of their noble lies!

Too oft, verily, did I follow close to the heels of truth: then did it
kick me on the face. Sometimes I meant to lie, and behold! then only did
I hit—the truth.

Too much hath become clear unto me: now it doth not concern me any more.
Nothing liveth any longer that I love,—how should I still love myself?

‘To live as I incline, or not to live at all’: so do I wish; so wisheth
also the holiest. But alas! how have _I_ still—inclination?

Have _I_—still a goal? A haven towards which MY sail is set?

A good wind? Ah, he only who knoweth WHITHER he saileth, knoweth what
wind is good, and a fair wind for him.

What still remaineth to me? A heart weary and flippant; an unstable
will; fluttering wings; a broken backbone.

This seeking for MY home: O Zarathustra, dost thou know that this
seeking hath been MY home-sickening; it eateth me up.

‘WHERE is—MY home?’ For it do I ask and seek, and have sought, but
have not found it. O eternal everywhere, O eternal nowhere, O
eternal—in-vain!”

Thus spake the shadow, and Zarathustra’s countenance lengthened at his
words. “Thou art my shadow!” said he at last sadly.

“Thy danger is not small, thou free spirit and wanderer! Thou hast had a
bad day: see that a still worse evening doth not overtake thee!

To such unsettled ones as thou, seemeth at last even a prisoner blessed.
Didst thou ever see how captured criminals sleep? They sleep quietly,
they enjoy their new security.

Beware lest in the end a narrow faith capture thee, a hard, rigorous
delusion! For now everything that is narrow and fixed seduceth and
tempteth thee.

Thou hast lost thy goal. Alas, how wilt thou forego and forget that
loss? Thereby—hast thou also lost thy way!

Thou poor rover and rambler, thou tired butterfly! wilt thou have a rest
and a home this evening? Then go up to my cave!

Thither leadeth the way to my cave. And now will I run quickly away from
thee again. Already lieth as it were a shadow upon me.

I will run alone, so that it may again become bright around me.
Therefore must I still be a long time merrily upon my legs. In the
evening, however, there will be—dancing with me!”—

Thus spake Zarathustra.




LXX. NOONTIDE.


—And Zarathustra ran and ran, but he found no one else, and was alone
and ever found himself again; he enjoyed and quaffed his solitude, and
thought of good things—for hours. About the hour of noontide, however,
when the sun stood exactly over Zarathustra’s head, he passed an old,
bent and gnarled tree, which was encircled round by the ardent love of
a vine, and hidden from itself; from this there hung yellow grapes in
abundance, confronting the wanderer. Then he felt inclined to quench a
little thirst, and to break off for himself a cluster of grapes. When,
however, he had already his arm outstretched for that purpose, he felt
still more inclined for something else—namely, to lie down beside the
tree at the hour of perfect noontide and sleep.

This Zarathustra did; and no sooner had he laid himself on the ground in
the stillness and secrecy of the variegated grass, than he had forgotten
his little thirst, and fell asleep. For as the proverb of Zarathustra
saith: “One thing is more necessary than the other.” Only that his eyes
remained open:—for they never grew weary of viewing and admiring the
tree and the love of the vine. In falling asleep, however, Zarathustra
spake thus to his heart:

“Hush! Hush! Hath not the world now become perfect? What hath happened
unto me?

As a delicate wind danceth invisibly upon parqueted seas, light,
feather-light, so—danceth sleep upon me.

No eye doth it close to me, it leaveth my soul awake. Light is it,
verily, feather-light.

It persuadeth me, I know not how, it toucheth me inwardly with a
caressing hand, it constraineth me. Yea, it constraineth me, so that my
soul stretcheth itself out:—

—How long and weary it becometh, my strange soul! Hath a seventh-day
evening come to it precisely at noontide? Hath it already wandered too
long, blissfully, among good and ripe things?

It stretcheth itself out, long—longer! it lieth still, my strange
soul. Too many good things hath it already tasted; this golden sadness
oppresseth it, it distorteth its mouth.

—As a ship that putteth into the calmest cove:—it now draweth up to
the land, weary of long voyages and uncertain seas. Is not the land more
faithful?

As such a ship huggeth the shore, tuggeth the shore:—then it sufficeth
for a spider to spin its thread from the ship to the land. No stronger
ropes are required there.

As such a weary ship in the calmest cove, so do I also now repose, nigh
to the earth, faithful, trusting, waiting, bound to it with the lightest
threads.

O happiness! O happiness! Wilt thou perhaps sing, O my soul? Thou liest
in the grass. But this is the secret, solemn hour, when no shepherd
playeth his pipe.

Take care! Hot noontide sleepeth on the fields. Do not sing! Hush! The
world is perfect.

Do not sing, thou prairie-bird, my soul! Do not even whisper! Lo—hush!
The old noontide sleepeth, it moveth its mouth: doth it not just now
drink a drop of happiness—

—An old brown drop of golden happiness, golden wine? Something whisketh
over it, its happiness laugheth. Thus—laugheth a God. Hush!—

—‘For happiness, how little sufficeth for happiness!’ Thus spake I
once and thought myself wise. But it was a blasphemy: THAT have I now
learned. Wise fools speak better.

The least thing precisely, the gentlest thing, the lightest thing, a
lizard’s rustling, a breath, a whisk, an eye-glance—LITTLE maketh up
the BEST happiness. Hush!

—What hath befallen me: Hark! Hath time flown away? Do I not fall? Have
I not fallen—hark! into the well of eternity?

—What happeneth to me? Hush! It stingeth me—alas—to the heart? To
the heart! Oh, break up, break up, my heart, after such happiness, after
such a sting!

—What? Hath not the world just now become perfect? Round and ripe? Oh,
for the golden round ring—whither doth it fly? Let me run after it!
Quick!

Hush—” (and here Zarathustra stretched himself, and felt that he was
asleep.)

“Up!” said he to himself, “thou sleeper! Thou noontide sleeper! Well
then, up, ye old legs! It is time and more than time; many a good
stretch of road is still awaiting you—

Now have ye slept your fill; for how long a time? A half-eternity! Well
then, up now, mine old heart! For how long after such a sleep mayest
thou—remain awake?”

(But then did he fall asleep anew, and his soul spake against him and
defended itself, and lay down again)—“Leave me alone! Hush! Hath not
the world just now become perfect? Oh, for the golden round ball!—

“Get up,” said Zarathustra, “thou little thief, thou sluggard! What!
Still stretching thyself, yawning, sighing, falling into deep wells?

Who art thou then, O my soul!” (and here he became frightened, for a
sunbeam shot down from heaven upon his face.)

“O heaven above me,” said he sighing, and sat upright, “thou gazest at
me? Thou hearkenest unto my strange soul?

When wilt thou drink this drop of dew that fell down upon all earthly
things,—when wilt thou drink this strange soul—

—When, thou well of eternity! thou joyous, awful, noontide abyss! when
wilt thou drink my soul back into thee?”

Thus spake Zarathustra, and rose from his couch beside the tree, as if
awakening from a strange drunkenness: and behold! there stood the
sun still exactly above his head. One might, however, rightly infer
therefrom that Zarathustra had not then slept long.




LXXI. THE GREETING.


It was late in the afternoon only when Zarathustra, after long useless
searching and strolling about, again came home to his cave. When,
however, he stood over against it, not more than twenty paces therefrom,
the thing happened which he now least of all expected: he heard anew the
great CRY OF DISTRESS. And extraordinary! this time the cry came out
of his own cave. It was a long, manifold, peculiar cry, and Zarathustra
plainly distinguished that it was composed of many voices: although
heard at a distance it might sound like the cry out of a single mouth.

Thereupon Zarathustra rushed forward to his cave, and behold! what a
spectacle awaited him after that concert! For there did they all sit
together whom he had passed during the day: the king on the right and
the king on the left, the old magician, the pope, the voluntary
beggar, the shadow, the intellectually conscientious one, the sorrowful
soothsayer, and the ass; the ugliest man, however, had set a crown on
his head, and had put round him two purple girdles,—for he liked, like
all ugly ones, to disguise himself and play the handsome person. In the
midst, however, of that sorrowful company stood Zarathustra’s eagle,
ruffled and disquieted, for it had been called upon to answer too much
for which its pride had not any answer; the wise serpent however hung
round its neck.

All this did Zarathustra behold with great astonishment; then however he
scrutinised each individual guest with courteous curiosity, read their
souls and wondered anew. In the meantime the assembled ones had risen
from their seats, and waited with reverence for Zarathustra to speak.
Zarathustra however spake thus:

“Ye despairing ones! Ye strange ones! So it was YOUR cry of distress
that I heard? And now do I know also where he is to be sought, whom I
have sought for in vain to-day: THE HIGHER MAN—:

—In mine own cave sitteth he, the higher man! But why do I wonder! Have
not I myself allured him to me by honey-offerings and artful lure-calls
of my happiness?

But it seemeth to me that ye are badly adapted for company: ye make
one another’s hearts fretful, ye that cry for help, when ye sit here
together? There is one that must first come,

—One who will make you laugh once more, a good jovial buffoon, a
dancer, a wind, a wild romp, some old fool:—what think ye?

Forgive me, however, ye despairing ones, for speaking such trivial words
before you, unworthy, verily, of such guests! But ye do not divine WHAT
maketh my heart wanton:—

—Ye yourselves do it, and your aspect, forgive it me! For every one
becometh courageous who beholdeth a despairing one. To encourage a
despairing one—every one thinketh himself strong enough to do so.

To myself have ye given this power,—a good gift, mine honourable
guests! An excellent guest’s-present! Well, do not then upbraid when I
also offer you something of mine.

This is mine empire and my dominion: that which is mine, however, shall
this evening and to-night be yours. Mine animals shall serve you: let my
cave be your resting-place!

At house and home with me shall no one despair: in my purlieus do I
protect every one from his wild beasts. And that is the first thing
which I offer you: security!

The second thing, however, is my little finger. And when ye have THAT,
then take the whole hand also, yea, and the heart with it! Welcome here,
welcome to you, my guests!”

Thus spake Zarathustra, and laughed with love and mischief. After this
greeting his guests bowed once more and were reverentially silent; the
king on the right, however, answered him in their name.

“O Zarathustra, by the way in which thou hast given us thy hand and thy
greeting, we recognise thee as Zarathustra. Thou hast humbled thyself
before us; almost hast thou hurt our reverence—:

—Who however could have humbled himself as thou hast done, with such
pride? THAT uplifteth us ourselves; a refreshment is it, to our eyes and
hearts.

To behold this, merely, gladly would we ascend higher mountains than
this. For as eager beholders have we come; we wanted to see what
brighteneth dim eyes.

And lo! now is it all over with our cries of distress. Now are our minds
and hearts open and enraptured. Little is lacking for our spirits to
become wanton.

There is nothing, O Zarathustra, that groweth more pleasingly on earth
than a lofty, strong will: it is the finest growth. An entire landscape
refresheth itself at one such tree.

To the pine do I compare him, O Zarathustra, which groweth up like
thee—tall, silent, hardy, solitary, of the best, supplest wood,
stately,—

—In the end, however, grasping out for ITS dominion with strong, green
branches, asking weighty questions of the wind, the storm, and whatever
is at home on high places;

—Answering more weightily, a commander, a victor! Oh! who should not
ascend high mountains to behold such growths?

At thy tree, O Zarathustra, the gloomy and ill-constituted also refresh
themselves; at thy look even the wavering become steady and heal their
hearts.

And verily, towards thy mountain and thy tree do many eyes turn to-day;
a great longing hath arisen, and many have learned to ask: ‘Who is
Zarathustra?’

And those into whose ears thou hast at any time dripped thy song and thy
honey: all the hidden ones, the lone-dwellers and the twain-dwellers,
have simultaneously said to their hearts:

‘Doth Zarathustra still live? It is no longer worth while to live,
everything is indifferent, everything is useless: or else—we must live
with Zarathustra!’

‘Why doth he not come who hath so long announced himself?’ thus do many
people ask; ‘hath solitude swallowed him up? Or should we perhaps go to
him?’

Now doth it come to pass that solitude itself becometh fragile and
breaketh open, like a grave that breaketh open and can no longer hold
its dead. Everywhere one seeth resurrected ones.

Now do the waves rise and rise around thy mountain, O Zarathustra. And
however high be thy height, many of them must rise up to thee: thy boat
shall not rest much longer on dry ground.

And that we despairing ones have now come into thy cave, and already no
longer despair:—it is but a prognostic and a presage that better ones
are on the way to thee,—

—For they themselves are on the way to thee, the last remnant of
God among men—that is to say, all the men of great longing, of great
loathing, of great satiety,

—All who do not want to live unless they learn again to HOPE—unless
they learn from thee, O Zarathustra, the GREAT hope!”

Thus spake the king on the right, and seized the hand of Zarathustra in
order to kiss it; but Zarathustra checked his veneration, and stepped
back frightened, fleeing as it were, silently and suddenly into the far
distance. After a little while, however, he was again at home with his
guests, looked at them with clear scrutinising eyes, and said:

“My guests, ye higher men, I will speak plain language and plainly with
you. It is not for YOU that I have waited here in these mountains.”

(“‘Plain language and plainly?’ Good God!” said here the king on the
left to himself; “one seeth he doth not know the good Occidentals, this
sage out of the Orient!

But he meaneth ‘blunt language and bluntly’—well! That is not the worst
taste in these days!”)

“Ye may, verily, all of you be higher men,” continued Zarathustra; “but
for me—ye are neither high enough, nor strong enough.

For me, that is to say, for the inexorable which is now silent in me,
but will not always be silent. And if ye appertain to me, still it is
not as my right arm.

For he who himself standeth, like you, on sickly and tender legs,
wisheth above all to be TREATED INDULGENTLY, whether he be conscious of
it or hide it from himself.

My arms and my legs, however, I do not treat indulgently, I DO NOT TREAT
MY WARRIORS INDULGENTLY: how then could ye be fit for MY warfare?

With you I should spoil all my victories. And many of you would tumble
over if ye but heard the loud beating of my drums.

Moreover, ye are not sufficiently beautiful and well-born for me. I
require pure, smooth mirrors for my doctrines; on your surface even mine
own likeness is distorted.

On your shoulders presseth many a burden, many a recollection; many a
mischievous dwarf squatteth in your corners. There is concealed populace
also in you.

And though ye be high and of a higher type, much in you is crooked and
misshapen. There is no smith in the world that could hammer you right
and straight for me.

Ye are only bridges: may higher ones pass over upon you! Ye signify
steps: so do not upbraid him who ascendeth beyond you into HIS height!

Out of your seed there may one day arise for me a genuine son and
perfect heir: but that time is distant. Ye yourselves are not those unto
whom my heritage and name belong.

Not for you do I wait here in these mountains; not with you may I
descend for the last time. Ye have come unto me only as a presage that
higher ones are on the way to me,—

—NOT the men of great longing, of great loathing, of great satiety, and
that which ye call the remnant of God;

—Nay! Nay! Three times Nay! For OTHERS do I wait here in these
mountains, and will not lift my foot from thence without them;

—For higher ones, stronger ones, triumphanter ones, merrier ones, for
such as are built squarely in body and soul: LAUGHING LIONS must come!

O my guests, ye strange ones—have ye yet heard nothing of my children?
And that they are on the way to me?

Do speak unto me of my gardens, of my Happy Isles, of my new beautiful
race—why do ye not speak unto me thereof?

This guests’-present do I solicit of your love, that ye speak unto me of
my children. For them am I rich, for them I became poor: what have I not
surrendered,

—What would I not surrender that I might have one thing: THESE
children, THIS living plantation, THESE life-trees of my will and of my
highest hope!”

Thus spake Zarathustra, and stopped suddenly in his discourse: for his
longing came over him, and he closed his eyes and his mouth, because
of the agitation of his heart. And all his guests also were silent, and
stood still and confounded: except only that the old soothsayer made
signs with his hands and his gestures.




LXXII. THE SUPPER.


For at this point the soothsayer interrupted the greeting of Zarathustra
and his guests: he pressed forward as one who had no time to lose,
seized Zarathustra’s hand and exclaimed: “But Zarathustra!

One thing is more necessary than the other, so sayest thou thyself:
well, one thing is now more necessary UNTO ME than all others.

A word at the right time: didst thou not invite me to TABLE? And here
are many who have made long journeys. Thou dost not mean to feed us
merely with discourses?

Besides, all of you have thought too much about freezing, drowning,
suffocating, and other bodily dangers: none of you, however, have
thought of MY danger, namely, perishing of hunger—”

(Thus spake the soothsayer. When Zarathustra’s animals, however, heard
these words, they ran away in terror. For they saw that all they
had brought home during the day would not be enough to fill the one
soothsayer.)

“Likewise perishing of thirst,” continued the soothsayer. “And although
I hear water splashing here like words of wisdom—that is to say,
plenteously and unweariedly, I—want WINE!

Not every one is a born water-drinker like Zarathustra. Neither doth
water suit weary and withered ones: WE deserve wine—IT alone giveth
immediate vigour and improvised health!”

On this occasion, when the soothsayer was longing for wine, it happened
that the king on the left, the silent one, also found expression for
once. “WE took care,” said he, “about wine, I, along with my brother the
king on the right: we have enough of wine,—a whole ass-load of it. So
there is nothing lacking but bread.”

“Bread,” replied Zarathustra, laughing when he spake, “it is precisely
bread that anchorites have not. But man doth not live by bread alone,
but also by the flesh of good lambs, of which I have two:

—THESE shall we slaughter quickly, and cook spicily with sage: it is
so that I like them. And there is also no lack of roots and fruits,
good enough even for the fastidious and dainty,—nor of nuts and other
riddles for cracking.

Thus will we have a good repast in a little while. But whoever wish to
eat with us must also give a hand to the work, even the kings. For with
Zarathustra even a king may be a cook.”

This proposal appealed to the hearts of all of them, save that the
voluntary beggar objected to the flesh and wine and spices.

“Just hear this glutton Zarathustra!” said he jokingly: “doth one go
into caves and high mountains to make such repasts?

Now indeed do I understand what he once taught us: Blessed be moderate
poverty!’ And why he wisheth to do away with beggars.”

“Be of good cheer,” replied Zarathustra, “as I am. Abide by thy
customs, thou excellent one: grind thy corn, drink thy water, praise thy
cooking,—if only it make thee glad!

I am a law only for mine own; I am not a law for all. He, however, who
belongeth unto me must be strong of bone and light of foot,—

—Joyous in fight and feast, no sulker, no John o’ Dreams, ready for the
hardest task as for the feast, healthy and hale.

The best belongeth unto mine and me; and if it be not given us, then do
we take it:—the best food, the purest sky, the strongest thoughts, the
fairest women!”—

Thus spake Zarathustra; the king on the right however answered and said:
“Strange! Did one ever hear such sensible things out of the mouth of a
wise man?

And verily, it is the strangest thing in a wise man, if over and above,
he be still sensible, and not an ass.”

Thus spake the king on the right and wondered; the ass however, with
ill-will, said YE-A to his remark. This however was the beginning of
that long repast which is called “The Supper” in the history-books. At
this there was nothing else spoken of but THE HIGHER MAN.




LXXIII. THE HIGHER MAN.


1.

When I came unto men for the first time, then did I commit the anchorite
folly, the great folly: I appeared on the market-place.

And when I spake unto all, I spake unto none. In the evening, however,
rope-dancers were my companions, and corpses; and I myself almost a
corpse.

With the new morning, however, there came unto me a new truth: then did
I learn to say: “Of what account to me are market-place and populace and
populace-noise and long populace-ears!”

Ye higher men, learn THIS from me: On the market-place no one believeth
in higher men. But if ye will speak there, very well! The populace,
however, blinketh: “We are all equal.”

“Ye higher men,”—so blinketh the populace—“there are no higher men, we
are all equal; man is man, before God—we are all equal!”

Before God!—Now, however, this God hath died. Before the populace,
however, we will not be equal. Ye higher men, away from the
market-place!

2.

Before God!—Now however this God hath died! Ye higher men, this God was
your greatest danger.

Only since he lay in the grave have ye again arisen. Now only cometh the
great noontide, now only doth the higher man become—master!

Have ye understood this word, O my brethren? Ye are frightened: do your
hearts turn giddy? Doth the abyss here yawn for you? Doth the hell-hound
here yelp at you?

Well! Take heart! ye higher men! Now only travaileth the mountain of the
human future. God hath died: now do WE desire—the Superman to live.

3.

The most careful ask to-day: “How is man to be maintained?” Zarathustra
however asketh, as the first and only one: “How is man to be SURPASSED?”

The Superman, I have at heart; THAT is the first and only thing to
me—and NOT man: not the neighbour, not the poorest, not the sorriest,
not the best.—

O my brethren, what I can love in man is that he is an over-going and a
down-going. And also in you there is much that maketh me love and hope.

In that ye have despised, ye higher men, that maketh me hope. For the
great despisers are the great reverers.

In that ye have despaired, there is much to honour. For ye have not
learned to submit yourselves, ye have not learned petty policy.

For to-day have the petty people become master: they all preach
submission and humility and policy and diligence and consideration and
the long et cetera of petty virtues.

Whatever is of the effeminate type, whatever originateth from the
servile type, and especially the populace-mishmash:—THAT wisheth now to
be master of all human destiny—O disgust! Disgust! Disgust!

THAT asketh and asketh and never tireth: “How is man to maintain himself
best, longest, most pleasantly?” Thereby—are they the masters of
to-day.

These masters of to-day—surpass them, O my brethren—these petty
people: THEY are the Superman’s greatest danger!

Surpass, ye higher men, the petty virtues, the petty policy, the
sand-grain considerateness, the ant-hill trumpery, the pitiable
comfortableness, the “happiness of the greatest number”—!

And rather despair than submit yourselves. And verily, I love you,
because ye know not to-day how to live, ye higher men! For thus do YE
live—best!

4.

Have ye courage, O my brethren? Are ye stout-hearted? NOT the courage
before witnesses, but anchorite and eagle courage, which not even a God
any longer beholdeth?

Cold souls, mules, the blind and the drunken, I do not call
stout-hearted. He hath heart who knoweth fear, but VANQUISHETH it; who
seeth the abyss, but with PRIDE.

He who seeth the abyss, but with eagle’s eyes,—he who with eagle’s
talons GRASPETH the abyss: he hath courage.—

5.

“Man is evil”—so said to me for consolation, all the wisest ones. Ah,
if only it be still true to-day! For the evil is man’s best force.

“Man must become better and eviler”—so do _I_ teach. The evilest is
necessary for the Superman’s best.

It may have been well for the preacher of the petty people to suffer and
be burdened by men’s sin. I, however, rejoice in great sin as my great
CONSOLATION.—

Such things, however, are not said for long ears. Every word, also,
is not suited for every mouth. These are fine far-away things: at them
sheep’s claws shall not grasp!

6.

Ye higher men, think ye that I am here to put right what ye have put
wrong?

Or that I wished henceforth to make snugger couches for you sufferers?
Or show you restless, miswandering, misclimbing ones, new and easier
footpaths?

Nay! Nay! Three times Nay! Always more, always better ones of your
type shall succumb,—for ye shall always have it worse and harder. Thus
only—

—Thus only groweth man aloft to the height where the lightning striketh
and shattereth him: high enough for the lightning!

Towards the few, the long, the remote go forth my soul and my seeking:
of what account to me are your many little, short miseries!

Ye do not yet suffer enough for me! For ye suffer from yourselves, ye
have not yet suffered FROM MAN. Ye would lie if ye spake otherwise! None
of you suffereth from what _I_ have suffered.—

7.

It is not enough for me that the lightning no longer doeth harm. I do
not wish to conduct it away: it shall learn—to work for ME.—

My wisdom hath accumulated long like a cloud, it becometh stiller and
darker. So doeth all wisdom which shall one day bear LIGHTNINGS.—

Unto these men of to-day will I not be LIGHT, nor be called light.
THEM—will I blind: lightning of my wisdom! put out their eyes!

8.

Do not will anything beyond your power: there is a bad falseness in
those who will beyond their power.

Especially when they will great things! For they awaken distrust in
great things, these subtle false-coiners and stage-players:—

—Until at last they are false towards themselves, squint-eyed, whited
cankers, glossed over with strong words, parade virtues and brilliant
false deeds.

Take good care there, ye higher men! For nothing is more precious to me,
and rarer, than honesty.

Is this to-day not that of the populace? The populace however knoweth
not what is great and what is small, what is straight and what is
honest: it is innocently crooked, it ever lieth.

9.

Have a good distrust to-day ye, higher men, ye enheartened ones! Ye
open-hearted ones! And keep your reasons secret! For this to-day is that
of the populace.

What the populace once learned to believe without reasons, who could—
refute it to them by means of reasons?

And on the market-place one convinceth with gestures. But reasons make
the populace distrustful.

And when truth hath once triumphed there, then ask yourselves with good
distrust: “What strong error hath fought for it?”

Be on your guard also against the learned! They hate you, because they
are unproductive! They have cold, withered eyes before which every bird
is unplumed.

Such persons vaunt about not lying: but inability to lie is still far
from being love to truth. Be on your guard!

Freedom from fever is still far from being knowledge! Refrigerated
spirits I do not believe in. He who cannot lie, doth not know what truth
is.

10.

If ye would go up high, then use your own legs! Do not get yourselves
CARRIED aloft; do not seat yourselves on other people’s backs and heads!

Thou hast mounted, however, on horseback? Thou now ridest briskly up
to thy goal? Well, my friend! But thy lame foot is also with thee on
horseback!

When thou reachest thy goal, when thou alightest from thy horse:
precisely on thy HEIGHT, thou higher man,—then wilt thou stumble!

11.

Ye creating ones, ye higher men! One is only pregnant with one’s own
child.

Do not let yourselves be imposed upon or put upon! Who then is YOUR
neighbour? Even if ye act “for your neighbour”—ye still do not create
for him!

Unlearn, I pray you, this “for,” ye creating ones: your very virtue
wisheth you to have naught to do with “for” and “on account of” and
“because.” Against these false little words shall ye stop your ears.

“For one’s neighbour,” is the virtue only of the petty people: there it
is said “like and like,” and “hand washeth hand”:—they have neither the
right nor the power for YOUR self-seeking!

In your self-seeking, ye creating ones, there is the foresight and
foreseeing of the pregnant! What no one’s eye hath yet seen, namely, the
fruit—this, sheltereth and saveth and nourisheth your entire love.

Where your entire love is, namely, with your child, there is also your
entire virtue! Your work, your will is YOUR “neighbour”: let no false
values impose upon you!

12.

Ye creating ones, ye higher men! Whoever hath to give birth is sick;
whoever hath given birth, however, is unclean.

Ask women: one giveth birth, not because it giveth pleasure. The pain
maketh hens and poets cackle.

Ye creating ones, in you there is much uncleanliness. That is because ye
have had to be mothers.

A new child: oh, how much new filth hath also come into the world! Go
apart! He who hath given birth shall wash his soul!

13.

Be not virtuous beyond your powers! And seek nothing from yourselves
opposed to probability!

Walk in the footsteps in which your fathers’ virtue hath already walked!
How would ye rise high, if your fathers’ will should not rise with you?

He, however, who would be a firstling, let him take care lest he also
become a lastling! And where the vices of your fathers are, there should
ye not set up as saints!

He whose fathers were inclined for women, and for strong wine and flesh
of wildboar swine; what would it be if he demanded chastity of himself?

A folly would it be! Much, verily, doth it seem to me for such a one, if
he should be the husband of one or of two or of three women.

And if he founded monasteries, and inscribed over their portals: “The
way to holiness,”—I should still say: What good is it! it is a new
folly!

He hath founded for himself a penance-house and refuge-house: much good
may it do! But I do not believe in it.

In solitude there groweth what any one bringeth into it—also the brute
in one’s nature. Thus is solitude inadvisable unto many.

Hath there ever been anything filthier on earth than the saints of
the wilderness? AROUND THEM was not only the devil loose—but also the
swine.

14.

Shy, ashamed, awkward, like the tiger whose spring hath failed—thus, ye
higher men, have I often seen you slink aside. A CAST which ye made had
failed.

But what doth it matter, ye dice-players! Ye had not learned to play and
mock, as one must play and mock! Do we not ever sit at a great table of
mocking and playing?

And if great things have been a failure with you, have ye yourselves
therefore—been a failure? And if ye yourselves have been a failure,
hath man therefore—been a failure? If man, however, hath been a
failure: well then! never mind!

15.

The higher its type, always the seldomer doth a thing succeed. Ye higher
men here, have ye not all—been failures?

Be of good cheer; what doth it matter? How much is still possible! Learn
to laugh at yourselves, as ye ought to laugh!

What wonder even that ye have failed and only half-succeeded, ye
half-shattered ones! Doth not—man’s FUTURE strive and struggle in you?

Man’s furthest, profoundest, star-highest issues, his prodigious
powers—do not all these foam through one another in your vessel?

What wonder that many a vessel shattereth! Learn to laugh at yourselves,
as ye ought to laugh! Ye higher men, O, how much is still possible!

And verily, how much hath already succeeded! How rich is this earth in
small, good, perfect things, in well-constituted things!

Set around you small, good, perfect things, ye higher men. Their golden
maturity healeth the heart. The perfect teacheth one to hope.

16.

What hath hitherto been the greatest sin here on earth? Was it not the
word of him who said: “Woe unto them that laugh now!”

Did he himself find no cause for laughter on the earth? Then he sought
badly. A child even findeth cause for it.

He—did not love sufficiently: otherwise would he also have loved
us, the laughing ones! But he hated and hooted us; wailing and
teeth-gnashing did he promise us.

Must one then curse immediately, when one doth not love? That—seemeth
to me bad taste. Thus did he, however, this absolute one. He sprang from
the populace.

And he himself just did not love sufficiently; otherwise would he have
raged less because people did not love him. All great love doth not SEEK
love:—it seeketh more.

Go out of the way of all such absolute ones! They are a poor sickly
type, a populace-type: they look at this life with ill-will, they have
an evil eye for this earth.

Go out of the way of all such absolute ones! They have heavy feet and
sultry hearts:—they do not know how to dance. How could the earth be
light to such ones!

17.

Tortuously do all good things come nigh to their goal. Like cats
they curve their backs, they purr inwardly with their approaching
happiness,—all good things laugh.

His step betrayeth whether a person already walketh on HIS OWN path:
just see me walk! He, however, who cometh nigh to his goal, danceth.

And verily, a statue have I not become, not yet do I stand there stiff,
stupid and stony, like a pillar; I love fast racing.

And though there be on earth fens and dense afflictions, he who hath
light feet runneth even across the mud, and danceth, as upon well-swept
ice.

Lift up your hearts, my brethren, high, higher! And do not forget your
legs! Lift up also your legs, ye good dancers, and better still, if ye
stand upon your heads!

18.

This crown of the laughter, this rose-garland crown: I myself have put
on this crown, I myself have consecrated my laughter. No one else have I
found to-day potent enough for this.

Zarathustra the dancer, Zarathustra the light one, who beckoneth with
his pinions, one ready for flight, beckoning unto all birds, ready and
prepared, a blissfully light-spirited one:—

Zarathustra the soothsayer, Zarathustra the sooth-laugher, no impatient
one, no absolute one, one who loveth leaps and side-leaps; I myself have
put on this crown!

19.

Lift up your hearts, my brethren, high, higher! And do not forget your
legs! Lift up also your legs, ye good dancers, and better still if ye
stand upon your heads!

There are also heavy animals in a state of happiness, there are
club-footed ones from the beginning. Curiously do they exert themselves,
like an elephant which endeavoureth to stand upon its head.

Better, however, to be foolish with happiness than foolish with
misfortune, better to dance awkwardly than walk lamely. So learn, I
pray you, my wisdom, ye higher men: even the worst thing hath two good
reverse sides,—

—Even the worst thing hath good dancing-legs: so learn, I pray you, ye
higher men, to put yourselves on your proper legs!

So unlearn, I pray you, the sorrow-sighing, and all the
populace-sadness! Oh, how sad the buffoons of the populace seem to me
to-day! This to-day, however, is that of the populace.

20.

Do like unto the wind when it rusheth forth from its mountain-caves:
unto its own piping will it dance; the seas tremble and leap under its
footsteps.

That which giveth wings to asses, that which milketh the lionesses:—
praised be that good, unruly spirit, which cometh like a hurricane unto
all the present and unto all the populace,—

—Which is hostile to thistle-heads and puzzle-heads, and to all
withered leaves and weeds:—praised be this wild, good, free spirit of
the storm, which danceth upon fens and afflictions, as upon meadows!

Which hateth the consumptive populace-dogs, and all the ill-constituted,
sullen brood:—praised be this spirit of all free spirits, the laughing
storm, which bloweth dust into the eyes of all the melanopic and
melancholic!

Ye higher men, the worst thing in you is that ye have none of you
learned to dance as ye ought to dance—to dance beyond yourselves! What
doth it matter that ye have failed!

How many things are still possible! So LEARN to laugh beyond yourselves!
Lift up your hearts, ye good dancers, high! higher! And do not forget
the good laughter!

This crown of the laughter, this rose-garland crown: to you my brethren
do I cast this crown! Laughing have I consecrated; ye higher men, LEARN,
I pray you—to laugh!




LXXIV. THE SONG OF MELANCHOLY.


1.

When Zarathustra spake these sayings, he stood nigh to the entrance of
his cave; with the last words, however, he slipped away from his guests,
and fled for a little while into the open air.

“O pure odours around me,” cried he, “O blessed stillness around me! But
where are mine animals? Hither, hither, mine eagle and my serpent!

Tell me, mine animals: these higher men, all of them—do they perhaps
not SMELL well? O pure odours around me! Now only do I know and feel how
I love you, mine animals.”

—And Zarathustra said once more: “I love you, mine animals!” The eagle,
however, and the serpent pressed close to him when he spake these
words, and looked up to him. In this attitude were they all three silent
together, and sniffed and sipped the good air with one another. For the
air here outside was better than with the higher men.

2.

Hardly, however, had Zarathustra left the cave when the old magician got
up, looked cunningly about him, and said: “He is gone!

And already, ye higher men—let me tickle you with this complimentary
and flattering name, as he himself doeth—already doth mine evil spirit
of deceit and magic attack me, my melancholy devil,

—Which is an adversary to this Zarathustra from the very heart: forgive
it for this! Now doth it wish to conjure before you, it hath just ITS
hour; in vain do I struggle with this evil spirit.

Unto all of you, whatever honours ye like to assume in your names,
whether ye call yourselves ‘the free spirits’ or ‘the conscientious,’
or ‘the penitents of the spirit,’ or ‘the unfettered,’ or ‘the great
longers,’—

—Unto all of you, who like me suffer FROM THE GREAT LOATHING, to
whom the old God hath died, and as yet no new God lieth in cradles and
swaddling clothes—unto all of you is mine evil spirit and magic-devil
favourable.

I know you, ye higher men, I know him,—I know also this fiend whom I
love in spite of me, this Zarathustra: he himself often seemeth to me
like the beautiful mask of a saint,

—Like a new strange mummery in which mine evil spirit, the melancholy
devil, delighteth:—I love Zarathustra, so doth it often seem to me, for
the sake of mine evil spirit.—

But already doth IT attack me and constrain me, this spirit of
melancholy, this evening-twilight devil: and verily, ye higher men, it
hath a longing—

—Open your eyes!—it hath a longing to come NAKED, whether male or
female, I do not yet know: but it cometh, it constraineth me, alas! open
your wits!

The day dieth out, unto all things cometh now the evening, also unto
the best things; hear now, and see, ye higher men, what devil—man or
woman—this spirit of evening-melancholy is!”

Thus spake the old magician, looked cunningly about him, and then seized
his harp.

3.

     In evening’s limpid air,
     What time the dew’s soothings
     Unto the earth downpour,
     Invisibly and unheard—
     For tender shoe-gear wear
     The soothing dews, like all that’s kind-gentle—:
     Bethinkst thou then, bethinkst thou, burning heart,
     How once thou thirstedest
     For heaven’s kindly teardrops and dew’s down-droppings,
     All singed and weary thirstedest,
     What time on yellow grass-pathways
     Wicked, occidental sunny glances
     Through sombre trees about thee sported,
     Blindingly sunny glow-glances, gladly-hurting?

     “Of TRUTH the wooer?  Thou?”—so taunted they—
     “Nay!  Merely poet!
     A brute insidious, plundering, grovelling,
     That aye must lie,
     That wittingly, wilfully, aye must lie:
     For booty lusting,
     Motley masked,
     Self-hidden, shrouded,
     Himself his booty—
     HE—of truth the wooer?
     Nay!  Mere fool!  Mere poet!
     Just motley speaking,
     From mask of fool confusedly shouting,
     Circumambling on fabricated word-bridges,
     On motley rainbow-arches,
     ‘Twixt the spurious heavenly,
     And spurious earthly,
     Round us roving, round us soaring,—
     MERE FOOL!  MERE POET!

     HE—of truth the wooer?
     Not still, stiff, smooth and cold,
     Become an image,
     A godlike statue,
     Set up in front of temples,
     As a God’s own door-guard:
     Nay! hostile to all such truthfulness-statues,
     In every desert homelier than at temples,
     With cattish wantonness,
     Through every window leaping
     Quickly into chances,
     Every wild forest a-sniffing,
     Greedily-longingly, sniffing,
     That thou, in wild forests,
     ’Mong the motley-speckled fierce creatures,
     Shouldest rove, sinful-sound and fine-coloured,
     With longing lips smacking,
     Blessedly mocking, blessedly hellish, blessedly bloodthirsty,
     Robbing, skulking, lying—roving:—

     Or unto eagles like which fixedly,
     Long adown the precipice look,
     Adown THEIR precipice:—
     Oh, how they whirl down now,
     Thereunder, therein,
     To ever deeper profoundness whirling!—
     Then,
     Sudden,
     With aim aright,
     With quivering flight,
     On LAMBKINS pouncing,
     Headlong down, sore-hungry,
     For lambkins longing,
     Fierce ’gainst all lamb-spirits,
     Furious-fierce ’gainst all that look
     Sheeplike, or lambeyed, or crisp-woolly,
     —Grey, with lambsheep kindliness!

     Even thus,
     Eaglelike, pantherlike,
     Are the poet’s desires,
     Are THINE OWN desires ‘neath a thousand guises,
     Thou fool!  Thou poet!
     Thou who all mankind viewedst—
     So God, as sheep—:
     The God TO REND within mankind,
     As the sheep in mankind,
     And in rending LAUGHING—

     THAT, THAT is thine own blessedness!
     Of a panther and eagle—blessedness!
     Of a poet and fool—the blessedness!—

     In evening’s limpid air,
     What time the moon’s sickle,
     Green, ‘twixt the purple-glowings,
     And jealous, steal’th forth:
     —Of day the foe,
     With every step in secret,
     The rosy garland-hammocks
     Downsickling, till they’ve sunken
     Down nightwards, faded, downsunken:—

     Thus had I sunken one day
     From mine own truth-insanity,
     From mine own fervid day-longings,
     Of day aweary, sick of sunshine,
     —Sunk downwards, evenwards, shadowwards:
     By one sole trueness
     All scorched and thirsty:
     —Bethinkst thou still, bethinkst thou, burning heart,
     How then thou thirstedest?—
     THAT I SHOULD BANNED BE
     FROM ALL THE TRUENESS!
     MERE FOOL!  MERE POET!




LXXV. SCIENCE.


Thus sang the magician; and all who were present went like birds
unawares into the net of his artful and melancholy voluptuousness.
Only the spiritually conscientious one had not been caught: he at once
snatched the harp from the magician and called out: “Air! Let in good
air! Let in Zarathustra! Thou makest this cave sultry and poisonous,
thou bad old magician!

Thou seducest, thou false one, thou subtle one, to unknown desires and
deserts. And alas, that such as thou should talk and make ado about the
TRUTH!

Alas, to all free spirits who are not on their guard against SUCH
magicians! It is all over with their freedom: thou teachest and temptest
back into prisons,—

—Thou old melancholy devil, out of thy lament soundeth a lurement: thou
resemblest those who with their praise of chastity secretly invite to
voluptuousness!”

Thus spake the conscientious one; the old magician, however, looked
about him, enjoying his triumph, and on that account put up with the
annoyance which the conscientious one caused him. “Be still!” said he
with modest voice, “good songs want to re-echo well; after good songs
one should be long silent.

Thus do all those present, the higher men. Thou, however, hast perhaps
understood but little of my song? In thee there is little of the magic
spirit.”

“Thou praisest me,” replied the conscientious one, “in that thou
separatest me from thyself; very well! But, ye others, what do I see? Ye
still sit there, all of you, with lusting eyes—:

Ye free spirits, whither hath your freedom gone! Ye almost seem to me
to resemble those who have long looked at bad girls dancing naked: your
souls themselves dance!

In you, ye higher men, there must be more of that which the magician
calleth his evil spirit of magic and deceit:—we must indeed be
different.

And verily, we spake and thought long enough together ere Zarathustra
came home to his cave, for me not to be unaware that we ARE different.

We SEEK different things even here aloft, ye and I. For I seek more
SECURITY; on that account have I come to Zarathustra. For he is still
the most steadfast tower and will—

—To-day, when everything tottereth, when all the earth quaketh. Ye,
however, when I see what eyes ye make, it almost seemeth to me that ye
seek MORE INSECURITY,

—More horror, more danger, more earthquake. Ye long (it almost seemeth
so to me—forgive my presumption, ye higher men)—

—Ye long for the worst and dangerousest life, which frighteneth ME
most,—for the life of wild beasts, for forests, caves, steep mountains
and labyrinthine gorges.

And it is not those who lead OUT OF danger that please you best, but
those who lead you away from all paths, the misleaders. But if
such longing in you be ACTUAL, it seemeth to me nevertheless to be
IMPOSSIBLE.

For fear—that is man’s original and fundamental feeling; through fear
everything is explained, original sin and original virtue. Through fear
there grew also MY virtue, that is to say: Science.

For fear of wild animals—that hath been longest fostered in
man, inclusive of the animal which he concealeth and feareth in
himself:—Zarathustra calleth it ‘the beast inside.’

Such prolonged ancient fear, at last become subtle, spiritual and
intellectual—at present, me thinketh, it is called SCIENCE.”—

Thus spake the conscientious one; but Zarathustra, who had just come
back into his cave and had heard and divined the last discourse, threw a
handful of roses to the conscientious one, and laughed on account of
his “truths.” “Why!” he exclaimed, “what did I hear just now? Verily, it
seemeth to me, thou art a fool, or else I myself am one: and quietly and
quickly will I put thy ‘truth’ upside down.

For FEAR—is an exception with us. Courage, however, and adventure, and
delight in the uncertain, in the unattempted—COURAGE seemeth to me the
entire primitive history of man.

The wildest and most courageous animals hath he envied and robbed of all
their virtues: thus only did he become—man.

THIS courage, at last become subtle, spiritual and intellectual, this
human courage, with eagle’s pinions and serpent’s wisdom: THIS, it
seemeth to me, is called at present—”

“ZARATHUSTRA!” cried all of them there assembled, as if with one voice,
and burst out at the same time into a great laughter; there arose,
however, from them as it were a heavy cloud. Even the magician laughed,
and said wisely: “Well! It is gone, mine evil spirit!

And did I not myself warn you against it when I said that it was a
deceiver, a lying and deceiving spirit?

Especially when it showeth itself naked. But what can _I_ do with regard
to its tricks! Have _I_ created it and the world?

Well! Let us be good again, and of good cheer! And although Zarathustra
looketh with evil eye—just see him! he disliketh me—:

—Ere night cometh will he again learn to love and laud me; he cannot
live long without committing such follies.

HE—loveth his enemies: this art knoweth he better than any one I have
seen. But he taketh revenge for it—on his friends!”

Thus spake the old magician, and the higher men applauded him; so that
Zarathustra went round, and mischievously and lovingly shook hands with
his friends,—like one who hath to make amends and apologise to every
one for something. When however he had thereby come to the door of his
cave, lo, then had he again a longing for the good air outside, and for
his animals,—and wished to steal out.




LXXVI. AMONG DAUGHTERS OF THE DESERT.


1.

“Go not away!” said then the wanderer who called himself Zarathustra’s
shadow, “abide with us—otherwise the old gloomy affliction might again
fall upon us.

Now hath that old magician given us of his worst for our good, and
lo! the good, pious pope there hath tears in his eyes, and hath quite
embarked again upon the sea of melancholy.

Those kings may well put on a good air before us still: for that have
THEY learned best of us all at present! Had they however no one to see
them, I wager that with them also the bad game would again commence,—

—The bad game of drifting clouds, of damp melancholy, of curtained
heavens, of stolen suns, of howling autumn-winds,

—The bad game of our howling and crying for help! Abide with us, O
Zarathustra! Here there is much concealed misery that wisheth to speak,
much evening, much cloud, much damp air!

Thou hast nourished us with strong food for men, and powerful proverbs:
do not let the weakly, womanly spirits attack us anew at dessert!

Thou alone makest the air around thee strong and clear! Did I ever find
anywhere on earth such good air as with thee in thy cave?

Many lands have I seen, my nose hath learned to test and estimate many
kinds of air: but with thee do my nostrils taste their greatest delight!

Unless it be,—unless it be—, do forgive an old recollection! Forgive
me an old after-dinner song, which I once composed amongst daughters of
the desert:—

For with them was there equally good, clear, Oriental air; there was I
furthest from cloudy, damp, melancholy Old-Europe!

Then did I love such Oriental maidens and other blue kingdoms of heaven,
over which hang no clouds and no thoughts.

Ye would not believe how charmingly they sat there, when they did
not dance, profound, but without thoughts, like little secrets, like
beribboned riddles, like dessert-nuts—

Many-hued and foreign, forsooth! but without clouds: riddles which
can be guessed: to please such maidens I then composed an after-dinner
psalm.”

Thus spake the wanderer who called himself Zarathustra’s shadow; and
before any one answered him, he had seized the harp of the old magician,
crossed his legs, and looked calmly and sagely around him:—with his
nostrils, however, he inhaled the air slowly and questioningly, like one
who in new countries tasteth new foreign air. Afterward he began to sing
with a kind of roaring.

2.

THE DESERTS GROW: WOE HIM WHO DOTH THEM HIDE!

     —Ha!
     Solemnly!
     In effect solemnly!
     A worthy beginning!
     Afric manner, solemnly!
     Of a lion worthy,
     Or perhaps of a virtuous howl-monkey—
     —But it’s naught to you,
     Ye friendly damsels dearly loved,
     At whose own feet to me,
     The first occasion,
     To a European under palm-trees,
     A seat is now granted.  Selah.

     Wonderful, truly!
     Here do I sit now,
     The desert nigh, and yet I am
     So far still from the desert,
     Even in naught yet deserted:
     That is, I’m swallowed down
     By this the smallest oasis—:
     —It opened up just yawning,
     Its loveliest mouth agape,
     Most sweet-odoured of all mouthlets:
     Then fell I right in,
     Right down, right through—in ’mong you,
     Ye friendly damsels dearly loved!  Selah.

     Hail! hail! to that whale, fishlike,
     If it thus for its guest’s convenience
     Made things nice!—(ye well know,
     Surely, my learned allusion?)
     Hail to its belly,
     If it had e’er
     A such loveliest oasis-belly
     As this is:  though however I doubt about it,
     —With this come I out of Old-Europe,
     That doubt’th more eagerly than doth any
     Elderly married woman.
     May the Lord improve it!
     Amen!

     Here do I sit now,
     In this the smallest oasis,
     Like a date indeed,
     Brown, quite sweet, gold-suppurating,
     For rounded mouth of maiden longing,
     But yet still more for youthful, maidlike,
     Ice-cold and snow-white and incisory
     Front teeth:  and for such assuredly,
     Pine the hearts all of ardent date-fruits.  Selah.

     To the there-named south-fruits now,
     Similar, all-too-similar,
     Do I lie here; by little
     Flying insects
     Round-sniffled and round-played,
     And also by yet littler,
     Foolisher, and peccabler
     Wishes and phantasies,—
     Environed by you,
     Ye silent, presentientest
     Maiden-kittens,
     Dudu and Suleika,
     —ROUNDSPHINXED, that into one word
     I may crowd much feeling:
     (Forgive me, O God,
     All such speech-sinning!)
     —Sit I here the best of air sniffling,
     Paradisal air, truly,
     Bright and buoyant air, golden-mottled,
     As goodly air as ever
     From lunar orb downfell—
     Be it by hazard,
     Or supervened it by arrogancy?
     As the ancient poets relate it.
     But doubter, I’m now calling it
     In question:  with this do I come indeed
     Out of Europe,
     That doubt’th more eagerly than doth any
     Elderly married woman.
     May the Lord improve it!
     Amen.

     This the finest air drinking,
     With nostrils out-swelled like goblets,
     Lacking future, lacking remembrances
     Thus do I sit here, ye
     Friendly damsels dearly loved,
     And look at the palm-tree there,
     How it, to a dance-girl, like,
     Doth bow and bend and on its haunches bob,
     —One doth it too, when one view’th it long!—
     To a dance-girl like, who as it seem’th to me,
     Too long, and dangerously persistent,
     Always, always, just on SINGLE leg hath stood?
     —Then forgot she thereby, as it seem’th to me,
     The OTHER leg?
     For vainly I, at least,
     Did search for the amissing
     Fellow-jewel
     —Namely, the other leg—
     In the sanctified precincts,
     Nigh her very dearest, very tenderest,
     Flapping and fluttering and flickering skirting.
     Yea, if ye should, ye beauteous friendly ones,
     Quite take my word:
     She hath, alas! LOST it!
     Hu!  Hu!  Hu!  Hu!  Hu!
     It is away!
     For ever away!
     The other leg!
     Oh, pity for that loveliest other leg!
     Where may it now tarry, all-forsaken weeping?
     The lonesomest leg?
     In fear perhaps before a
     Furious, yellow, blond and curled
     Leonine monster?  Or perhaps even
     Gnawed away, nibbled badly—
     Most wretched, woeful! woeful! nibbled badly!  Selah.

     Oh, weep ye not,
     Gentle spirits!
     Weep ye not, ye
     Date-fruit spirits!  Milk-bosoms!
     Ye sweetwood-heart
     Purselets!
     Weep ye no more,
     Pallid Dudu!
     Be a man, Suleika!  Bold!  Bold!
     —Or else should there perhaps
     Something strengthening, heart-strengthening,
     Here most proper be?
     Some inspiring text?
     Some solemn exhortation?—
     Ha!  Up now! honour!
     Moral honour!  European honour!
     Blow again, continue,
     Bellows-box of virtue!
     Ha!
     Once more thy roaring,
     Thy moral roaring!
     As a virtuous lion
     Nigh the daughters of deserts roaring!
     —For virtue’s out-howl,
     Ye very dearest maidens,
     Is more than every
     European fervour, European hot-hunger!
     And now do I stand here,
     As European,
     I can’t be different, God’s help to me!
     Amen!

THE DESERTS GROW: WOE HIM WHO DOTH THEM HIDE!




LXXVII. THE AWAKENING.


1.

After the song of the wanderer and shadow, the cave became all at once
full of noise and laughter: and since the assembled guests all spake
simultaneously, and even the ass, encouraged thereby, no longer
remained silent, a little aversion and scorn for his visitors came over
Zarathustra, although he rejoiced at their gladness. For it seemed to
him a sign of convalescence. So he slipped out into the open air and
spake to his animals.

“Whither hath their distress now gone?” said he, and already did he
himself feel relieved of his petty disgust—“with me, it seemeth that
they have unlearned their cries of distress!

—Though, alas! not yet their crying.” And Zarathustra stopped his
ears, for just then did the YE-A of the ass mix strangely with the noisy
jubilation of those higher men.

“They are merry,” he began again, “and who knoweth? perhaps at their
host’s expense; and if they have learned of me to laugh, still it is not
MY laughter they have learned.

But what matter about that! They are old people: they recover in their
own way, they laugh in their own way; mine ears have already endured
worse and have not become peevish.

This day is a victory: he already yieldeth, he fleeth, THE SPIRIT OF
GRAVITY, mine old arch-enemy! How well this day is about to end, which
began so badly and gloomily!

And it is ABOUT TO end. Already cometh the evening: over the sea
rideth it hither, the good rider! How it bobbeth, the blessed one, the
home-returning one, in its purple saddles!

The sky gazeth brightly thereon, the world lieth deep. Oh, all ye
strange ones who have come to me, it is already worth while to have
lived with me!”

Thus spake Zarathustra. And again came the cries and laughter of the
higher men out of the cave: then began he anew:

“They bite at it, my bait taketh, there departeth also from them their
enemy, the spirit of gravity. Now do they learn to laugh at themselves:
do I hear rightly?

My virile food taketh effect, my strong and savoury sayings: and verily,
I did not nourish them with flatulent vegetables! But with warrior-food,
with conqueror-food: new desires did I awaken.

New hopes are in their arms and legs, their hearts expand. They find new
words, soon will their spirits breathe wantonness.

Such food may sure enough not be proper for children, nor even for
longing girls old and young. One persuadeth their bowels otherwise; I am
not their physician and teacher.

The DISGUST departeth from these higher men; well! that is my victory.
In my domain they become assured; all stupid shame fleeth away; they
empty themselves.

They empty their hearts, good times return unto them, they keep holiday
and ruminate,—they become THANKFUL.

THAT do I take as the best sign: they become thankful. Not long will it
be ere they devise festivals, and put up memorials to their old joys.

They are CONVALESCENTS!” Thus spake Zarathustra joyfully to his heart
and gazed outward; his animals, however, pressed up to him, and honoured
his happiness and his silence.

2.

All on a sudden however, Zarathustra’s ear was frightened: for the cave
which had hitherto been full of noise and laughter, became all at once
still as death;—his nose, however, smelt a sweet-scented vapour and
incense-odour, as if from burning pine-cones.

“What happeneth? What are they about?” he asked himself, and stole up
to the entrance, that he might be able unobserved to see his guests.
But wonder upon wonder! what was he then obliged to behold with his own
eyes!

“They have all of them become PIOUS again, they PRAY, they are
mad!”—said he, and was astonished beyond measure. And forsooth! all
these higher men, the two kings, the pope out of service, the evil
magician, the voluntary beggar, the wanderer and shadow, the old
soothsayer, the spiritually conscientious one, and the ugliest man—they
all lay on their knees like children and credulous old women, and
worshipped the ass. And just then began the ugliest man to gurgle and
snort, as if something unutterable in him tried to find expression;
when, however, he had actually found words, behold! it was a pious,
strange litany in praise of the adored and censed ass. And the litany
sounded thus:

Amen! And glory and honour and wisdom and thanks and praise and strength
be to our God, from everlasting to everlasting!

—The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

He carrieth our burdens, he hath taken upon him the form of a servant,
he is patient of heart and never saith Nay; and he who loveth his God
chastiseth him.

—The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

He speaketh not: except that he ever saith Yea to the world which
he created: thus doth he extol his world. It is his artfulness that
speaketh not: thus is he rarely found wrong.

—The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

Uncomely goeth he through the world. Grey is the favourite colour in
which he wrappeth his virtue. Hath he spirit, then doth he conceal it;
every one, however, believeth in his long ears.

—The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

What hidden wisdom it is to wear long ears, and only to say Yea and
never Nay! Hath he not created the world in his own image, namely, as
stupid as possible?

—The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

Thou goest straight and crooked ways; it concerneth thee little what
seemeth straight or crooked unto us men. Beyond good and evil is thy
domain. It is thine innocence not to know what innocence is.

—The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

Lo! how thou spurnest none from thee, neither beggars nor kings. Thou
sufferest little children to come unto thee, and when the bad boys decoy
thee, then sayest thou simply, YE-A.

—The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.

Thou lovest she-asses and fresh figs, thou art no food-despiser. A
thistle tickleth thy heart when thou chancest to be hungry. There is the
wisdom of a God therein.

—The ass, however, here brayed YE-A.




LXXVIII. THE ASS-FESTIVAL.


1.

At this place in the litany, however, Zarathustra could no longer
control himself; he himself cried out YE-A, louder even than the ass,
and sprang into the midst of his maddened guests. “Whatever are you
about, ye grown-up children?” he exclaimed, pulling up the praying ones
from the ground. “Alas, if any one else, except Zarathustra, had seen
you:

Every one would think you the worst blasphemers, or the very foolishest
old women, with your new belief!

And thou thyself, thou old pope, how is it in accordance with thee, to
adore an ass in such a manner as God?”—

“O Zarathustra,” answered the pope, “forgive me, but in divine matters
I am more enlightened even than thou. And it is right that it should be
so.

Better to adore God so, in this form, than in no form at all! Think over
this saying, mine exalted friend: thou wilt readily divine that in such
a saying there is wisdom.

He who said ‘God is a Spirit’—made the greatest stride and slide
hitherto made on earth towards unbelief: such a dictum is not easily
amended again on earth!

Mine old heart leapeth and boundeth because there is still something
to adore on earth. Forgive it, O Zarathustra, to an old, pious
pontiff-heart!—”

—“And thou,” said Zarathustra to the wanderer and shadow, “thou callest
and thinkest thyself a free spirit? And thou here practisest such
idolatry and hierolatry?

Worse verily, doest thou here than with thy bad brown girls, thou bad,
new believer!”

“It is sad enough,” answered the wanderer and shadow, “thou art right:
but how can I help it! The old God liveth again, O Zarathustra, thou
mayst say what thou wilt.

The ugliest man is to blame for it all: he hath reawakened him. And
if he say that he once killed him, with Gods DEATH is always just a
prejudice.”

—“And thou,” said Zarathustra, “thou bad old magician, what didst thou
do! Who ought to believe any longer in thee in this free age, when THOU
believest in such divine donkeyism?

It was a stupid thing that thou didst; how couldst thou, a shrewd man,
do such a stupid thing!”

“O Zarathustra,” answered the shrewd magician, “thou art right, it was a
stupid thing,—it was also repugnant to me.”

—“And thou even,” said Zarathustra to the spiritually conscientious
one, “consider, and put thy finger to thy nose! Doth nothing go against
thy conscience here? Is thy spirit not too cleanly for this praying and
the fumes of those devotees?”

“There is something therein,” said the spiritually conscientious one,
and put his finger to his nose, “there is something in this spectacle
which even doeth good to my conscience.

Perhaps I dare not believe in God: certain it is however, that God
seemeth to me most worthy of belief in this form.

God is said to be eternal, according to the testimony of the most pious:
he who hath so much time taketh his time. As slow and as stupid as
possible: THEREBY can such a one nevertheless go very far.

And he who hath too much spirit might well become infatuated with
stupidity and folly. Think of thyself, O Zarathustra!

Thou thyself—verily! even thou couldst well become an ass through
superabundance of wisdom.

Doth not the true sage willingly walk on the crookedest paths? The
evidence teacheth it, O Zarathustra,—THINE OWN evidence!”

—“And thou thyself, finally,” said Zarathustra, and turned towards the
ugliest man, who still lay on the ground stretching up his arm to the
ass (for he gave it wine to drink). “Say, thou nondescript, what hast
thou been about!

Thou seemest to me transformed, thine eyes glow, the mantle of the
sublime covereth thine ugliness: WHAT didst thou do?

Is it then true what they say, that thou hast again awakened him? And
why? Was he not for good reasons killed and made away with?

Thou thyself seemest to me awakened: what didst thou do? why didst THOU
turn round? Why didst THOU get converted? Speak, thou nondescript!”

“O Zarathustra,” answered the ugliest man, “thou art a rogue!

Whether HE yet liveth, or again liveth, or is thoroughly dead—which of
us both knoweth that best? I ask thee.

One thing however do I know,—from thyself did I learn it once, O
Zarathustra: he who wanteth to kill most thoroughly, LAUGHETH.

‘Not by wrath but by laughter doth one kill’—thus spakest thou once,
O Zarathustra, thou hidden one, thou destroyer without wrath, thou
dangerous saint,—thou art a rogue!”

2.

Then, however, did it come to pass that Zarathustra, astonished at such
merely roguish answers, jumped back to the door of his cave, and turning
towards all his guests, cried out with a strong voice:

“O ye wags, all of you, ye buffoons! Why do ye dissemble and disguise
yourselves before me!

How the hearts of all of you convulsed with delight and wickedness,
because ye had at last become again like little children—namely,
pious,—

—Because ye at last did again as children do—namely, prayed, folded
your hands and said ‘good God’!

But now leave, I pray you, THIS nursery, mine own cave, where to-day
all childishness is carried on. Cool down, here outside, your hot
child-wantonness and heart-tumult!

To be sure: except ye become as little children ye shall not enter into
THAT kingdom of heaven.” (And Zarathustra pointed aloft with his hands.)

“But we do not at all want to enter into the kingdom of heaven: we have
become men,—SO WE WANT THE KINGDOM OF EARTH.”

3.

And once more began Zarathustra to speak. “O my new friends,” said he,—
“ye strange ones, ye higher men, how well do ye now please me,—

—Since ye have again become joyful! Ye have, verily, all blossomed
forth: it seemeth to me that for such flowers as you, NEW FESTIVALS are
required.

—A little valiant nonsense, some divine service and ass-festival, some
old joyful Zarathustra fool, some blusterer to blow your souls bright.

Forget not this night and this ass-festival, ye higher men! THAT did ye
devise when with me, that do I take as a good omen,—such things only
the convalescents devise!

And should ye celebrate it again, this ass-festival, do it from love to
yourselves, do it also from love to me! And in remembrance of me!”

Thus spake Zarathustra.




LXXIX. THE DRUNKEN SONG.


1.

Meanwhile one after another had gone out into the open air, and into the
cool, thoughtful night; Zarathustra himself, however, led the ugliest
man by the hand, that he might show him his night-world, and the great
round moon, and the silvery water-falls near his cave. There they at
last stood still beside one another; all of them old people, but with
comforted, brave hearts, and astonished in themselves that it was so
well with them on earth; the mystery of the night, however, came nigher
and nigher to their hearts. And anew Zarathustra thought to himself:
“Oh, how well do they now please me, these higher men!”—but he did not
say it aloud, for he respected their happiness and their silence.—

Then, however, there happened that which in this astonishing long day
was most astonishing: the ugliest man began once more and for the last
time to gurgle and snort, and when he had at length found expression,
behold! there sprang a question plump and plain out of his mouth, a
good, deep, clear question, which moved the hearts of all who listened
to him.

“My friends, all of you,” said the ugliest man, “what think ye? For the
sake of this day—_I_ am for the first time content to have lived mine
entire life.

And that I testify so much is still not enough for me. It is worth while
living on the earth: one day, one festival with Zarathustra, hath taught
me to love the earth.

‘Was THAT—life?’ will I say unto death. ‘Well! Once more!’

My friends, what think ye? Will ye not, like me, say unto death: ‘Was
THAT—life? For the sake of Zarathustra, well! Once more!’”—

Thus spake the ugliest man; it was not, however, far from midnight.
And what took place then, think ye? As soon as the higher men heard his
question, they became all at once conscious of their transformation and
convalescence, and of him who was the cause thereof: then did they rush
up to Zarathustra, thanking, honouring, caressing him, and kissing his
hands, each in his own peculiar way; so that some laughed and some wept.
The old soothsayer, however, danced with delight; and though he was
then, as some narrators suppose, full of sweet wine, he was certainly
still fuller of sweet life, and had renounced all weariness. There are
even those who narrate that the ass then danced: for not in vain had the
ugliest man previously given it wine to drink. That may be the case, or
it may be otherwise; and if in truth the ass did not dance that evening,
there nevertheless happened then greater and rarer wonders than
the dancing of an ass would have been. In short, as the proverb of
Zarathustra saith: “What doth it matter!”

2.

When, however, this took place with the ugliest man, Zarathustra stood
there like one drunken: his glance dulled, his tongue faltered and his
feet staggered. And who could divine what thoughts then passed through
Zarathustra’s soul? Apparently, however, his spirit retreated and fled
in advance and was in remote distances, and as it were “wandering on
high mountain-ridges,” as it standeth written, “‘twixt two seas,

—Wandering ‘twixt the past and the future as a heavy cloud.” Gradually,
however, while the higher men held him in their arms, he came back to
himself a little, and resisted with his hands the crowd of the honouring
and caring ones; but he did not speak. All at once, however, he turned
his head quickly, for he seemed to hear something: then laid he his
finger on his mouth and said: “COME!”

And immediately it became still and mysterious round about; from
the depth however there came up slowly the sound of a clock-bell.
Zarathustra listened thereto, like the higher men; then, however, laid
he his finger on his mouth the second time, and said again: “COME! COME!
IT IS GETTING ON TO MIDNIGHT!”—and his voice had changed. But still
he had not moved from the spot. Then it became yet stiller and more
mysterious, and everything hearkened, even the ass, and Zarathustra’s
noble animals, the eagle and the serpent,—likewise the cave of
Zarathustra and the big cool moon, and the night itself. Zarathustra,
however, laid his hand upon his mouth for the third time, and said:

COME! COME! COME! LET US NOW WANDER! IT IS THE HOUR: LET US WANDER INTO
THE NIGHT!

3.

Ye higher men, it is getting on to midnight: then will I say something
into your ears, as that old clock-bell saith it into mine ear,—

—As mysteriously, as frightfully, and as cordially as that midnight
clock-bell speaketh it to me, which hath experienced more than one man:

—Which hath already counted the smarting throbbings of your fathers’
hearts—ah! ah! how it sigheth! how it laugheth in its dream! the old,
deep, deep midnight!

Hush! Hush! Then is there many a thing heard which may not be heard
by day; now however, in the cool air, when even all the tumult of your
hearts hath become still,—

—Now doth it speak, now is it heard, now doth it steal into
overwakeful, nocturnal souls: ah! ah! how the midnight sigheth! how it
laugheth in its dream!

—Hearest thou not how it mysteriously, frightfully, and cordially
speaketh unto THEE, the old deep, deep midnight?

O MAN, TAKE HEED!

4.

Woe to me! Whither hath time gone? Have I not sunk into deep wells? The
world sleepeth—

Ah! Ah! The dog howleth, the moon shineth. Rather will I die, rather
will I die, than say unto you what my midnight-heart now thinketh.

Already have I died. It is all over. Spider, why spinnest thou around
me? Wilt thou have blood? Ah! Ah! The dew falleth, the hour cometh—

—The hour in which I frost and freeze, which asketh and asketh and
asketh: “Who hath sufficient courage for it?

—Who is to be master of the world? Who is going to say: THUS shall ye
flow, ye great and small streams!”

—The hour approacheth: O man, thou higher man, take heed! this talk is
for fine ears, for thine ears—WHAT SAITH DEEP MIDNIGHT’S VOICE INDEED?

5.

It carrieth me away, my soul danceth. Day’s-work! Day’s-work! Who is to
be master of the world?

The moon is cool, the wind is still. Ah! Ah! Have ye already flown high
enough? Ye have danced: a leg, nevertheless, is not a wing.

Ye good dancers, now is all delight over: wine hath become lees, every
cup hath become brittle, the sepulchres mutter.

Ye have not flown high enough: now do the sepulchres mutter: “Free the
dead! Why is it so long night? Doth not the moon make us drunken?”

Ye higher men, free the sepulchres, awaken the corpses! Ah, why doth the
worm still burrow? There approacheth, there approacheth, the hour,—

—There boometh the clock-bell, there thrilleth still the heart, there
burroweth still the wood-worm, the heart-worm. Ah! Ah! THE WORLD IS
DEEP!

6.

Sweet lyre! Sweet lyre! I love thy tone, thy drunken, ranunculine
tone!—how long, how far hath come unto me thy tone, from the distance,
from the ponds of love!

Thou old clock-bell, thou sweet lyre! Every pain hath torn thy heart,
father-pain, fathers’-pain, forefathers’-pain; thy speech hath become
ripe,—

—Ripe like the golden autumn and the afternoon, like mine anchorite
heart—now sayest thou: The world itself hath become ripe, the grape
turneth brown,

—Now doth it wish to die, to die of happiness. Ye higher men, do ye not
feel it? There welleth up mysteriously an odour,

—A perfume and odour of eternity, a rosy-blessed, brown,
gold-wine-odour of old happiness,

—Of drunken midnight-death happiness, which singeth: the world is deep,
AND DEEPER THAN THE DAY COULD READ!

7.

Leave me alone! Leave me alone! I am too pure for thee. Touch me not!
Hath not my world just now become perfect?

My skin is too pure for thy hands. Leave me alone, thou dull, doltish,
stupid day! Is not the midnight brighter?

The purest are to be masters of the world, the least known, the
strongest, the midnight-souls, who are brighter and deeper than any day.

O day, thou gropest for me? Thou feelest for my happiness? For thee am I
rich, lonesome, a treasure-pit, a gold chamber?

O world, thou wantest ME? Am I worldly for thee? Am I spiritual for
thee? Am I divine for thee? But day and world, ye are too coarse,—

—Have cleverer hands, grasp after deeper happiness, after deeper
unhappiness, grasp after some God; grasp not after me:

—Mine unhappiness, my happiness is deep, thou strange day, but yet am I
no God, no God’s-hell: DEEP IS ITS WOE.

8.

God’s woe is deeper, thou strange world! Grasp at God’s woe, not at me!
What am I! A drunken sweet lyre,—

—A midnight-lyre, a bell-frog, which no one understandeth, but which
MUST speak before deaf ones, ye higher men! For ye do not understand me!

Gone! Gone! O youth! O noontide! O afternoon! Now have come evening and
night and midnight,—the dog howleth, the wind:

—Is the wind not a dog? It whineth, it barketh, it howleth. Ah! Ah!
how she sigheth! how she laugheth, how she wheezeth and panteth, the
midnight!

How she just now speaketh soberly, this drunken poetess! hath she
perhaps overdrunk her drunkenness? hath she become overawake? doth she
ruminate?

—Her woe doth she ruminate over, in a dream, the old, deep
midnight—and still more her joy. For joy, although woe be deep, JOY IS
DEEPER STILL THAN GRIEF CAN BE.

9.

Thou grape-vine! Why dost thou praise me? Have I not cut thee! I am
cruel, thou bleedest—: what meaneth thy praise of my drunken cruelty?

“Whatever hath become perfect, everything mature—wanteth to die!” so
sayest thou. Blessed, blessed be the vintner’s knife! But everything
immature wanteth to live: alas!

Woe saith: “Hence! Go! Away, thou woe!” But everything that suffereth
wanteth to live, that it may become mature and lively and longing,

—Longing for the further, the higher, the brighter. “I want heirs,”
 so saith everything that suffereth, “I want children, I do not want
MYSELF,”—

Joy, however, doth not want heirs, it doth not want children,—joy
wanteth itself, it wanteth eternity, it wanteth recurrence, it wanteth
everything eternally-like-itself.

Woe saith: “Break, bleed, thou heart! Wander, thou leg! Thou wing, fly!
Onward! upward! thou pain!” Well! Cheer up! O mine old heart: WOE SAITH:
“HENCE! GO!”

10.

Ye higher men, what think ye? Am I a soothsayer? Or a dreamer? Or a
drunkard? Or a dream-reader? Or a midnight-bell?

Or a drop of dew? Or a fume and fragrance of eternity? Hear ye it not?
Smell ye it not? Just now hath my world become perfect, midnight is also
midday,—

Pain is also a joy, curse is also a blessing, night is also a sun,—go
away! or ye will learn that a sage is also a fool.

Said ye ever Yea to one joy? O my friends, then said ye Yea also unto
ALL woe. All things are enlinked, enlaced and enamoured,—

—Wanted ye ever once to come twice; said ye ever: “Thou pleasest me,
happiness! Instant! Moment!” then wanted ye ALL to come back again!

—All anew, all eternal, all enlinked, enlaced and enamoured, Oh, then
did ye LOVE the world,—

—Ye eternal ones, ye love it eternally and for all time: and also unto
woe do ye say: Hence! Go! but come back! FOR JOYS ALL WANT—ETERNITY!

11.

All joy wanteth the eternity of all things, it wanteth honey, it
wanteth lees, it wanteth drunken midnight, it wanteth graves, it wanteth
grave-tears’ consolation, it wanteth gilded evening-red—

—WHAT doth not joy want! it is thirstier, heartier, hungrier, more
frightful, more mysterious, than all woe: it wanteth ITSELF, it biteth
into ITSELF, the ring’s will writheth in it,—

—It wanteth love, it wanteth hate, it is over-rich, it bestoweth, it
throweth away, it beggeth for some one to take from it, it thanketh the
taker, it would fain be hated,—

—So rich is joy that it thirsteth for woe, for hell, for hate, for
shame, for the lame, for the WORLD,—for this world, Oh, ye know it
indeed!

Ye higher men, for you doth it long, this joy, this irrepressible,
blessed joy—for your woe, ye failures! For failures, longeth all
eternal joy.

For joys all want themselves, therefore do they also want grief! O
happiness, O pain! Oh break, thou heart! Ye higher men, do learn it,
that joys want eternity.

—Joys want the eternity of ALL things, they WANT DEEP, PROFOUND
ETERNITY!

12.

Have ye now learned my song? Have ye divined what it would say? Well!
Cheer up! Ye higher men, sing now my roundelay!

Sing now yourselves the song, the name of which is “Once more,” the
signification of which is “Unto all eternity!”—sing, ye higher men,
Zarathustra’s roundelay!

     O man!  Take heed!
     What saith deep midnight’s voice indeed?
     “I slept my sleep—,
     “From deepest dream I’ve woke, and plead:—
     “The world is deep,
     “And deeper than the day could read.
     “Deep is its woe—,
     “Joy—deeper still than grief can be:
     “Woe saith:  Hence!  Go!
     “But joys all want eternity—,
     “—Want deep, profound eternity!”




LXXX. THE SIGN.


In the morning, however, after this night, Zarathustra jumped up from
his couch, and, having girded his loins, he came out of his cave glowing
and strong, like a morning sun coming out of gloomy mountains.

“Thou great star,” spake he, as he had spoken once before, “thou deep
eye of happiness, what would be all thy happiness if thou hadst not
THOSE for whom thou shinest!

And if they remained in their chambers whilst thou art already awake,
and comest and bestowest and distributest, how would thy proud modesty
upbraid for it!

Well! they still sleep, these higher men, whilst _I_ am awake: THEY are
not my proper companions! Not for them do I wait here in my mountains.

At my work I want to be, at my day: but they understand not what are the
signs of my morning, my step—is not for them the awakening-call.

They still sleep in my cave; their dream still drinketh at my drunken
songs. The audient ear for ME—the OBEDIENT ear, is yet lacking in their
limbs.”

—This had Zarathustra spoken to his heart when the sun arose: then
looked he inquiringly aloft, for he heard above him the sharp call of
his eagle. “Well!” called he upwards, “thus is it pleasing and proper to
me. Mine animals are awake, for I am awake.

Mine eagle is awake, and like me honoureth the sun. With eagle-talons
doth it grasp at the new light. Ye are my proper animals; I love you.

But still do I lack my proper men!”—

Thus spake Zarathustra; then, however, it happened that all on a sudden
he became aware that he was flocked around and fluttered around, as if
by innumerable birds,—the whizzing of so many wings, however, and the
crowding around his head was so great that he shut his eyes. And verily,
there came down upon him as it were a cloud, like a cloud of arrows
which poureth upon a new enemy. But behold, here it was a cloud of love,
and showered upon a new friend.

“What happeneth unto me?” thought Zarathustra in his astonished heart,
and slowly seated himself on the big stone which lay close to the exit
from his cave. But while he grasped about with his hands, around him,
above him and below him, and repelled the tender birds, behold, there
then happened to him something still stranger: for he grasped thereby
unawares into a mass of thick, warm, shaggy hair; at the same time,
however, there sounded before him a roar,—a long, soft lion-roar.

“THE SIGN COMETH,” said Zarathustra, and a change came over his heart.
And in truth, when it turned clear before him, there lay a yellow,
powerful animal at his feet, resting its head on his knee,—unwilling to
leave him out of love, and doing like a dog which again findeth its old
master. The doves, however, were no less eager with their love than the
lion; and whenever a dove whisked over its nose, the lion shook its head
and wondered and laughed.

When all this went on Zarathustra spake only a word: “MY CHILDREN ARE
NIGH, MY CHILDREN”—, then he became quite mute. His heart, however,
was loosed, and from his eyes there dropped down tears and fell upon
his hands. And he took no further notice of anything, but sat there
motionless, without repelling the animals further. Then flew the doves
to and fro, and perched on his shoulder, and caressed his white hair,
and did not tire of their tenderness and joyousness. The strong lion,
however, licked always the tears that fell on Zarathustra’s hands, and
roared and growled shyly. Thus did these animals do.—

All this went on for a long time, or a short time: for properly
speaking, there is NO time on earth for such things—. Meanwhile,
however, the higher men had awakened in Zarathustra’s cave, and
marshalled themselves for a procession to go to meet Zarathustra, and
give him their morning greeting: for they had found when they awakened
that he no longer tarried with them. When, however, they reached the
door of the cave and the noise of their steps had preceded them, the
lion started violently; it turned away all at once from Zarathustra, and
roaring wildly, sprang towards the cave. The higher men, however, when
they heard the lion roaring, cried all aloud as with one voice, fled
back and vanished in an instant.

Zarathustra himself, however, stunned and strange, rose from his seat,
looked around him, stood there astonished, inquired of his heart,
bethought himself, and remained alone. “What did I hear?” said he at
last, slowly, “what happened unto me just now?”

But soon there came to him his recollection, and he took in at a glance
all that had taken place between yesterday and to-day. “Here is indeed
the stone,” said he, and stroked his beard, “on IT sat I yester-morn;
and here came the soothsayer unto me, and here heard I first the cry
which I heard just now, the great cry of distress.

O ye higher men, YOUR distress was it that the old soothsayer foretold
to me yester-morn,—

—Unto your distress did he want to seduce and tempt me: ‘O
Zarathustra,’ said he to me, ‘I come to seduce thee to thy last sin.’

To my last sin?” cried Zarathustra, and laughed angrily at his own
words: “WHAT hath been reserved for me as my last sin?”

—And once more Zarathustra became absorbed in himself, and sat down
again on the big stone and meditated. Suddenly he sprang up,—

“FELLOW-SUFFERING! FELLOW-SUFFERING WITH THE HIGHER MEN!” he cried out,
and his countenance changed into brass. “Well! THAT—hath had its time!

My suffering and my fellow-suffering—what matter about them! Do I then
strive after HAPPINESS? I strive after my WORK!

Well! The lion hath come, my children are nigh, Zarathustra hath grown
ripe, mine hour hath come:—

This is MY morning, MY day beginneth: ARISE NOW, ARISE, THOU GREAT
NOONTIDE!”—

Thus spake Zarathustra and left his cave, glowing and strong, like a
morning sun coming out of gloomy mountains.




APPENDIX.


NOTES ON “THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA” BY ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.

I have had some opportunities of studying the conditions under which
Nietzsche is read in Germany, France, and England, and I have found
that, in each of these countries, students of his philosophy, as if
actuated by precisely similar motives and desires, and misled by the
same mistaken tactics on the part of most publishers, all proceed in the
same happy-go-lucky style when “taking him up.” They have had it said to
them that he wrote without any system, and they very naturally conclude
that it does not matter in the least whether they begin with his first,
third, or last book, provided they can obtain a few vague ideas as to
what his leading and most sensational principles were.

Now, it is clear that the book with the most mysterious, startling, or
suggestive title, will always stand the best chance of being purchased
by those who have no other criteria to guide them in their choice
than the aspect of a title-page; and this explains why “Thus Spake
Zarathustra” is almost always the first and often the only one of
Nietzsche’s books that falls into the hands of the uninitiated.

The title suggests all kinds of mysteries; a glance at the
chapter-headings quickly confirms the suspicions already aroused,
and the sub-title: “A Book for All and None”, generally succeeds in
dissipating the last doubts the prospective purchaser may entertain
concerning his fitness for the book or its fitness for him. And what
happens?

“Thus Spake Zarathustra” is taken home; the reader, who perchance may
know no more concerning Nietzsche than a magazine article has told him,
tries to read it and, understanding less than half he reads, probably
never gets further than the second or third part,—and then only to feel
convinced that Nietzsche himself was “rather hazy” as to what he was
talking about. Such chapters as “The Child with the Mirror”, “In the
Happy Isles”, “The Grave-Song,” “Immaculate Perception,” “The Stillest
Hour”, “The Seven Seals”, and many others, are almost utterly devoid of
meaning to all those who do not know something of Nietzsche’s life, his
aims and his friendships.

As a matter of fact, “Thus Spake Zarathustra”, though it is
unquestionably Nietzsche’s opus magnum, is by no means the first of
Nietzsche’s works that the beginner ought to undertake to read. The
author himself refers to it as the deepest work ever offered to the
German public, and elsewhere speaks of his other writings as being
necessary for the understanding of it. But when it is remembered that
in Zarathustra we not only have the history of his most intimate
experiences, friendships, feuds, disappointments, triumphs and the like,
but that the very form in which they are narrated is one which tends
rather to obscure than to throw light upon them, the difficulties which
meet the reader who starts quite unprepared will be seen to be really
formidable.

Zarathustra, then,—this shadowy, allegorical personality, speaking in
allegories and parables, and at times not even refraining from relating
his own dreams—is a figure we can understand but very imperfectly if we
have no knowledge of his creator and counterpart, Friedrich Nietzsche;
and it were therefore well, previous to our study of the more abstruse
parts of this book, if we were to turn to some authoritative book on
Nietzsche’s life and works and to read all that is there said on the
subject. Those who can read German will find an excellent guide, in this
respect, in Frau Foerster-Nietzsche’s exhaustive and highly interesting
biography of her brother: “Das Leben Friedrich Nietzsche’s” (published
by Naumann); while the works of Deussen, Raoul Richter, and Baroness
Isabelle von Unger-Sternberg, will be found to throw useful and
necessary light upon many questions which it would be difficult for a
sister to touch upon.

In regard to the actual philosophical views expounded in this work,
there is an excellent way of clearing up any difficulties they may
present, and that is by an appeal to Nietzsche’s other works. Again and
again, of course, he will be found to express himself so clearly that
all reference to his other writings may be dispensed with; but where
this is not the case, the advice he himself gives is after all the best
to be followed here, viz.:—to regard such works as: “Joyful Science”,
“Beyond Good and Evil”, “The Genealogy of Morals”, “The Twilight of
the Idols”, “The Antichrist”, “The Will to Power”, etc., etc., as the
necessary preparation for “Thus Spake Zarathustra”.

These directions, though they are by no means simple to carry out, seem
at least to possess the quality of definiteness and straightforwardness.
“Follow them and all will be clear,” I seem to imply. But I regret to
say that this is not really the case. For my experience tells me that
even after the above directions have been followed with the greatest
possible zeal, the student will still halt in perplexity before certain
passages in the book before us, and wonder what they mean. Now, it is
with the view of giving a little additional help to all those who find
themselves in this position that I proceed to put forth my own personal
interpretation of the more abstruse passages in this work.

In offering this little commentary to the Nietzsche student, I should
like it to be understood that I make no claim as to its infallibility or
indispensability. It represents but an attempt on my part—a very feeble
one perhaps—to give the reader what little help I can in surmounting
difficulties which a long study of Nietzsche’s life and works has
enabled me, partially I hope, to overcome.

 ...

Perhaps it would be as well to start out with a broad and rapid sketch
of Nietzsche as a writer on Morals, Evolution, and Sociology, so that
the reader may be prepared to pick out for himself, so to speak, all
passages in this work bearing in any way upon Nietzsche’s views in those
three important branches of knowledge.

(A.) Nietzsche and Morality.

In morality, Nietzsche starts out by adopting the position of the
relativist. He says there are no absolute values “good” and “evil”;
these are mere means adopted by all in order to acquire power to
maintain their place in the world, or to become supreme. It is the
lion’s good to devour an antelope. It is the dead-leaf butterfly’s
good to tell a foe a falsehood. For when the dead-leaf butterfly is in
danger, it clings to the side of a twig, and what it says to its foe is
practically this: “I am not a butterfly, I am a dead leaf, and can be
of no use to thee.” This is a lie which is good to the butterfly, for
it preserves it. In nature every species of organic being instinctively
adopts and practises those acts which most conduce to the prevalence
or supremacy of its kind. Once the most favourable order of conduct is
found, proved efficient and established, it becomes the ruling morality
of the species that adopts it and bears them along to victory. All
species must not and cannot value alike, for what is the lion’s good is
the antelope’s evil and vice versa.

Concepts of good and evil are therefore, in their origin, merely a means
to an end, they are expedients for acquiring power.

Applying this principle to mankind, Nietzsche attacked Christian
moral values. He declared them to be, like all other morals, merely
an expedient for protecting a certain type of man. In the case of
Christianity this type was, according to Nietzsche, a low one.

Conflicting moral codes have been no more than the conflicting weapons
of different classes of men; for in mankind there is a continual war
between the powerful, the noble, the strong, and the well-constituted
on the one side, and the impotent, the mean, the weak, and the
ill-constituted on the other. The war is a war of moral principles.
The morality of the powerful class, Nietzsche calls NOBLE- or
MASTER-MORALITY; that of the weak and subordinate class he calls
SLAVE-MORALITY. In the first morality it is the eagle which, looking
down upon a browsing lamb, contends that “eating lamb is good.” In the
second, the slave-morality, it is the lamb which, looking up from the
sward, bleats dissentingly: “Eating lamb is evil.”

(B.) The Master- and Slave-Morality Compared.

The first morality is active, creative, Dionysian. The second is
passive, defensive,—to it belongs the “struggle for existence.”

Where attempts have not been made to reconcile the two moralities, they
may be described as follows:—All is GOOD in the noble morality which
proceeds from strength, power, health, well-constitutedness, happiness,
and awfulness; for, the motive force behind the people practising it is
“the struggle for power.” The antithesis “good and bad” to this
first class means the same as “noble” and “despicable.” “Bad” in the
master-morality must be applied to the coward, to all acts that spring
from weakness, to the man with “an eye to the main chance,” who would
forsake everything in order to live.

With the second, the slave-morality, the case is different. There,
inasmuch as the community is an oppressed, suffering, unemancipated, and
weary one, all THAT will be held to be good which alleviates the
state of suffering. Pity, the obliging hand, the warm heart, patience,
industry, and humility—these are unquestionably the qualities we shall
here find flooded with the light of approval and admiration; because
they are the most USEFUL qualities—; they make life endurable, they are
of assistance in the “struggle for existence” which is the motive force
behind the people practising this morality. To this class, all that is
AWFUL is bad, in fact it is THE evil par excellence. Strength, health,
superabundance of animal spirits and power, are regarded with hate,
suspicion, and fear by the subordinate class.

Now Nietzsche believed that the first or the noble-morality conduced to
an ascent in the line of life; because it was creative and active. On
the other hand, he believed that the second or slave-morality, where
it became paramount, led to degeneration, because it was passive and
defensive, wanting merely to keep those who practised it alive. Hence
his earnest advocacy of noble-morality.

(C.) Nietzsche and Evolution.

Nietzsche as an evolutionist I shall have occasion to define and discuss
in the course of these notes (see Notes on Chapter LVI., par. 10, and on
Chapter LVII.). For the present let it suffice for us to know that he
accepted the “Development Hypothesis” as an explanation of the origin of
species: but he did not halt where most naturalists have halted. He
by no means regarded man as the highest possible being which evolution
could arrive at; for though his physical development may have reached
its limit, this is not the case with his mental or spiritual attributes.
If the process be a fact; if things have BECOME what they are, then, he
contends, we may describe no limit to man’s aspirations. If he struggled
up from barbarism, and still more remotely from the lower Primates,
his ideal should be to surpass man himself and reach Superman (see
especially the Prologue).

(D.) Nietzsche and Sociology.

Nietzsche as a sociologist aims at an aristocratic arrangement of
society. He would have us rear an ideal race. Honest and truthful in
intellectual matters, he could not even think that men are equal. “With
these preachers of equality will I not be mixed up and confounded. For
thus speaketh justice unto ME: ‘Men are not equal.’” He sees precisely
in this inequality a purpose to be served, a condition to be exploited.
“Every elevation of the type ‘man,’” he writes in “Beyond Good and
Evil”, “has hitherto been the work of an aristocratic society—and so
will it always be—a society believing in a long scale of gradations of
rank and differences of worth among human beings.”

Those who are sufficiently interested to desire to read his own detailed
account of the society he would fain establish, will find an excellent
passage in Aphorism 57 of “The Antichrist”.

 ...

PART I. THE PROLOGUE.

In Part I. including the Prologue, no very great difficulties will
appear. Zarathustra’s habit of designating a whole class of men or a
whole school of thought by a single fitting nickname may perhaps lead to
a little confusion at first; but, as a rule, when the general drift
of his arguments is grasped, it requires but a slight effort of the
imagination to discover whom he is referring to. In the ninth paragraph
of the Prologue, for instance, it is quite obvious that “Herdsmen” in
the verse “Herdsmen, I say, etc., etc.,” stands for all those to-day
who are the advocates of gregariousness—of the ant-hill. And when our
author says: “A robber shall Zarathustra be called by the herdsmen,” it
is clear that these words may be taken almost literally from one whose
ideal was the rearing of a higher aristocracy. Again, “the good and
just,” throughout the book, is the expression used in referring to the
self-righteous of modern times,—those who are quite sure that they
know all that is to be known concerning good and evil, and are satisfied
that the values their little world of tradition has handed down to them,
are destined to rule mankind as long as it lasts.

In the last paragraph of the Prologue, verse 7, Zarathustra gives us a
foretaste of his teaching concerning the big and the little sagacities,
expounded subsequently. He says he would he were as wise as his serpent;
this desire will be found explained in the discourse entitled “The
Despisers of the Body”, which I shall have occasion to refer to later.

 ...

THE DISCOURSES.

Chapter I. The Three Metamorphoses.

This opening discourse is a parable in which Zarathustra discloses the
mental development of all creators of new values. It is the story of
a life which reaches its consummation in attaining to a second
ingenuousness or in returning to childhood. Nietzsche, the supposed
anarchist, here plainly disclaims all relationship whatever to anarchy,
for he shows us that only by bearing the burdens of the existing law and
submitting to it patiently, as the camel submits to being laden, does
the free spirit acquire that ascendancy over tradition which enables him
to meet and master the dragon “Thou shalt,”—the dragon with the values
of a thousand years glittering on its scales. There are two lessons in
this discourse: first, that in order to create one must be as a little
child; secondly, that it is only through existing law and order that
one attains to that height from which new law and new order may be
promulgated.

Chapter II. The Academic Chairs of Virtue.

Almost the whole of this is quite comprehensible. It is a discourse
against all those who confound virtue with tameness and smug ease, and
who regard as virtuous only that which promotes security and tends to
deepen sleep.

Chapter IV. The Despisers of the Body.

Here Zarathustra gives names to the intellect and the instincts; he
calls the one “the little sagacity” and the latter “the big sagacity.”
 Schopenhauer’s teaching concerning the intellect is fully endorsed here.
“An instrument of thy body is also thy little sagacity, my brother,
which thou callest ‘spirit,’” says Zarathustra. From beginning to end it
is a warning to those who would think too lightly of the instincts
and unduly exalt the intellect and its derivatives: Reason and
Understanding.

Chapter IX. The Preachers of Death.

This is an analysis of the psychology of all those who have the “evil
eye” and are pessimists by virtue of their constitutions.

Chapter XV. The Thousand and One Goals.

In this discourse Zarathustra opens his exposition of the doctrine of
relativity in morality, and declares all morality to be a mere means
to power. Needless to say that verses 9, 10, 11, and 12 refer to the
Greeks, the Persians, the Jews, and the Germans respectively. In the
penultimate verse he makes known his discovery concerning the root of
modern Nihilism and indifference,—i.e., that modern man has no goal, no
aim, no ideals (see Note A).

Chapter XVIII. Old and Young Women.

Nietzsche’s views on women have either to be loved at first sight
or they become perhaps the greatest obstacle in the way of those who
otherwise would be inclined to accept his philosophy. Women especially,
of course, have been taught to dislike them, because it has been
rumoured that his views are unfriendly to themselves. Now, to my mind,
all this is pure misunderstanding and error.

German philosophers, thanks to Schopenhauer, have earned rather a bad
name for their views on women. It is almost impossible for one of them
to write a line on the subject, however kindly he may do so, without
being suspected of wishing to open a crusade against the fair sex.
Despite the fact, therefore, that all Nietzsche’s views in this respect
were dictated to him by the profoundest love; despite Zarathustra’s
reservation in this discourse, that “with women nothing (that can be
said) is impossible,” and in the face of other overwhelming evidence
to the contrary, Nietzsche is universally reported to have mis son
pied dans le plat, where the female sex is concerned. And what is the
fundamental doctrine which has given rise to so much bitterness and
aversion?—Merely this: that the sexes are at bottom ANTAGONISTIC—that
is to say, as different as blue is from yellow, and that the best
possible means of rearing anything approaching a desirable race is to
preserve and to foster this profound hostility. What Nietzsche strives
to combat and to overthrow is the modern democratic tendency which is
slowly labouring to level all things—even the sexes. His quarrel is not
with women—what indeed could be more undignified?—it is with those who
would destroy the natural relationship between the sexes, by modifying
either the one or the other with a view to making them more alike. The
human world is just as dependent upon women’s powers as upon men’s. It
is women’s strongest and most valuable instincts which help to determine
who are to be the fathers of the next generation. By destroying these
particular instincts, that is to say by attempting to masculinise woman,
and to feminise men, we jeopardise the future of our people. The general
democratic movement of modern times, in its frantic struggle to mitigate
all differences, is now invading even the world of sex. It is against
this movement that Nietzsche raises his voice; he would have woman
become ever more woman and man become ever more man. Only thus, and
he is undoubtedly right, can their combined instincts lead to the
excellence of humanity. Regarded in this light, all his views on woman
appear not only necessary but just (see Note on Chapter LVI., par. 21.)

It is interesting to observe that the last line of the discourse, which
has so frequently been used by women as a weapon against Nietzsche’s
views concerning them, was suggested to Nietzsche by a woman (see “Das
Leben F. Nietzsche’s”).

Chapter XXI. Voluntary Death.

In regard to this discourse, I should only like to point out that
Nietzsche had a particular aversion to the word “suicide”—self-murder.
He disliked the evil it suggested, and in rechristening the act
Voluntary Death, i.e., the death that comes from no other hand than
one’s own, he was desirous of elevating it to the position it held in
classical antiquity (see Aphorism 36 in “The Twilight of the Idols”).

Chapter XXII. The Bestowing Virtue.

An important aspect of Nietzsche’s philosophy is brought to light in
this discourse. His teaching, as is well known, places the Aristotelian
man of spirit, above all others in the natural divisions of man. The
man with overflowing strength, both of mind and body, who must discharge
this strength or perish, is the Nietzschean ideal. To such a man, giving
from his overflow becomes a necessity; bestowing develops into a means
of existence, and this is the only giving, the only charity, that
Nietzsche recognises. In paragraph 3 of the discourse, we read
Zarathustra’s healthy exhortation to his disciples to become independent
thinkers and to find themselves before they learn any more from him (see
Notes on Chapters LVI., par. 5, and LXXIII., pars. 10, 11).

 ...

PART II.

Chapter XXIII. The Child with the Mirror.

Nietzsche tells us here, in a poetical form, how deeply grieved he was
by the manifold misinterpretations and misunderstandings which were
becoming rife concerning his publications. He does not recognise
himself in the mirror of public opinion, and recoils terrified from the
distorted reflection of his features. In verse 20 he gives us a
hint which it were well not to pass over too lightly; for, in the
introduction to “The Genealogy of Morals” (written in 1887) he finds it
necessary to refer to the matter again and with greater precision. The
point is this, that a creator of new values meets with his surest and
strongest obstacles in the very spirit of the language which is at his
disposal. Words, like all other manifestations of an evolving race, are
stamped with the values that have long been paramount in that race.
Now, the original thinker who finds himself compelled to use the current
speech of his country in order to impart new and hitherto untried views
to his fellows, imposes a task upon the natural means of communication
which it is totally unfitted to perform,—hence the obscurities and
prolixities which are so frequently met with in the writings of original
thinkers. In the “Dawn of Day”, Nietzsche actually cautions young
writers against THE DANGER OF ALLOWING THEIR THOUGHTS TO BE MOULDED BY
THE WORDS AT THEIR DISPOSAL.

Chapter XXIV. In the Happy Isles.

While writing this, Nietzsche is supposed to have been thinking of the
island of Ischia which was ultimately destroyed by an earthquake. His
teaching here is quite clear. He was among the first thinkers of Europe
to overcome the pessimism which godlessness generally brings in its
wake. He points to creating as the surest salvation from the suffering
which is a concomitant of all higher life. “What would there be to
create,” he asks, “if there were—Gods?” His ideal, the Superman, lends
him the cheerfulness necessary to the overcoming of that despair usually
attendant upon godlessness and upon the apparent aimlessness of a world
without a god.

Chapter XXIX. The Tarantulas.

The tarantulas are the Socialists and Democrats. This discourse offers
us an analysis of their mental attitude. Nietzsche refuses to be
confounded with those resentful and revengeful ones who condemn society
FROM BELOW, and whose criticism is only suppressed envy. “There are
those who preach my doctrine of life,” he says of the Nietzschean
Socialists, “and are at the same time preachers of equality and
tarantulas” (see Notes on Chapter XL. and Chapter LI.).

Chapter XXX. The Famous Wise Ones.

This refers to all those philosophers hitherto, who have run in the
harness of established values and have not risked their reputation with
the people in pursuit of truth. The philosopher, however, as Nietzsche
understood him, is a man who creates new values, and thus leads mankind
in a new direction.

Chapter XXXIII. The Grave-Song.

Here Zarathustra sings about the ideals and friendships of his youth.
Verses 27 to 31 undoubtedly refer to Richard Wagner (see Note on Chapter
LXV.).

Chapter XXXIV. Self-Surpassing.

In this discourse we get the best exposition in the whole book of
Nietzsche’s doctrine of the Will to Power. I go into this question
thoroughly in the Note on Chapter LVII.

Nietzsche was not an iconoclast from choice. Those who hastily class him
with the anarchists (or the Progressivists of the last century) fail
to understand the high esteem in which he always held both law and
discipline. In verse 41 of this most decisive discourse he truly
explains his position when he says: “...he who hath to be a creator in
good and evil—verily he hath first to be a destroyer, and break values
in pieces.” This teaching in regard to self-control is evidence enough
of his reverence for law.

Chapter XXXV. The Sublime Ones.

These belong to a type which Nietzsche did not altogether dislike, but
which he would fain have rendered more subtle and plastic. It is the
type that takes life and itself too seriously, that never surmounts the
camel-stage mentioned in the first discourse, and that is obdurately
sublime and earnest. To be able to smile while speaking of lofty things
and NOT TO BE OPPRESSED by them, is the secret of real greatness. He
whose hand trembles when it lays hold of a beautiful thing, has the
quality of reverence, without the artist’s unembarrassed friendship
with the beautiful. Hence the mistakes which have arisen in regard to
confounding Nietzsche with his extreme opposites the anarchists and
agitators. For what they dare to touch and break with the impudence
and irreverence of the unappreciative, he seems likewise to touch and
break,—but with other fingers—with the fingers of the loving and
unembarrassed artist who is on good terms with the beautiful and who
feels able to create it and to enhance it with his touch. The question
of taste plays an important part in Nietzsche’s philosophy, and verses
9, 10 of this discourse exactly state Nietzsche’s ultimate views on the
subject. In the “Spirit of Gravity”, he actually cries:—“Neither a good
nor a bad taste, but MY taste, of which I have no longer either shame or
secrecy.”

Chapter XXXVI. The Land of Culture.

This is a poetical epitome of some of the scathing criticism of
scholars which appears in the first of the “Thoughts out of Season”—the
polemical pamphlet (written in 1873) against David Strauss and his
school. He reproaches his former colleagues with being sterile and
shows them that their sterility is the result of their not believing
in anything. “He who had to create, had always his presaging dreams and
astral premonitions—and believed in believing!” (See Note on Chapter
LXXVII.) In the last two verses he reveals the nature of his altruism.
How far it differs from that of Christianity we have already read in the
discourse “Neighbour-Love”, but here he tells us definitely the nature
of his love to mankind; he explains why he was compelled to assail the
Christian values of pity and excessive love of the neighbour, not only
because they are slave-values and therefore tend to promote degeneration
(see Note B.), but because he could only love his children’s land, the
undiscovered land in a remote sea; because he would fain retrieve the
errors of his fathers in his children.

Chapter XXXVII. Immaculate Perception.

An important feature of Nietzsche’s interpretation of Life is disclosed
in this discourse. As Buckle suggests in his “Influence of Women on the
Progress of Knowledge”, the scientific spirit of the investigator is
both helped and supplemented by the latter’s emotions and personality,
and the divorce of all emotionalism and individual temperament from
science is a fatal step towards sterility. Zarathustra abjures all those
who would fain turn an IMPERSONAL eye upon nature and contemplate her
phenomena with that pure objectivity to which the scientific idealists
of to-day would so much like to attain. He accuses such idealists of
hypocrisy and guile; he says they lack innocence in their desires and
therefore slander all desiring.

Chapter XXXVIII. Scholars.

This is a record of Nietzsche’s final breach with his former
colleagues—the scholars of Germany. Already after the publication of
the “Birth of Tragedy”, numbers of German philologists and professional
philosophers had denounced him as one who had strayed too far from
their flock, and his lectures at the University of Bale were deserted
in consequence; but it was not until 1879, when he finally severed all
connection with University work, that he may be said to have attained to
the freedom and independence which stamp this discourse.

Chapter XXXIX. Poets.

People have sometimes said that Nietzsche had no sense of humour. I
have no intention of defending him here against such foolish critics; I
should only like to point out to the reader that we have him here at
his best, poking fun at himself, and at his fellow-poets (see Note on
Chapter LXIII., pars. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20).

Chapter XL. Great Events.

Here we seem to have a puzzle. Zarathustra himself, while relating
his experience with the fire-dog to his disciples, fails to get them
interested in his narrative, and we also may be only too ready to turn
over these pages under the impression that they are little more than
a mere phantasy or poetical flight. Zarathustra’s interview with the
fire-dog is, however, of great importance. In it we find Nietzsche
face to face with the creature he most sincerely loathes—the spirit
of revolution, and we obtain fresh hints concerning his hatred of the
anarchist and rebel. “‘Freedom’ ye all roar most eagerly,” he says to
the fire-dog, “but I have unlearned the belief in ‘Great Events’ when
there is much roaring and smoke about them. Not around the inventors
of new noise, but around the inventors of new values, doth the world
revolve; INAUDIBLY it revolveth.”

Chapter XLI. The Soothsayer.

This refers, of course, to Schopenhauer. Nietzsche, as is well known,
was at one time an ardent follower of Schopenhauer. He overcame
Pessimism by discovering an object in existence; he saw the possibility
of raising society to a higher level and preached the profoundest
Optimism in consequence.

Chapter XLII. Redemption.

Zarathustra here addresses cripples. He tells them of other
cripples—the GREAT MEN in this world who have one organ or faculty
inordinately developed at the cost of their other faculties. This is
doubtless a reference to a fact which is too often noticeable in the
case of so many of the world’s giants in art, science, or religion. In
verse 19 we are told what Nietzsche called Redemption—that is to say,
the ability to say of all that is past: “Thus would I have it.” The
in ability to say this, and the resentment which results therefrom,
he regards as the source of all our feelings of revenge, and all our
desires to punish—punishment meaning to him merely a euphemism for the
word revenge, invented in order to still our consciences. He who can be
proud of his enemies, who can be grateful to them for the obstacles they
have put in his way; he who can regard his worst calamity as but the
extra strain on the bow of his life, which is to send the arrow of
his longing even further than he could have hoped;—this man knows no
revenge, neither does he know despair, he truly has found redemption and
can turn on the worst in his life and even in himself, and call it his
best (see Notes on Chapter LVII.).

Chapter XLIII. Manly Prudence.

This discourse is very important. In “Beyond Good and Evil” we hear
often enough that the select and superior man must wear a mask, and
here we find this injunction explained. “And he who would not languish
amongst men, must learn to drink out of all glasses: and he who would
keep clean amongst men, must know how to wash himself even with dirty
water.” This, I venture to suggest, requires some explanation. At a time
when individuality is supposed to be shown most tellingly by putting
boots on one’s hands and gloves on one’s feet, it is somewhat refreshing
to come across a true individualist who feels the chasm between himself
and others so deeply, that he must perforce adapt himself to them
outwardly, at least, in all respects, so that the inner difference
should be overlooked. Nietzsche practically tells us here that it is not
he who intentionally wears eccentric clothes or does eccentric things
who is truly the individualist. The profound man, who is by nature
differentiated from his fellows, feels this difference too keenly to
call attention to it by any outward show. He is shamefast and bashful
with those who surround him and wishes not to be discovered by them,
just as one instinctively avoids all lavish display of comfort or wealth
in the presence of a poor friend.

Chapter XLIV. The Stillest Hour.

This seems to me to give an account of the great struggle which must
have taken place in Nietzsche’s soul before he finally resolved to make
known the more esoteric portions of his teaching. Our deepest feelings
crave silence. There is a certain self-respect in the serious man which
makes him hold his profoundest feelings sacred. Before they are uttered
they are full of the modesty of a virgin, and often the oldest sage will
blush like a girl when this virginity is violated by an indiscretion
which forces him to reveal his deepest thoughts.

 ...

PART III.

This is perhaps the most important of all the four parts. If it
contained only “The Vision and the Enigma” and “The Old and New Tables”
 I should still be of this opinion; for in the former of these discourses
we meet with what Nietzsche regarded as the crowning doctrine of his
philosophy and in “The Old and New Tables” we have a valuable epitome of
practically all his leading principles.

Chapter XLVI. The Vision and the Enigma.

“The Vision and the Enigma” is perhaps an example of Nietzsche in his
most obscure vein. We must know how persistently he inveighed against
the oppressing and depressing influence of man’s sense of guilt and
consciousness of sin in order fully to grasp the significance of this
discourse. Slowly but surely, he thought the values of Christianity and
Judaic traditions had done their work in the minds of men. What were
once but expedients devised for the discipline of a certain portion of
humanity, had now passed into man’s blood and had become instincts. This
oppressive and paralysing sense of guilt and of sin is what Nietzsche
refers to when he speaks of “the spirit of gravity.” This creature
half-dwarf, half-mole, whom he bears with him a certain distance on his
climb and finally defies, and whom he calls his devil and arch-enemy, is
nothing more than the heavy millstone “guilty conscience,” together with
the concept of sin which at present hangs round the neck of men. To rise
above it—to soar—is the most difficult of all things to-day. Nietzsche
is able to think cheerfully and optimistically of the possibility of
life in this world recurring again and again, when he has once cast the
dwarf from his shoulders, and he announces his doctrine of the Eternal
Recurrence of all things great and small to his arch-enemy and in
defiance of him.

That there is much to be said for Nietzsche’s hypothesis of the Eternal
Recurrence of all things great and small, nobody who has read the
literature on the subject will doubt for an instant; but it remains a
very daring conjecture notwithstanding and even in its ultimate effect,
as a dogma, on the minds of men, I venture to doubt whether Nietzsche
ever properly estimated its worth (see Note on Chapter LVII.).

What follows is clear enough. Zarathustra sees a young shepherd
struggling on the ground with a snake holding fast to the back of his
throat. The sage, assuming that the snake must have crawled into the
young man’s mouth while he lay sleeping, runs to his help and pulls
at the loathsome reptile with all his might, but in vain. At last, in
despair, Zarathustra appeals to the young man’s will. Knowing full well
what a ghastly operation he is recommending, he nevertheless cries,
“Bite! Bite! Its head off! Bite!” as the only possible solution of the
difficulty. The young shepherd bites, and far away he spits the
snake’s head, whereupon he rises, “No longer shepherd, no longer man—a
transfigured being, a light-surrounded being, that LAUGHED! Never on
earth laughed a man as he laughed!”

In this parable the young shepherd is obviously the man of to-day; the
snake that chokes him represents the stultifying and paralysing social
values that threaten to shatter humanity, and the advice “Bite! Bite!”
 is but Nietzsche’s exasperated cry to mankind to alter their values
before it is too late.

Chapter XLVII. Involuntary Bliss.

This, like “The Wanderer”, is one of the many introspective passages
in the work, and is full of innuendos and hints as to the Nietzschean
outlook on life.

Chapter XLVIII. Before Sunrise.

Here we have a record of Zarathustra’s avowal of optimism, as also the
important statement concerning “Chance” or “Accident” (verse 27). Those
who are familiar with Nietzsche’s philosophy will not require to be told
what an important role his doctrine of chance plays in his teaching.
The Giant Chance has hitherto played with the puppet “man,”—this is
the fact he cannot contemplate with equanimity. Man shall now exploit
chance, he says again and again, and make it fall on its knees before
him! (See verse 33 in “On the Olive-Mount”, and verses 9–10 in “The
Bedwarfing Virtue”).

Chapter XLIX. The Bedwarfing Virtue.

This requires scarcely any comment. It is a satire on modern man and
his belittling virtues. In verses 23 and 24 of the second part of the
discourse we are reminded of Nietzsche’s powerful indictment of the
great of to-day, in the Antichrist (Aphorism 43):—“At present
nobody has any longer the courage for separate rights, for rights of
domination, for a feeling of reverence for himself and his equals,—FOR
PATHOS OF DISTANCE.... Our politics are MORBID from this want of
courage!—The aristocracy of character has been undermined most craftily
by the lie of the equality of souls; and if the belief in the ‘privilege
of the many,’ makes revolutions and WILL CONTINUE TO MAKE them, it is
Christianity, let us not doubt it, it is CHRISTIAN valuations, which
translate every revolution merely into blood and crime!” (see also
“Beyond Good and Evil”, pages 120, 121). Nietzsche thought it was a
bad sign of the times that even rulers have lost the courage of
their positions, and that a man of Frederick the Great’s power and
distinguished gifts should have been able to say: “Ich bin der erste
Diener des Staates” (I am the first servant of the State.) To this
utterance of the great sovereign, verse 24 undoubtedly refers.
“Cowardice” and “Mediocrity,” are the names with which he labels modern
notions of virtue and moderation.

In Part III., we get the sentiments of the discourse “In the Happy
Isles”, but perhaps in stronger terms. Once again we find Nietzsche
thoroughly at ease, if not cheerful, as an atheist, and speaking with
vertiginous daring of making chance go on its knees to him. In verse
20, Zarathustra makes yet another attempt at defining his entirely
anti-anarchical attitude, and unless such passages have been completely
overlooked or deliberately ignored hitherto by those who will persist in
laying anarchy at his door, it is impossible to understand how he ever
became associated with that foul political party.

The last verse introduces the expression, “THE GREAT NOONTIDE!” In the
poem to be found at the end of “Beyond Good and Evil”, we meet with
the expression again, and we shall find it occurring time and again in
Nietzsche’s works. It will be found fully elucidated in the fifth part
of “The Twilight of the Idols”; but for those who cannot refer to
this book, it were well to point out that Nietzsche called the present
period—our period—the noon of man’s history. Dawn is behind us. The
childhood of mankind is over. Now we KNOW; there is now no longer any
excuse for mistakes which will tend to botch and disfigure the type man.
“With respect to what is past,” he says, “I have, like all discerning
ones, great toleration, that is to say, GENEROUS self-control.... But my
feeling changes suddenly, and breaks out as soon as I enter the modern
period, OUR period. Our age KNOWS...” (See Note on Chapter LXX.).

Chapter LI. On Passing-by.

Here we find Nietzsche confronted with his extreme opposite, with
him therefore for whom he is most frequently mistaken by the unwary.
“Zarathustra’s ape” he is called in the discourse. He is one of those
at whose hands Nietzsche had to suffer most during his life-time, and
at whose hands his philosophy has suffered most since his death. In this
respect it may seem a little trivial to speak of extremes meeting; but
it is wonderfully apt. Many have adopted Nietzsche’s mannerisms and
word-coinages, who had nothing in common with him beyond the ideas and
“business” they plagiarised; but the superficial observer and a large
portion of the public, not knowing of these things,—not knowing perhaps
that there are iconoclasts who destroy out of love and are therefore
creators, and that there are others who destroy out of resentment and
revengefulness and who are therefore revolutionists and anarchists,—are
prone to confound the two, to the detriment of the nobler type.

If we now read what the fool says to Zarathustra, and note the tricks of
speech he has borrowed from him: if we carefully follow the attitude
he assumes, we shall understand why Zarathustra finally interrupts him.
“Stop this at once,” Zarathustra cries, “long have thy speech and
thy species disgusted me.... Out of love alone shall my contempt and my
warning bird take wing; BUT NOT OUT OF THE SWAMP!” It were well if
this discourse were taken to heart by all those who are too ready to
associate Nietzsche with lesser and noiser men,—with mountebanks and
mummers.

Chapter LII. The Apostates.

It is clear that this applies to all those breathless and hasty “tasters
of everything,” who plunge too rashly into the sea of independent
thought and “heresy,” and who, having miscalculated their strength, find
it impossible to keep their head above water. “A little older, a little
colder,” says Nietzsche. They soon clamber back to the conventions of
the age they intended reforming. The French then say “le diable se fait
hermite,” but these men, as a rule, have never been devils, neither
do they become angels; for, in order to be really good or evil, some
strength and deep breathing is required. Those who are more interested
in supporting orthodoxy than in being over nice concerning the kind of
support they give it, often refer to these people as evidence in favour
of the true faith.

Chapter LIII. The Return Home.

This is an example of a class of writing which may be passed over too
lightly by those whom poetasters have made distrustful of poetry. From
first to last it is extremely valuable as an autobiographical note. The
inevitable superficiality of the rabble is contrasted with the peaceful
and profound depths of the anchorite. Here we first get a direct hint
concerning Nietzsche’s fundamental passion—the main force behind all
his new values and scathing criticism of existing values. In verse 30
we are told that pity was his greatest danger. The broad altruism of the
law-giver, thinking over vast eras of time, was continually being pitted
by Nietzsche, in himself, against that transient and meaner sympathy for
the neighbour which he more perhaps than any of his contemporaries had
suffered from, but which he was certain involved enormous dangers not
only for himself but also to the next and subsequent generations (see
Note B., where “pity” is mentioned among the degenerate virtues). Later
in the book we shall see how his profound compassion leads him into
temptation, and how frantically he struggles against it. In verses 31
and 32, he tells us to what extent he had to modify himself in order
to be endured by his fellows whom he loved (see also verse 12 in “Manly
Prudence”). Nietzsche’s great love for his fellows, which he confesses
in the Prologue, and which is at the root of all his teaching, seems
rather to elude the discerning powers of the average philanthropist and
modern man. He cannot see the wood for the trees. A philanthropy that
sacrifices the minority of the present-day for the majority constituting
posterity, completely evades his mental grasp, and Nietzsche’s
philosophy, because it declares Christian values to be a danger to the
future of our kind, is therefore shelved as brutal, cold, and hard (see
Note on Chapter XXXVI.). Nietzsche tried to be all things to all men;
he was sufficiently fond of his fellows for that: in the Return Home he
describes how he ultimately returns to loneliness in order to recover
from the effects of his experiment.

Chapter LIV. The Three Evil Things.

Nietzsche is here completely in his element. Three things hitherto
best cursed and most calumniated on earth, are brought forward to be
weighed. Voluptuousness, thirst of power, and selfishness,—the three
forces in humanity which Christianity has done most to garble and
besmirch,—Nietzsche endeavours to reinstate in their former places of
honour. Voluptuousness, or sensual pleasure, is a dangerous thing to
discuss nowadays. If we mention it with favour we may be regarded,
however unjustly, as the advocate of savages, satyrs, and pure
sensuality. If we condemn it, we either go over to the Puritans or we
join those who are wont to come to table with no edge to their appetites
and who therefore grumble at all good fare. There can be no doubt that
the value of healthy innocent voluptuousness, like the value of health
itself, must have been greatly discounted by all those who, resenting
their inability to partake of this world’s goods, cried like St Paul:
“I would that all men were even as I myself.” Now Nietzsche’s philosophy
might be called an attempt at giving back to healthy and normal men
innocence and a clean conscience in their desires—NOT to applaud the
vulgar sensualists who respond to every stimulus and whose passions are
out of hand; not to tell the mean, selfish individual, whose selfishness
is a pollution (see Aphorism 33, “Twilight of the Idols”), that he is
right, nor to assure the weak, the sick, and the crippled, that the
thirst of power, which they gratify by exploiting the happier and
healthier individuals, is justified;—but to save the clean healthy man
from the values of those around him, who look at everything through the
mud that is in their own bodies,—to give him, and him alone, a clean
conscience in his manhood and the desires of his manhood. “Do I counsel
you to slay your instincts? I counsel to innocence in your instincts.”
 In verse 7 of the second paragraph (as in verse I of paragraph 19 in
“The Old and New Tables”) Nietzsche gives us a reason for his occasional
obscurity (see also verses 3 to 7 of “Poets”). As I have already pointed
out, his philosophy is quite esoteric. It can serve no purpose with the
ordinary, mediocre type of man. I, personally, can no longer have any
doubt that Nietzsche’s only object, in that part of his philosophy where
he bids his friends stand “Beyond Good and Evil” with him, was to save
higher men, whose growth and scope might be limited by the too
strict observance of modern values from foundering on the rocks of a
“Compromise” between their own genius and traditional conventions. The
only possible way in which the great man can achieve greatness is
by means of exceptional freedom—the freedom which assists him in
experiencing HIMSELF. Verses 20 to 30 afford an excellent supplement to
Nietzsche’s description of the attitude of the noble type towards the
slaves in Aphorism 260 of the work “Beyond Good and Evil” (see also Note
B.)

Chapter LV. The Spirit of Gravity.

(See Note on Chapter XLVI.) In Part II. of this discourse we meet with
a doctrine not touched upon hitherto, save indirectly;—I refer to the
doctrine of self-love. We should try to understand this perfectly before
proceeding; for it is precisely views of this sort which, after having
been cut out of the original context, are repeated far and wide as
internal evidence proving the general unsoundness of Nietzsche’s
philosophy. Already in the last of the “Thoughts out of Season”
 Nietzsche speaks as follows about modern men: “...these modern creatures
wish rather to be hunted down, wounded and torn to shreds, than to
live alone with themselves in solitary calm. Alone with oneself!—this
thought terrifies the modern soul; it is his one anxiety, his one
ghastly fear” (English Edition, page 141). In his feverish scurry to
find entertainment and diversion, whether in a novel, a newspaper, or a
play, the modern man condemns his own age utterly; for he shows that in
his heart of hearts he despises himself. One cannot change a condition
of this sort in a day; to become endurable to oneself an inner
transformation is necessary. Too long have we lost ourselves in our
friends and entertainments to be able to find ourselves so soon at
another’s bidding. “And verily, it is no commandment for to-day and
to-morrow to LEARN to love oneself. Rather is it of all arts the finest,
subtlest, last, and patientest.”

In the last verse Nietzsche challenges us to show that our way is
the right way. In his teaching he does not coerce us, nor does he
overpersuade; he simply says: “I am a law only for mine own, I am not a
law for all. This—is now MY way,—where is yours?”

Chapter LVI. Old and New Tables. Par. 2.

Nietzsche himself declares this to be the most decisive portion of
the whole of “Thus Spake Zarathustra”. It is a sort of epitome of his
leading doctrines. In verse 12 of the second paragraph, we learn how he
himself would fain have abandoned the poetical method of expression had
he not known only too well that the only chance a new doctrine has of
surviving, nowadays, depends upon its being given to the world in some
kind of art-form. Just as prophets, centuries ago, often had to have
recourse to the mask of madness in order to mitigate the hatred of those
who did not and could not see as they did; so, to-day, the struggle for
existence among opinions and values is so great, that an art-form
is practically the only garb in which a new philosophy can dare to
introduce itself to us.

Pars. 3 and 4.

Many of the paragraphs will be found to be merely reminiscent of former
discourses. For instance, par. 3 recalls “Redemption”. The last verse
of par. 4 is important. Freedom which, as I have pointed out before,
Nietzsche considered a dangerous acquisition in inexperienced or
unworthy hands, here receives its death-blow as a general desideratum.
In the first Part we read under “The Way of the Creating One”, that
freedom as an end in itself does not concern Zarathustra at all. He says
there: “Free from what? What doth that matter to Zarathustra? Clearly,
however, shall thine eye answer me: free FOR WHAT?” And in “The
Bedwarfing Virtue”: “Ah that ye understood my word: ‘Do ever what ye
will—but first be such as CAN WILL.’”

Par. 5.

Here we have a description of the kind of altruism Nietzsche exacted
from higher men. It is really a comment upon “The Bestowing Virtue” (see
Note on Chapter XXII.).

Par. 6.

This refers, of course, to the reception pioneers of Nietzsche’s stamp
meet with at the hands of their contemporaries.

Par. 8.

Nietzsche teaches that nothing is stable,—not even values,—not
even the concepts good and evil. He likens life unto a stream. But
foot-bridges and railings span the stream, and they seem to stand
firm. Many will be reminded of good and evil when they look upon these
structures; for thus these same values stand over the stream of life,
and life flows on beneath them and leaves them standing. When, however,
winter comes and the stream gets frozen, many inquire: “Should not
everything—STAND STILL? Fundamentally everything standeth still.” But
soon the spring cometh and with it the thaw-wind. It breaks the ice, and
the ice breaks down the foot-bridges and railings, whereupon everything
is swept away. This state of affairs, according to Nietzsche, has now
been reached. “Oh, my brethren, is not everything AT PRESENT IN FLUX?
Have not all railings and foot-bridges fallen into the water? Who would
still HOLD ON to ‘good’ and ‘evil’?”

Par. 9.

This is complementary to the first three verses of par. 2.

Par. 10.

So far, this is perhaps the most important paragraph. It is a protest
against reading a moral order of things in life. “Life is something
essentially immoral!” Nietzsche tells us in the introduction to the
“Birth of Tragedy”. Even to call life “activity,” or to define it
further as “the continuous adjustment of internal relations to external
relations,” as Spencer has it, Nietzsche characterises as a “democratic
idiosyncracy.” He says to define it in this way, “is to mistake the
true nature and function of life, which is Will to Power.... Life is
ESSENTIALLY appropriation, injury, conquest of the strange and weak,
suppression, severity, obtrusion of its own forms, incorporation and
at least, putting it mildest, exploitation.” Adaptation is merely a
secondary activity, a mere re-activity (see Note on Chapter LVII.).

Pars. 11, 12.

These deal with Nietzsche’s principle of the desirability of rearing a
select race. The biological and historical grounds for his insistence
upon this principle are, of course, manifold. Gobineau in his great
work, “L’Inegalite des Races Humaines”, lays strong emphasis upon the
evils which arise from promiscuous and inter-social marriages. He alone
would suffice to carry Nietzsche’s point against all those who are
opposed to the other conditions, to the conditions which would have
saved Rome, which have maintained the strength of the Jewish race, and
which are strictly maintained by every breeder of animals throughout the
world. Darwin in his remarks relative to the degeneration of CULTIVATED
types of animals through the action of promiscuous breeding, brings
Gobineau support from the realm of biology.

The last two verses of par. 12 were discussed in the Notes on Chapters
XXXVI. and LIII.

Par. 13.

This, like the first part of “The Soothsayer”, is obviously a reference
to the Schopenhauerian Pessimism.

Pars. 14, 15, 16, 17.

These are supplementary to the discourse “Backworld’s-men”.

Par. 18.

We must be careful to separate this paragraph, in sense, from the
previous four paragraphs. Nietzsche is still dealing with Pessimism
here; but it is the pessimism of the hero—the man most susceptible of
all to desperate views of life, owing to the obstacles that are arrayed
against him in a world where men of his kind are very rare and are
continually being sacrificed. It was to save this man that Nietzsche
wrote. Heroism foiled, thwarted, and wrecked, hoping and fighting until
the last, is at length overtaken by despair, and renounces all struggle
for sleep. This is not the natural or constitutional pessimism which
proceeds from an unhealthy body—the dyspeptic’s lack of appetite; it
is rather the desperation of the netted lion that ultimately stops all
movement, because the more it moves the more involved it becomes.

Par. 20.

“All that increases power is good, all that springs from weakness is
bad. The weak and ill-constituted shall perish: first principle of our
charity. And one shall also help them thereto.” Nietzsche partly divined
the kind of reception moral values of this stamp would meet with at
the hands of the effeminate manhood of Europe. Here we see that he had
anticipated the most likely form their criticism would take (see also
the last two verses of par. 17).

Par. 21.

The first ten verses, here, are reminiscent of “War and Warriors” and
of “The Flies in the Market-place.” Verses 11 and 12, however, are
particularly important. There is a strong argument in favour of the
sharp differentiation of castes and of races (and even of sexes; see
Note on Chapter XVIII.) running all through Nietzsche’s writings.
But sharp differentiation also implies antagonism in some form or
other—hence Nietzsche’s fears for modern men. What modern men desire
above all, is peace and the cessation of pain. But neither great races
nor great castes have ever been built up in this way. “Who still wanteth
to rule?” Zarathustra asks in the “Prologue”. “Who still wanteth to
obey? Both are too burdensome.” This is rapidly becoming everybody’s
attitude to-day. The tame moral reading of the face of nature, together
with such democratic interpretations of life as those suggested by
Herbert Spencer, are signs of a physiological condition which is the
reverse of that bounding and irresponsible healthiness in which harder
and more tragic values rule.

Par. 24.

This should be read in conjunction with “Child and Marriage”. In the
fifth verse we shall recognise our old friend “Marriage on the ten-years
system,” which George Meredith suggested some years ago. This, however,
must not be taken too literally. I do not think Nietzsche’s profoundest
views on marriage were ever intended to be given over to the public at
all, at least not for the present. They appear in the biography by his
sister, and although their wisdom is unquestionable, the nature of the
reforms he suggests render it impossible for them to become popular just
now.

Pars. 26, 27.

See Note on “The Prologue”.

Par. 28.

Nietzsche was not an iconoclast from predilection. No bitterness or
empty hate dictated his vituperations against existing values and
against the dogmas of his parents and forefathers. He knew too well what
these things meant to the millions who profess them, to approach the
task of uprooting them with levity or even with haste. He saw what
modern anarchists and revolutionists do NOT see—namely, that man is in
danger of actual destruction when his customs and values are broken.
I need hardly point out, therefore, how deeply he was conscious of
the responsibility he threw upon our shoulders when he invited us to
reconsider our position. The lines in this paragraph are evidence enough
of his earnestness.

Chapter LVII. The Convalescent.

We meet with several puzzles here. Zarathustra calls himself the
advocate of the circle (the Eternal Recurrence of all things), and he
calls this doctrine his abysmal thought. In the last verse of the
first paragraph, however, after hailing his deepest thought, he cries:
“Disgust, disgust, disgust!” We know Nietzsche’s ideal man was that
“world-approving, exuberant, and vivacious creature, who has not only
learnt to compromise and arrange with that which was and is, but wishes
to have it again, AS IT WAS AND IS, for all eternity insatiably calling
out da capo, not only to himself, but to the whole piece and play” (see
Note on Chapter XLII.). But if one ask oneself what the conditions to
such an attitude are, one will realise immediately how utterly different
Nietzsche was from his ideal. The man who insatiably cries da capo to
himself and to the whole of his mise-en-scene, must be in a position to
desire every incident in his life to be repeated, not once, but
again and again eternally. Now, Nietzsche’s life had been too full of
disappointments, illness, unsuccessful struggles, and snubs, to allow of
his thinking of the Eternal Recurrence without loathing—hence probably
the words of the last verse.

In verses 15 and 16, we have Nietzsche declaring himself an evolutionist
in the broadest sense—that is to say, that he believes in the
Development Hypothesis as the description of the process by which
species have originated. Now, to understand his position correctly
we must show his relationship to the two greatest of modern
evolutionists—Darwin and Spencer. As a philosopher, however, Nietzsche
does not stand or fall by his objections to the Darwinian or Spencerian
cosmogony. He never laid claim to a very profound knowledge of biology,
and his criticism is far more valuable as the attitude of a fresh mind
than as that of a specialist towards the question. Moreover, in his
objections many difficulties are raised which are not settled by an
appeal to either of the men above mentioned. We have given Nietzsche’s
definition of life in the Note on Chapter LVI., par. 10. Still, there
remains a hope that Darwin and Nietzsche may some day become reconciled
by a new description of the processes by which varieties occur. The
appearance of varieties among animals and of “sporting plants” in
the vegetable kingdom, is still shrouded in mystery, and the question
whether this is not precisely the ground on which Darwin and Nietzsche
will meet, is an interesting one. The former says in his “Origin of
Species”, concerning the causes of variability: “...there are two
factors, namely, the nature of the organism, and the nature of the
conditions. THE FORMER SEEMS TO BE MUCH THE MORE IMPORTANT (The italics
are mine.), for nearly similar variations sometimes arise under, as
far as we can judge, dissimilar conditions; and on the other hand,
dissimilar variations arise under conditions which appear to be
nearly uniform.” Nietzsche, recognising this same truth, would ascribe
practically all the importance to the “highest functionaries in the
organism, in which the life-will appears as an active and formative
principle,” and except in certain cases (where passive organisms alone
are concerned) would not give such a prominent place to the influence
of environment. Adaptation, according to him, is merely a secondary
activity, a mere re-activity, and he is therefore quite opposed to
Spencer’s definition: “Life is the continuous adjustment of internal
relations to external relations.” Again in the motive force behind
animal and plant life, Nietzsche disagrees with Darwin. He
transforms the “Struggle for Existence”—the passive and involuntary
condition—into the “Struggle for Power,” which is active and creative,
and much more in harmony with Darwin’s own view, given above, concerning
the importance of the organism itself. The change is one of such
far-reaching importance that we cannot dispose of it in a breath, as a
mere play upon words. “Much is reckoned higher than life itself by the
living one.” Nietzsche says that to speak of the activity of life as a
“struggle for existence,” is to state the case inadequately. He warns us
not to confound Malthus with nature. There is something more than
this struggle between the organic beings on this earth; want, which is
supposed to bring this struggle about, is not so common as is supposed;
some other force must be operative. The Will to Power is this force,
“the instinct of self-preservation is only one of the indirect and most
frequent results thereof.” A certain lack of acumen in psychological
questions and the condition of affairs in England at the time Darwin
wrote, may both, according to Nietzsche, have induced the renowned
naturalist to describe the forces of nature as he did in his “Origin of
Species”.

In verses 28, 29, and 30 of the second portion of this discourse we meet
with a doctrine which, at first sight, seems to be merely “le manoir
a l’envers,” indeed one English critic has actually said of Nietzsche,
that “Thus Spake Zarathustra” is no more than a compendium of modern
views and maxims turned upside down. Examining these heterodox
pronouncements a little more closely, however, we may possibly perceive
their truth. Regarding good and evil as purely relative values, it
stands to reason that what may be bad or evil in a given man, relative
to a certain environment, may actually be good if not highly virtuous
in him relative to a certain other environment. If this hypothetical man
represent the ascending line of life—that is to say, if he promise all
that which is highest in a Graeco-Roman sense, then it is likely that
he will be condemned as wicked if introduced into the society of men
representing the opposite and descending line of life.

By depriving a man of his wickedness—more particularly nowadays—
therefore, one may unwittingly be doing violence to the greatest in him.
It may be an outrage against his wholeness, just as the lopping-off of a
leg would be. Fortunately, the natural so-called “wickedness” of higher
men has in a certain measure been able to resist this lopping process
which successive slave-moralities have practised; but signs are not
wanting which show that the noblest wickedness is fast vanishing from
society—the wickedness of courage and determination—and that Nietzsche
had good reasons for crying: “Ah, that (man’s) baddest is so very small!
Ah, that his best is so very small. What is good? To be brave is good!
It is the good war which halloweth every cause!” (see also par. 5,
“Higher Man”).

Chapter LX. The Seven Seals.

This is a final paean which Zarathustra sings to Eternity and the
marriage-ring of rings, the ring of the Eternal Recurrence.

 ...

PART IV.

In my opinion this part is Nietzsche’s open avowal that all his
philosophy, together with all his hopes, enthusiastic outbursts,
blasphemies, prolixities, and obscurities, were merely so many gifts
laid at the feet of higher men. He had no desire to save the world. What
he wished to determine was: Who is to be master of the world? This is
a very different thing. He came to save higher men;—to give them that
freedom by which, alone, they can develop and reach their zenith (see
Note on Chapter LIV., end). It has been argued, and with considerable
force, that no such philosophy is required by higher men, that, as a
matter of fact, higher men, by virtue of their constitutions always, do
stand Beyond Good and Evil, and never allow anything to stand in the
way of their complete growth. Nietzsche, however, was evidently not so
confident about this. He would probably have argued that we only see the
successful cases. Being a great man himself, he was well aware of the
dangers threatening greatness in our age. In “Beyond Good and Evil” he
writes: “There are few pains so grievous as to have seen, divined,
or experienced how an exceptional man has missed his way and
deteriorated...” He knew “from his painfullest recollections on what
wretched obstacles promising developments of the highest rank have
hitherto usually gone to pieces, broken down, sunk, and become
contemptible.” Now in Part IV. we shall find that his strongest
temptation to descend to the feeling of “pity” for his contemporaries,
is the “cry for help” which he hears from the lips of the higher men
exposed to the dreadful danger of their modern environment.

Chapter LXI. The Honey Sacrifice.

In the fourteenth verse of this discourse Nietzsche defines the solemn
duty he imposed upon himself: “Become what thou art.” Surely the
criticism which has been directed against this maxim must all fall to
the ground when it is remembered, once and for all, that Nietzsche’s
teaching was never intended to be other than an esoteric one. “I am a
law only for mine own,” he says emphatically, “I am not a law for
all.” It is of the greatest importance to humanity that its highest
individuals should be allowed to attain to their full development; for,
only by means of its heroes can the human race be led forward step by
step to higher and yet higher levels. “Become what thou art” applied
to all, of course, becomes a vicious maxim; it is to be hoped, however,
that we may learn in time that the same action performed by a given
number of men, loses its identity precisely that same number of
times.—“Quod licet Jovi, non licet bovi.”

At the last eight verses many readers may be tempted to laugh. In
England we almost always laugh when a man takes himself seriously at
anything save sport. And there is of course no reason why the reader
should not be hilarious.—A certain greatness is requisite, both in
order to be sublime and to have reverence for the sublime. Nietzsche
earnestly believed that the Zarathustra-kingdom—his dynasty of a
thousand years—would one day come; if he had not believed it so
earnestly, if every artist in fact had not believed so earnestly in
his Hazar, whether of ten, fifteen, a hundred, or a thousand years, we
should have lost all our higher men; they would have become pessimists,
suicides, or merchants. If the minor poet and philosopher has made us
shy of the prophetic seriousness which characterized an Isaiah or a
Jeremiah, it is surely our loss and the minor poet’s gain.

Chapter LXII. The Cry of Distress.

We now meet with Zarathustra in extraordinary circumstances. He is
confronted with Schopenhauer and tempted by the old Soothsayer to commit
the sin of pity. “I have come that I may seduce thee to thy last sin!”
 says the Soothsayer to Zarathustra. It will be remembered that in
Schopenhauer’s ethics, pity is elevated to the highest place among the
virtues, and very consistently too, seeing that the Weltanschauung is
a pessimistic one. Schopenhauer appeals to Nietzsche’s deepest and
strongest sentiment—his sympathy for higher men. “Why dost thou conceal
thyself?” he cries. “It is THE HIGHER MAN that calleth for thee!”
 Zarathustra is almost overcome by the Soothsayer’s pleading, as he
had been once already in the past, but he resists him step by step. At
length he can withstand him no longer, and, on the plea that the higher
man is on his ground and therefore under his protection, Zarathustra
departs in search of him, leaving Schopenhauer—a higher man in
Nietzsche’s opinion—in the cave as a guest.

Chapter LXIII. Talk with the Kings.

On his way Zarathustra meets two more higher men of his time; two
kings cross his path. They are above the average modern type; for their
instincts tell them what real ruling is, and they despise the mockery
which they have been taught to call “Reigning.” “We ARE NOT the first
men,” they say, “and have nevertheless to STAND FOR them: of this
imposture have we at last become weary and disgusted.” It is the kings
who tell Zarathustra: “There is no sorer misfortune in all human destiny
than when the mighty of the earth are not also the first men. There
everything becometh false and distorted and monstrous.” The kings are
also asked by Zarathustra to accept the shelter of his cave, whereupon
he proceeds on his way.

Chapter LXIV. The Leech.

Among the higher men whom Zarathustra wishes to save, is also the
scientific specialist—the man who honestly and scrupulously pursues his
investigations, as Darwin did, in one department of knowledge. “I love
him who liveth in order to know, and seeketh to know in order that the
Superman may hereafter live. Thus seeketh he his own down-going.”
 “The spiritually conscientious one,” he is called in this discourse.
Zarathustra steps on him unawares, and the slave of science, bleeding
from the violence he has done to himself by his self-imposed task,
speaks proudly of his little sphere of knowledge—his little hand’s
breadth of ground on Zarathustra’s territory, philosophy. “Where mine
honesty ceaseth,” says the true scientific specialist, “there am I blind
and want also to be blind. Where I want to know, however, there want
I also to be honest—namely, severe, rigorous, restricted, cruel, and
inexorable.” Zarathustra greatly respecting this man, invites him too to
the cave, and then vanishes in answer to another cry for help.

Chapter LXV. The Magician.

The Magician is of course an artist, and Nietzsche’s intimate knowledge
of perhaps the greatest artist of his age rendered the selection of
Wagner, as the type in this discourse, almost inevitable. Most readers
will be acquainted with the facts relating to Nietzsche’s and Wagner’s
friendship and ultimate separation. As a boy and a youth Nietzsche had
shown such a remarkable gift for music that it had been a question at
one time whether he should not perhaps give up everything else in order
to develop this gift, but he became a scholar notwithstanding, although
he never entirely gave up composing, and playing the piano. While
still in his teens, he became acquainted with Wagner’s music and
grew passionately fond of it. Long before he met Wagner he must have
idealised him in his mind to an extent which only a profoundly artistic
nature could have been capable of. Nietzsche always had high ideals for
humanity. If one were asked whether, throughout his many changes, there
was yet one aim, one direction, and one hope to which he held fast,
one would be forced to reply in the affirmative and declare that aim,
direction, and hope to have been “the elevation of the type man.”
 Now, when Nietzsche met Wagner he was actually casting about for an
incarnation of his dreams for the German people, and we have only to
remember his youth (he was twenty-one when he was introduced to Wagner),
his love of Wagner’s music, and the undoubted power of the great
musician’s personality, in order to realise how very uncritical his
attitude must have been in the first flood of his enthusiasm. Again,
when the friendship ripened, we cannot well imagine Nietzsche, the
younger man, being anything less than intoxicated by his senior’s
attention and love, and we are therefore not surprised to find him
pressing Wagner forward as the great Reformer and Saviour of mankind.
“Wagner in Bayreuth” (English Edition, 1909) gives us the best proof
of Nietzsche’s infatuation, and although signs are not wanting in this
essay which show how clearly and even cruelly he was sub-consciously
“taking stock” of his friend—even then, the work is a record of what
great love and admiration can do in the way of endowing the object
of one’s affection with all the qualities and ideals that a fertile
imagination can conceive.

When the blow came it was therefore all the more severe. Nietzsche
at length realised that the friend of his fancy and the real Richard
Wagner—the composer of Parsifal—were not one; the fact dawned
upon him slowly; disappointment upon disappointment, revelation after
revelation, ultimately brought it home to him, and though his best
instincts were naturally opposed to it at first, the revulsion of
feeling at last became too strong to be ignored, and Nietzsche was
plunged into the blackest despair. Years after his break with Wagner,
he wrote “The Case of Wagner”, and “Nietzsche contra Wagner”, and these
works are with us to prove the sincerity and depth of his views on the
man who was the greatest event of his life.

The poem in this discourse is, of course, reminiscent of Wagner’s own
poetical manner, and it must be remembered that the whole was written
subsequent to Nietzsche’s final break with his friend. The dialogue
between Zarathustra and the Magician reveals pretty fully what it
was that Nietzsche grew to loathe so intensely in Wagner,—viz., his
pronounced histrionic tendencies, his dissembling powers, his inordinate
vanity, his equivocalness, his falseness. “It honoureth thee,” says
Zarathustra, “that thou soughtest for greatness, but it betrayeth thee
also. Thou art not great.” The Magician is nevertheless sent as a guest
to Zarathustra’s cave; for, in his heart, Zarathustra believed until the
end that the Magician was a higher man broken by modern values.

Chapter LXVI. Out of Service.

Zarathustra now meets the last pope, and, in a poetical form, we get
Nietzsche’s description of the course Judaism and Christianity pursued
before they reached their final break-up in Atheism, Agnosticism, and
the like. The God of a strong, warlike race—the God of Israel—is a
jealous, revengeful God. He is a power that can be pictured and endured
only by a hardy and courageous race, a race rich enough to sacrifice and
to lose in sacrifice. The image of this God degenerates with the people
that appropriate it, and gradually He becomes a God of love—“soft and
mellow,” a lower middle-class deity, who is “pitiful.” He can no longer
be a God who requires sacrifice, for we ourselves are no longer rich
enough for that. The tables are therefore turned upon Him; HE must
sacrifice to us. His pity becomes so great that he actually does
sacrifice something to us—His only begotten Son. Such a process
carried to its logical conclusions must ultimately end in His own
destruction, and thus we find the pope declaring that God was one day
suffocated by His all-too-great pity. What follows is clear enough.
Zarathustra recognises another higher man in the ex-pope and sends him
too as a guest to the cave.

Chapter LXVII. The Ugliest Man.

This discourse contains perhaps the boldest of Nietzsche’s suggestions
concerning Atheism, as well as some extremely penetrating remarks upon
the sentiment of pity. Zarathustra comes across the repulsive creature
sitting on the wayside, and what does he do? He manifests the only
correct feelings that can be manifested in the presence of any great
misery—that is to say, shame, reverence, embarrassment. Nietzsche
detested the obtrusive and gushing pity that goes up to misery without
a blush either on its cheek or in its heart—the pity which is only
another form of self-glorification. “Thank God that I am not like
thee!”—only this self-glorifying sentiment can lend a well-constituted
man the impudence to SHOW his pity for the cripple and the
ill-constituted. In the presence of the ugliest man Nietzsche
blushes,—he blushes for his race; his own particular kind of
altruism—the altruism that might have prevented the existence of this
man—strikes him with all its force. He will have the world otherwise.
He will have a world where one need not blush for one’s fellows—hence
his appeal to us to love only our children’s land, the land undiscovered
in the remotest sea.

Zarathustra calls the ugliest man the murderer of God! Certainly, this
is one aspect of a certain kind of Atheism—the Atheism of the man who
reveres beauty to such an extent that his own ugliness, which outrages
him, must be concealed from every eye lest it should not be respected as
Zarathustra respected it. If there be a God, He too must be evaded. His
pity must be foiled. But God is ubiquitous and omniscient. Therefore,
for the really GREAT ugly man, He must not exist. “Their pity IS it from
which I flee away,” he says—that is to say: “It is from their want of
reverence and lack of shame in presence of my great misery!” The ugliest
man despises himself; but Zarathustra said in his Prologue: “I love
the great despisers because they are the great adorers, and arrows of
longing for the other shore.” He therefore honours the ugliest man: sees
height in his self-contempt, and invites him to join the other higher
men in the cave.

Chapter LXVIII. The Voluntary Beggar.

In this discourse, we undoubtedly have the ideal Buddhist, if not
Gautama Buddha himself. Nietzsche had the greatest respect for Buddhism,
and almost wherever he refers to it in his works, it is in terms of
praise. He recognised that though Buddhism is undoubtedly a religion for
decadents, its decadent values emanate from the higher and not, as in
Christianity, from the lower grades of society. In Aphorism 20 of “The
Antichrist”, he compares it exhaustively with Christianity, and
the result of his investigation is very much in favour of the older
religion. Still, he recognised a most decided Buddhistic influence
in Christ’s teaching, and the words in verses 29, 30, and 31 are very
reminiscent of his views in regard to the Christian Savior.

The figure of Christ has been introduced often enough into fiction, and
many scholars have undertaken to write His life according to their own
lights, but few perhaps have ever attempted to present Him to us bereft
of all those characteristics which a lack of the sense of harmony has
attached to His person through the ages in which His doctrines have been
taught. Now Nietzsche disagreed entirely with Renan’s view, that Christ
was “le grand maitre en ironie”; in Aphorism 31 of “The Antichrist”,
he says that he (Nietzsche) always purged his picture of the Humble
Nazarene of all those bitter and spiteful outbursts which, in view of
the struggle the first Christians went through, may very well have been
added to the original character by Apologists and Sectarians who, at
that time, could ill afford to consider nice psychological points,
seeing that what they needed, above all, was a wrangling and abusive
deity. These two conflicting halves in the character of the Christ of
the Gospels, which no sound psychology can ever reconcile, Nietzsche
always kept distinct in his own mind; he could not credit the same man
with sentiments sometimes so noble and at other times so vulgar, and
in presenting us with this new portrait of the Saviour, purged of all
impurities, Nietzsche rendered military honours to a foe, which far
exceed in worth all that His most ardent disciples have ever claimed for
Him. In verse 26 we are vividly reminded of Herbert Spencer’s words “‘Le
mariage de convenance’ is legalised prostitution.”

Chapter LXIX. The Shadow.

Here we have a description of that courageous and wayward spirit that
literally haunts the footsteps of every great thinker and every great
leader; sometimes with the result that it loses all aims, all hopes,
and all trust in a definite goal. It is the case of the bravest and
most broad-minded men of to-day. These literally shadow the most daring
movements in the science and art of their generation; they completely
lose their bearings and actually find themselves, in the end, without a
way, a goal, or a home. “On every surface have I already sat!...I become
thin, I am almost equal to a shadow!” At last, in despair, such men
do indeed cry out: “Nothing is true; all is permitted,” and then they
become mere wreckage. “Too much hath become clear unto me: now nothing
mattereth to me any more. Nothing liveth any longer that I love,—how
should I still love myself! Have I still a goal? Where is MY home?”
 Zarathustra realises the danger threatening such a man. “Thy danger is
not small, thou free spirit and wanderer,” he says. “Thou hast had a bad
day. See that a still worse evening doth not overtake thee!” The danger
Zarathustra refers to is precisely this, that even a prison may seem a
blessing to such a man. At least the bars keep him in a place of rest;
a place of confinement, at its worst, is real. “Beware lest in the end
a narrow faith capture thee,” says Zarathustra, “for now everything that
is narrow and fixed seduceth and tempteth thee.”

Chapter LXX. Noontide.

At the noon of life Nietzsche said he entered the world; with him
man came of age. We are now held responsible for our actions; our old
guardians, the gods and demi-gods of our youth, the superstitions and
fears of our childhood, withdraw; the field lies open before us; we
lived through our morning with but one master—chance—; let us see to
it that we MAKE our afternoon our own (see Note XLIX., Part III.).

Chapter LXXI. The Greeting.

Here I think I may claim that my contention in regard to the purpose and
aim of the whole of Nietzsche’s philosophy (as stated at the beginning
of my Notes on Part IV.) is completely upheld. He fought for “all who
do not want to live, unless they learn again to HOPE—unless THEY learn
(from him) the GREAT hope!” Zarathustra’s address to his guests shows
clearly enough how he wished to help them: “I DO NOT TREAT MY WARRIORS
INDULGENTLY,” he says: “how then could ye be fit for MY warfare?” He
rebukes and spurns them, no word of love comes from his lips. Elsewhere
he says a man should be a hard bed to his friend, thus alone can he be
of use to him. Nietzsche would be a hard bed to higher men. He would
make them harder; for, in order to be a law unto himself, man must
possess the requisite hardness. “I wait for higher ones, stronger ones,
more triumphant ones, merrier ones, for such as are built squarely in
body and soul.” He says in par. 6 of “Higher Man”:—

“Ye higher men, think ye that I am here to put right what ye have put
wrong? Or that I wished henceforth to make snugger couches for you
sufferers? Or show you restless, miswandering, misclimbing ones new and
easier footpaths?”

“Nay! Nay! Three times nay! Always more, always better ones of your type
shall succumb—for ye shall always have it worse and harder.”

Chapter LXXII. The Supper.

In the first seven verses of this discourse, I cannot help seeing
a gentle allusion to Schopenhauer’s habits as a bon-vivant. For a
pessimist, be it remembered, Schopenhauer led quite an extraordinary
life. He ate well, loved well, played the flute well, and I believe he
smoked the best cigars. What follows is clear enough.

Chapter LXXIII. The Higher Man. Par. 1.

Nietzsche admits, here, that at one time he had thought of appealing to
the people, to the crowd in the market-place, but that he had ultimately
to abandon the task. He bids higher men depart from the market-place.

Par. 3.

Here we are told quite plainly what class of men actually owe all their
impulses and desires to the instinct of self-preservation. The struggle
for existence is indeed the only spur in the case of such people.
To them it matters not in what shape or condition man be preserved,
provided only he survive. The transcendental maxim that “Life per se is
precious” is the ruling maxim here.

Par. 4.

In the Note on Chapter LVII. (end) I speak of Nietzsche’s elevation of
the virtue, Courage, to the highest place among the virtues. Here he
tells higher men the class of courage he expects from them.

Pars. 5, 6.

These have already been referred to in the Notes on Chapters LVII. (end)
and LXXI.

Par. 7.

I suggest that the last verse in this paragraph strongly confirms the
view that Nietzsche’s teaching was always meant by him to be esoteric
and for higher man alone.

Par. 9.

In the last verse, here, another shaft of light is thrown upon the
Immaculate Perception or so-called “pure objectivity” of the scientific
mind. “Freedom from fever is still far from being knowledge.” Where a
man’s emotions cease to accompany him in his investigations, he is
not necessarily nearer the truth. Says Spencer, in the Preface to his
Autobiography:—“In the genesis of a system of thought, the emotional
nature is a large factor: perhaps as large a factor as the intellectual
nature” (see pages 134, 141 of Vol. I., “Thoughts out of Season”).

Pars. 10, 11.

When we approach Nietzsche’s philosophy we must be prepared to be
independent thinkers; in fact, the greatest virtue of his works is
perhaps the subtlety with which they impose the obligation upon one
of thinking alone, of scoring off one’s own bat, and of shifting
intellectually for oneself.

Par. 13.

“I am a railing alongside the torrent; whoever is able to grasp me, may
grasp me! Your crutch, however, I am not.” These two paragraphs are an
exhortation to higher men to become independent.

Par. 15.

Here Nietzsche perhaps exaggerates the importance of heredity. As,
however, the question is by no means one on which we are all agreed,
what he says is not without value.

A very important principle in Nietzsche’s philosophy is enunciated in
the first verse of this paragraph. “The higher its type, always the
seldomer doth a thing succeed” (see page 82 of “Beyond Good and Evil”).
Those who, like some political economists, talk in a business-like way
about the terrific waste of human life and energy, deliberately overlook
the fact that the waste most to be deplored usually occurs among
higher individuals. Economy was never precisely one of nature’s leading
principles. All this sentimental wailing over the larger proportion
of failures than successes in human life, does not seem to take into
account the fact that it is the rarest thing on earth for a highly
organised being to attain to the fullest development and activity of all
its functions, simply because it is so highly organised. The blind Will
to Power in nature therefore stands in urgent need of direction by man.

Pars. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

These paragraphs deal with Nietzsche’s protest against the democratic
seriousness (Pobelernst) of modern times. “All good things laugh,” he
says, and his final command to the higher men is, “LEARN, I pray you—to
laugh.” All that is GOOD, in Nietzsche’s sense, is cheerful. To be able
to crack a joke about one’s deepest feelings is the greatest test of
their value. The man who does not laugh, like the man who does not make
faces, is already a buffoon at heart.

“What hath hitherto been the greatest sin here on earth? Was it not the
word of him who said: ‘Woe unto them that laugh now!’ Did he himself
find no cause for laughter on the earth? Then he sought badly. A child
even findeth cause for it.”

Chapter LXXIV. The Song of Melancholy.

After his address to the higher men, Zarathustra goes out into the
open to recover himself. Meanwhile the magician (Wagner), seizing the
opportunity in order to draw them all into his net once more, sings the
Song of Melancholy.

Chapter LXXV. Science.

The only one to resist the “melancholy voluptuousness” of his art, is
the spiritually conscientious one—the scientific specialist of whom we
read in the discourse entitled “The Leech”. He takes the harp from the
magician and cries for air, while reproving the musician in the style
of “The Case of Wagner”. When the magician retaliates by saying that the
spiritually conscientious one could have understood little of his song,
the latter replies: “Thou praisest me in that thou separatest me from
thyself.” The speech of the scientific man to his fellow higher men is
well worth studying. By means of it, Nietzsche pays a high tribute to
the honesty of the true specialist, while, in representing him as the
only one who can resist the demoniacal influence of the magician’s
music, he elevates him at a stroke, above all those present. Zarathustra
and the spiritually conscientious one join issue at the end on the
question of the proper place of “fear” in man’s history, and Nietzsche
avails himself of the opportunity in order to restate his views
concerning the relation of courage to humanity. It is precisely because
courage has played the most important part in our development that
he would not see it vanish from among our virtues to-day. “...courage
seemeth to me the entire primitive history of man.”

Chapter LXXVI. Among the Daughters of the Desert.

This tells its own tale.

Chapter LXXVII. The Awakening.

In this discourse, Nietzsche wishes to give his followers a warning.
He thinks he has so far helped them that they have become convalescent,
that new desires are awakened in them and that new hopes are in their
arms and legs. But he mistakes the nature of the change. True, he has
helped them, he has given them back what they most need, i.e., belief in
believing—the confidence in having confidence in something, but how
do they use it? This belief in faith, if one can so express it without
seeming tautological, has certainly been restored to them, and in
the first flood of their enthusiasm they use it by bowing down and
worshipping an ass! When writing this passage, Nietzsche was obviously
thinking of the accusations which were levelled at the early Christians
by their pagan contemporaries. It is well known that they were supposed
not only to be eaters of human flesh but also ass-worshippers, and among
the Roman graffiti, the most famous is the one found on the Palatino,
showing a man worshipping a cross on which is suspended a figure
with the head of an ass (see Minucius Felix, “Octavius” IX.; Tacitus,
“Historiae” v. 3; Tertullian, “Apologia”, etc.). Nietzsche’s obvious
moral, however, is that great scientists and thinkers, once they have
reached the wall encircling scepticism and have thereby learned to
recover their confidence in the act of believing, as such, usually
manifest the change in their outlook by falling victims to the narrowest
and most superstitious of creeds. So much for the introduction of the
ass as an object of worship.

Now, with regard to the actual service and Ass-Festival, no reader who
happens to be acquainted with the religious history of the Middle Ages
will fail to see the allusion here to the asinaria festa which were by
no means uncommon in France, Germany, and elsewhere in Europe during the
thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries.

Chapter LXXVIII. The Ass-Festival.

At length, in the middle of their feast, Zarathustra bursts in upon
them and rebukes them soundly. But he does not do so long; in the
Ass-Festival, it suddenly occurs to him, that he is concerned with a
ceremony that may not be without its purpose, as something foolish but
necessary—a recreation for wise men. He is therefore highly pleased
that the higher men have all blossomed forth; they therefore require
new festivals,—“A little valiant nonsense, some divine service and
ass-festival, some old joyful Zarathustra fool, some blusterer to blow
their souls bright.”

He tells them not to forget that night and the ass-festival, for “such
things only the convalescent devise! And should ye celebrate it again,”
 he concludes, “do it from love to yourselves, do it also from love to
me! And in remembrance of ME!”

Chapter LXXIX. The Drunken Song.

It were the height of presumption to attempt to fix any particular
interpretation of my own to the words of this song. With what has gone
before, the reader, while reading it as poetry, should be able to seek
and find his own meaning in it. The doctrine of the Eternal Recurrence
appears for the last time here, in an art-form. Nietzsche lays stress
upon the fact that all happiness, all delight, longs for repetitions,
and just as a child cries “Again! Again!” to the adult who happens to
be amusing him; so the man who sees a meaning, and a joyful meaning, in
existence must also cry “Again!” and yet “Again!” to all his life.

Chapter LXXX. The Sign.

In this discourse, Nietzsche disassociates himself finally from the
higher men, and by the symbol of the lion, wishes to convey to us that
he has won over and mastered the best and the most terrible in nature.
That great power and tenderness are kin, was already his belief in
1875—eight years before he wrote this speech, and when the birds and
the lion come to him, it is because he is the embodiment of the two
qualities. All that is terrible and great in nature, the higher men are
not yet prepared for; for they retreat horror-stricken into the cave
when the lion springs at them; but Zarathustra makes not a move towards
them. He was tempted to them on the previous day, he says, but “That
hath had its time! My suffering and my fellow-suffering,—what matter
about them! Do I then strive after HAPPINESS? I strive after my work!
Well! the lion hath come, my children are nigh. Zarathustra hath grown
ripe. MY day beginneth: ARISE NOW, ARISE, THOU GREAT NOONDAY!”

 ...

The above I know to be open to much criticism. I shall be grateful to
all those who will be kind enough to show me where and how I have gone
wrong; but I should like to point out that, as they stand, I have not
given to these Notes by any means their final form.

ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.

London, February 1909.


================================================================================
[Beyond Good and Evil (선악의 저편)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Beyond Good and Evil
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Beyond Good and Evil

Author: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

Translator: Helen Zimmern


        
Release date: August 1, 2003 [eBook #4363]
                Most recently updated: January 9, 2019

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/4363

Credits: Produced by John Mamoun, Charles Franks, David Widger and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL ***




Produced by John Mamoun, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team






BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL

By Friedrich Nietzsche


Translated by Helen Zimmern



TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE ABOUT THIS E-TEXT EDITION:

The following is a reprint of the Helen Zimmern translation from German
into English of "Beyond Good and Evil," as published in The Complete
Works of Friedrich Nietzsche (1909-1913). Some adaptations from the
original text were made to format it into an e-text. Italics in the
original book are capitalized in this e-text, except for most foreign
language phrases that were italicized. Original footnotes are put in
brackets "[]" at the points where they are cited in the text. Some
spellings were altered. "To-day" and "To-morrow" are spelled "today"
and "tomorrow." Some words containing the letters "ise" in the original
text, such as "idealise," had these letters changed to "ize," such as
"idealize." "Sceptic" was changed to "skeptic."


TABLE OF CONTENTS

    PREFACE
    BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL

    CHAPTER I:    PREJUDICES OF PHILOSOPHERS
    CHAPTER II:   THE FREE SPIRIT
    CHAPTER III:  THE RELIGIOUS MOOD
    CHAPTER IV:   APOPHTHEGMS AND INTERLUDES
    CHAPTER V:    THE NATURAL HISTORY OF MORALS
    CHAPTER VI:   WE SCHOLARS
    CHAPTER VII:  OUR VIRTUES
    CHAPTER VIII: PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES
    CHAPTER IX:   WHAT IS NOBLE?

    FROM THE HEIGHTS (POEM TRANSLATED BY L.A. MAGNUS)




PREFACE


SUPPOSING that Truth is a woman--what then? Is there not ground
for suspecting that all philosophers, in so far as they have been
dogmatists, have failed to understand women--that the terrible
seriousness and clumsy importunity with which they have usually paid
their addresses to Truth, have been unskilled and unseemly methods for
winning a woman? Certainly she has never allowed herself to be won; and
at present every kind of dogma stands with sad and discouraged mien--IF,
indeed, it stands at all! For there are scoffers who maintain that it
has fallen, that all dogma lies on the ground--nay more, that it is at
its last gasp. But to speak seriously, there are good grounds for hoping
that all dogmatizing in philosophy, whatever solemn, whatever conclusive
and decided airs it has assumed, may have been only a noble puerilism
and tyronism; and probably the time is at hand when it will be once
and again understood WHAT has actually sufficed for the basis of such
imposing and absolute philosophical edifices as the dogmatists have
hitherto reared: perhaps some popular superstition of immemorial time
(such as the soul-superstition, which, in the form of subject- and
ego-superstition, has not yet ceased doing mischief): perhaps some
play upon words, a deception on the part of grammar, or an
audacious generalization of very restricted, very personal, very
human--all-too-human facts. The philosophy of the dogmatists, it is to
be hoped, was only a promise for thousands of years afterwards, as was
astrology in still earlier times, in the service of which probably more
labour, gold, acuteness, and patience have been spent than on any
actual science hitherto: we owe to it, and to its "super-terrestrial"
pretensions in Asia and Egypt, the grand style of architecture. It seems
that in order to inscribe themselves upon the heart of humanity with
everlasting claims, all great things have first to wander about the
earth as enormous and awe-inspiring caricatures: dogmatic philosophy has
been a caricature of this kind--for instance, the Vedanta doctrine in
Asia, and Platonism in Europe. Let us not be ungrateful to it, although
it must certainly be confessed that the worst, the most tiresome,
and the most dangerous of errors hitherto has been a dogmatist
error--namely, Plato's invention of Pure Spirit and the Good in Itself.
But now when it has been surmounted, when Europe, rid of this nightmare,
can again draw breath freely and at least enjoy a healthier--sleep,
we, WHOSE DUTY IS WAKEFULNESS ITSELF, are the heirs of all the strength
which the struggle against this error has fostered. It amounted to
the very inversion of truth, and the denial of the PERSPECTIVE--the
fundamental condition--of life, to speak of Spirit and the Good as Plato
spoke of them; indeed one might ask, as a physician: "How did such a
malady attack that finest product of antiquity, Plato? Had the wicked
Socrates really corrupted him? Was Socrates after all a corrupter of
youths, and deserved his hemlock?" But the struggle against Plato,
or--to speak plainer, and for the "people"--the struggle against
the ecclesiastical oppression of millenniums of Christianity (FOR
CHRISTIANITY IS PLATONISM FOR THE "PEOPLE"), produced in Europe
a magnificent tension of soul, such as had not existed anywhere
previously; with such a tensely strained bow one can now aim at the
furthest goals. As a matter of fact, the European feels this tension as
a state of distress, and twice attempts have been made in grand style to
unbend the bow: once by means of Jesuitism, and the second time by means
of democratic enlightenment--which, with the aid of liberty of the press
and newspaper-reading, might, in fact, bring it about that the spirit
would not so easily find itself in "distress"! (The Germans invented
gunpowder--all credit to them! but they again made things square--they
invented printing.) But we, who are neither Jesuits, nor democrats,
nor even sufficiently Germans, we GOOD EUROPEANS, and free, VERY free
spirits--we have it still, all the distress of spirit and all the
tension of its bow! And perhaps also the arrow, the duty, and, who
knows? THE GOAL TO AIM AT....

Sils Maria Upper Engadine, JUNE, 1885.




CHAPTER I. PREJUDICES OF PHILOSOPHERS


1. The Will to Truth, which is to tempt us to many a hazardous
enterprise, the famous Truthfulness of which all philosophers have
hitherto spoken with respect, what questions has this Will to Truth not
laid before us! What strange, perplexing, questionable questions! It is
already a long story; yet it seems as if it were hardly commenced. Is
it any wonder if we at last grow distrustful, lose patience, and turn
impatiently away? That this Sphinx teaches us at last to ask questions
ourselves? WHO is it really that puts questions to us here? WHAT really
is this "Will to Truth" in us? In fact we made a long halt at the
question as to the origin of this Will--until at last we came to an
absolute standstill before a yet more fundamental question. We inquired
about the VALUE of this Will. Granted that we want the truth: WHY NOT
RATHER untruth? And uncertainty? Even ignorance? The problem of the
value of truth presented itself before us--or was it we who presented
ourselves before the problem? Which of us is the Oedipus here? Which
the Sphinx? It would seem to be a rendezvous of questions and notes of
interrogation. And could it be believed that it at last seems to us as
if the problem had never been propounded before, as if we were the first
to discern it, get a sight of it, and RISK RAISING it? For there is risk
in raising it, perhaps there is no greater risk.

2. "HOW COULD anything originate out of its opposite? For example, truth
out of error? or the Will to Truth out of the will to deception? or the
generous deed out of selfishness? or the pure sun-bright vision of the
wise man out of covetousness? Such genesis is impossible; whoever dreams
of it is a fool, nay, worse than a fool; things of the highest
value must have a different origin, an origin of THEIR own--in this
transitory, seductive, illusory, paltry world, in this turmoil of
delusion and cupidity, they cannot have their source. But rather in
the lap of Being, in the intransitory, in the concealed God, in the
'Thing-in-itself--THERE must be their source, and nowhere else!"--This
mode of reasoning discloses the typical prejudice by which
metaphysicians of all times can be recognized, this mode of valuation
is at the back of all their logical procedure; through this "belief" of
theirs, they exert themselves for their "knowledge," for something that
is in the end solemnly christened "the Truth." The fundamental belief of
metaphysicians is THE BELIEF IN ANTITHESES OF VALUES. It never occurred
even to the wariest of them to doubt here on the very threshold (where
doubt, however, was most necessary); though they had made a solemn
vow, "DE OMNIBUS DUBITANDUM." For it may be doubted, firstly, whether
antitheses exist at all; and secondly, whether the popular valuations
and antitheses of value upon which metaphysicians have set their
seal, are not perhaps merely superficial estimates, merely provisional
perspectives, besides being probably made from some corner, perhaps from
below--"frog perspectives," as it were, to borrow an expression current
among painters. In spite of all the value which may belong to the true,
the positive, and the unselfish, it might be possible that a higher
and more fundamental value for life generally should be assigned to
pretence, to the will to delusion, to selfishness, and cupidity. It
might even be possible that WHAT constitutes the value of those good and
respected things, consists precisely in their being insidiously
related, knotted, and crocheted to these evil and apparently opposed
things--perhaps even in being essentially identical with them. Perhaps!
But who wishes to concern himself with such dangerous "Perhapses"!
For that investigation one must await the advent of a new order of
philosophers, such as will have other tastes and inclinations, the
reverse of those hitherto prevalent--philosophers of the dangerous
"Perhaps" in every sense of the term. And to speak in all seriousness, I
see such new philosophers beginning to appear.

3. Having kept a sharp eye on philosophers, and having read between
their lines long enough, I now say to myself that the greater part of
conscious thinking must be counted among the instinctive functions, and
it is so even in the case of philosophical thinking; one has here to
learn anew, as one learned anew about heredity and "innateness." As
little as the act of birth comes into consideration in the whole process
and procedure of heredity, just as little is "being-conscious" OPPOSED
to the instinctive in any decisive sense; the greater part of the
conscious thinking of a philosopher is secretly influenced by his
instincts, and forced into definite channels. And behind all logic and
its seeming sovereignty of movement, there are valuations, or to speak
more plainly, physiological demands, for the maintenance of a definite
mode of life For example, that the certain is worth more than the
uncertain, that illusion is less valuable than "truth" such valuations,
in spite of their regulative importance for US, might notwithstanding be
only superficial valuations, special kinds of _niaiserie_, such as may
be necessary for the maintenance of beings such as ourselves. Supposing,
in effect, that man is not just the "measure of things."

4. The falseness of an opinion is not for us any objection to it: it is
here, perhaps, that our new language sounds most strangely. The
question is, how far an opinion is life-furthering, life-preserving,
species-preserving, perhaps species-rearing, and we are fundamentally
inclined to maintain that the falsest opinions (to which the synthetic
judgments a priori belong), are the most indispensable to us, that
without a recognition of logical fictions, without a comparison of
reality with the purely IMAGINED world of the absolute and immutable,
without a constant counterfeiting of the world by means of numbers,
man could not live--that the renunciation of false opinions would be
a renunciation of life, a negation of life. TO RECOGNISE UNTRUTH AS A
CONDITION OF LIFE; that is certainly to impugn the traditional ideas of
value in a dangerous manner, and a philosophy which ventures to do so,
has thereby alone placed itself beyond good and evil.

5. That which causes philosophers to be regarded half-distrustfully
and half-mockingly, is not the oft-repeated discovery how innocent they
are--how often and easily they make mistakes and lose their way, in
short, how childish and childlike they are,--but that there is not
enough honest dealing with them, whereas they all raise a loud and
virtuous outcry when the problem of truthfulness is even hinted at in
the remotest manner. They all pose as though their real opinions had
been discovered and attained through the self-evolving of a cold, pure,
divinely indifferent dialectic (in contrast to all sorts of mystics,
who, fairer and foolisher, talk of "inspiration"), whereas, in fact, a
prejudiced proposition, idea, or "suggestion," which is generally
their heart's desire abstracted and refined, is defended by them with
arguments sought out after the event. They are all advocates who do not
wish to be regarded as such, generally astute defenders, also, of their
prejudices, which they dub "truths,"--and VERY far from having the
conscience which bravely admits this to itself, very far from having
the good taste of the courage which goes so far as to let this be
understood, perhaps to warn friend or foe, or in cheerful confidence
and self-ridicule. The spectacle of the Tartuffery of old Kant, equally
stiff and decent, with which he entices us into the dialectic
by-ways that lead (more correctly mislead) to his "categorical
imperative"--makes us fastidious ones smile, we who find no small
amusement in spying out the subtle tricks of old moralists and ethical
preachers. Or, still more so, the hocus-pocus in mathematical form, by
means of which Spinoza has, as it were, clad his philosophy in mail and
mask--in fact, the "love of HIS wisdom," to translate the term fairly
and squarely--in order thereby to strike terror at once into the heart
of the assailant who should dare to cast a glance on that invincible
maiden, that Pallas Athene:--how much of personal timidity and
vulnerability does this masquerade of a sickly recluse betray!

6. It has gradually become clear to me what every great philosophy up
till now has consisted of--namely, the confession of its originator, and
a species of involuntary and unconscious auto-biography; and moreover
that the moral (or immoral) purpose in every philosophy has constituted
the true vital germ out of which the entire plant has always grown.
Indeed, to understand how the abstrusest metaphysical assertions of a
philosopher have been arrived at, it is always well (and wise) to first
ask oneself: "What morality do they (or does he) aim at?" Accordingly,
I do not believe that an "impulse to knowledge" is the father of
philosophy; but that another impulse, here as elsewhere, has only made
use of knowledge (and mistaken knowledge!) as an instrument. But whoever
considers the fundamental impulses of man with a view to determining
how far they may have here acted as INSPIRING GENII (or as demons and
cobolds), will find that they have all practiced philosophy at one time
or another, and that each one of them would have been only too glad to
look upon itself as the ultimate end of existence and the legitimate
LORD over all the other impulses. For every impulse is imperious, and as
SUCH, attempts to philosophize. To be sure, in the case of scholars, in
the case of really scientific men, it may be otherwise--"better," if
you will; there there may really be such a thing as an "impulse to
knowledge," some kind of small, independent clock-work, which, when well
wound up, works away industriously to that end, WITHOUT the rest of
the scholarly impulses taking any material part therein. The actual
"interests" of the scholar, therefore, are generally in quite another
direction--in the family, perhaps, or in money-making, or in politics;
it is, in fact, almost indifferent at what point of research his little
machine is placed, and whether the hopeful young worker becomes a
good philologist, a mushroom specialist, or a chemist; he is not
CHARACTERISED by becoming this or that. In the philosopher, on the
contrary, there is absolutely nothing impersonal; and above all,
his morality furnishes a decided and decisive testimony as to WHO HE
IS,--that is to say, in what order the deepest impulses of his nature
stand to each other.

7. How malicious philosophers can be! I know of nothing more stinging
than the joke Epicurus took the liberty of making on Plato and the
Platonists; he called them Dionysiokolakes. In its original sense,
and on the face of it, the word signifies "Flatterers of
Dionysius"--consequently, tyrants' accessories and lick-spittles;
besides this, however, it is as much as to say, "They are all ACTORS,
there is nothing genuine about them" (for Dionysiokolax was a popular
name for an actor). And the latter is really the malignant reproach that
Epicurus cast upon Plato: he was annoyed by the grandiose manner, the
mise en scene style of which Plato and his scholars were masters--of
which Epicurus was not a master! He, the old school-teacher of Samos,
who sat concealed in his little garden at Athens, and wrote three
hundred books, perhaps out of rage and ambitious envy of Plato, who
knows! Greece took a hundred years to find out who the garden-god
Epicurus really was. Did she ever find out?

8. There is a point in every philosophy at which the "conviction" of
the philosopher appears on the scene; or, to put it in the words of an
ancient mystery:

Adventavit asinus, Pulcher et fortissimus.

9. You desire to LIVE "according to Nature"? Oh, you noble Stoics, what
fraud of words! Imagine to yourselves a being like Nature, boundlessly
extravagant, boundlessly indifferent, without purpose or consideration,
without pity or justice, at once fruitful and barren and uncertain:
imagine to yourselves INDIFFERENCE as a power--how COULD you live
in accordance with such indifference? To live--is not that just
endeavouring to be otherwise than this Nature? Is not living valuing,
preferring, being unjust, being limited, endeavouring to be different?
And granted that your imperative, "living according to Nature," means
actually the same as "living according to life"--how could you do
DIFFERENTLY? Why should you make a principle out of what you yourselves
are, and must be? In reality, however, it is quite otherwise with you:
while you pretend to read with rapture the canon of your law in Nature,
you want something quite the contrary, you extraordinary stage-players
and self-deluders! In your pride you wish to dictate your morals and
ideals to Nature, to Nature herself, and to incorporate them therein;
you insist that it shall be Nature "according to the Stoa," and would
like everything to be made after your own image, as a vast, eternal
glorification and generalism of Stoicism! With all your love for truth,
you have forced yourselves so long, so persistently, and with such
hypnotic rigidity to see Nature FALSELY, that is to say, Stoically,
that you are no longer able to see it otherwise--and to crown all, some
unfathomable superciliousness gives you the Bedlamite hope that
BECAUSE you are able to tyrannize over yourselves--Stoicism is
self-tyranny--Nature will also allow herself to be tyrannized over: is
not the Stoic a PART of Nature?... But this is an old and everlasting
story: what happened in old times with the Stoics still happens today,
as soon as ever a philosophy begins to believe in itself. It always
creates the world in its own image; it cannot do otherwise; philosophy
is this tyrannical impulse itself, the most spiritual Will to Power, the
will to "creation of the world," the will to the causa prima.

10. The eagerness and subtlety, I should even say craftiness, with
which the problem of "the real and the apparent world" is dealt with at
present throughout Europe, furnishes food for thought and attention; and
he who hears only a "Will to Truth" in the background, and nothing else,
cannot certainly boast of the sharpest ears. In rare and isolated
cases, it may really have happened that such a Will to Truth--a certain
extravagant and adventurous pluck, a metaphysician's ambition of the
forlorn hope--has participated therein: that which in the end always
prefers a handful of "certainty" to a whole cartload of beautiful
possibilities; there may even be puritanical fanatics of conscience,
who prefer to put their last trust in a sure nothing, rather than in an
uncertain something. But that is Nihilism, and the sign of a despairing,
mortally wearied soul, notwithstanding the courageous bearing such a
virtue may display. It seems, however, to be otherwise with stronger
and livelier thinkers who are still eager for life. In that they side
AGAINST appearance, and speak superciliously of "perspective," in
that they rank the credibility of their own bodies about as low as the
credibility of the ocular evidence that "the earth stands still," and
thus, apparently, allowing with complacency their securest possession
to escape (for what does one at present believe in more firmly than
in one's body?),--who knows if they are not really trying to win back
something which was formerly an even securer possession, something
of the old domain of the faith of former times, perhaps the "immortal
soul," perhaps "the old God," in short, ideas by which they could live
better, that is to say, more vigorously and more joyously, than by
"modern ideas"? There is DISTRUST of these modern ideas in this mode
of looking at things, a disbelief in all that has been constructed
yesterday and today; there is perhaps some slight admixture of satiety
and scorn, which can no longer endure the BRIC-A-BRAC of ideas of the
most varied origin, such as so-called Positivism at present throws on
the market; a disgust of the more refined taste at the village-fair
motleyness and patchiness of all these reality-philosophasters, in whom
there is nothing either new or true, except this motleyness. Therein it
seems to me that we should agree with those skeptical anti-realists and
knowledge-microscopists of the present day; their instinct, which repels
them from MODERN reality, is unrefuted... what do their retrograde
by-paths concern us! The main thing about them is NOT that they wish
to go "back," but that they wish to get AWAY therefrom. A little MORE
strength, swing, courage, and artistic power, and they would be OFF--and
not back!

11. It seems to me that there is everywhere an attempt at present to
divert attention from the actual influence which Kant exercised on
German philosophy, and especially to ignore prudently the value which
he set upon himself. Kant was first and foremost proud of his Table of
Categories; with it in his hand he said: "This is the most difficult
thing that could ever be undertaken on behalf of metaphysics." Let us
only understand this "could be"! He was proud of having DISCOVERED a
new faculty in man, the faculty of synthetic judgment a priori. Granting
that he deceived himself in this matter; the development and rapid
flourishing of German philosophy depended nevertheless on his pride, and
on the eager rivalry of the younger generation to discover if possible
something--at all events "new faculties"--of which to be still
prouder!--But let us reflect for a moment--it is high time to do so.
"How are synthetic judgments a priori POSSIBLE?" Kant asks himself--and
what is really his answer? "BY MEANS OF A MEANS (faculty)"--but
unfortunately not in five words, but so circumstantially, imposingly,
and with such display of German profundity and verbal flourishes, that
one altogether loses sight of the comical niaiserie allemande involved
in such an answer. People were beside themselves with delight over this
new faculty, and the jubilation reached its climax when Kant further
discovered a moral faculty in man--for at that time Germans were still
moral, not yet dabbling in the "Politics of hard fact." Then came
the honeymoon of German philosophy. All the young theologians of the
Tubingen institution went immediately into the groves--all seeking for
"faculties." And what did they not find--in that innocent, rich, and
still youthful period of the German spirit, to which Romanticism, the
malicious fairy, piped and sang, when one could not yet distinguish
between "finding" and "inventing"! Above all a faculty for the
"transcendental"; Schelling christened it, intellectual intuition,
and thereby gratified the most earnest longings of the naturally
pious-inclined Germans. One can do no greater wrong to the whole of
this exuberant and eccentric movement (which was really youthfulness,
notwithstanding that it disguised itself so boldly, in hoary and senile
conceptions), than to take it seriously, or even treat it with moral
indignation. Enough, however--the world grew older, and the dream
vanished. A time came when people rubbed their foreheads, and they still
rub them today. People had been dreaming, and first and foremost--old
Kant. "By means of a means (faculty)"--he had said, or at least meant to
say. But, is that--an answer? An explanation? Or is it not rather merely
a repetition of the question? How does opium induce sleep? "By means of
a means (faculty)," namely the virtus dormitiva, replies the doctor in
Moliere,

    Quia est in eo virtus dormitiva,
    Cujus est natura sensus assoupire.

But such replies belong to the realm of comedy, and it is high time
to replace the Kantian question, "How are synthetic judgments a PRIORI
possible?" by another question, "Why is belief in such judgments
necessary?"--in effect, it is high time that we should understand
that such judgments must be believed to be true, for the sake of the
preservation of creatures like ourselves; though they still might
naturally be false judgments! Or, more plainly spoken, and roughly and
readily--synthetic judgments a priori should not "be possible" at all;
we have no right to them; in our mouths they are nothing but false
judgments. Only, of course, the belief in their truth is necessary, as
plausible belief and ocular evidence belonging to the perspective view
of life. And finally, to call to mind the enormous influence which
"German philosophy"--I hope you understand its right to inverted commas
(goosefeet)?--has exercised throughout the whole of Europe, there is
no doubt that a certain VIRTUS DORMITIVA had a share in it; thanks to
German philosophy, it was a delight to the noble idlers, the virtuous,
the mystics, the artiste, the three-fourths Christians, and the
political obscurantists of all nations, to find an antidote to the still
overwhelming sensualism which overflowed from the last century into
this, in short--"sensus assoupire."...

12. As regards materialistic atomism, it is one of the best-refuted
theories that have been advanced, and in Europe there is now perhaps
no one in the learned world so unscholarly as to attach serious
signification to it, except for convenient everyday use (as an
abbreviation of the means of expression)--thanks chiefly to the Pole
Boscovich: he and the Pole Copernicus have hitherto been the greatest
and most successful opponents of ocular evidence. For while Copernicus
has persuaded us to believe, contrary to all the senses, that the earth
does NOT stand fast, Boscovich has taught us to abjure the belief in the
last thing that "stood fast" of the earth--the belief in "substance," in
"matter," in the earth-residuum, and particle-atom: it is the greatest
triumph over the senses that has hitherto been gained on earth. One
must, however, go still further, and also declare war, relentless war
to the knife, against the "atomistic requirements" which still lead a
dangerous after-life in places where no one suspects them, like the more
celebrated "metaphysical requirements": one must also above all give
the finishing stroke to that other and more portentous atomism which
Christianity has taught best and longest, the SOUL-ATOMISM. Let it be
permitted to designate by this expression the belief which regards the
soul as something indestructible, eternal, indivisible, as a monad,
as an atomon: this belief ought to be expelled from science! Between
ourselves, it is not at all necessary to get rid of "the soul" thereby,
and thus renounce one of the oldest and most venerated hypotheses--as
happens frequently to the clumsiness of naturalists, who can hardly
touch on the soul without immediately losing it. But the way is open
for new acceptations and refinements of the soul-hypothesis; and such
conceptions as "mortal soul," and "soul of subjective multiplicity,"
and "soul as social structure of the instincts and passions," want
henceforth to have legitimate rights in science. In that the NEW
psychologist is about to put an end to the superstitions which have
hitherto flourished with almost tropical luxuriance around the idea of
the soul, he is really, as it were, thrusting himself into a new desert
and a new distrust--it is possible that the older psychologists had a
merrier and more comfortable time of it; eventually, however, he finds
that precisely thereby he is also condemned to INVENT--and, who knows?
perhaps to DISCOVER the new.

13. Psychologists should bethink themselves before putting down the
instinct of self-preservation as the cardinal instinct of an organic
being. A living thing seeks above all to DISCHARGE its strength--life
itself is WILL TO POWER; self-preservation is only one of the indirect
and most frequent RESULTS thereof. In short, here, as everywhere else,
let us beware of SUPERFLUOUS teleological principles!--one of which
is the instinct of self-preservation (we owe it to Spinoza's
inconsistency). It is thus, in effect, that method ordains, which must
be essentially economy of principles.

14. It is perhaps just dawning on five or six minds that natural
philosophy is only a world-exposition and world-arrangement (according
to us, if I may say so!) and NOT a world-explanation; but in so far as
it is based on belief in the senses, it is regarded as more, and for a
long time to come must be regarded as more--namely, as an explanation.
It has eyes and fingers of its own, it has ocular evidence and
palpableness of its own: this operates fascinatingly, persuasively, and
CONVINCINGLY upon an age with fundamentally plebeian tastes--in fact, it
follows instinctively the canon of truth of eternal popular sensualism.
What is clear, what is "explained"? Only that which can be seen and
felt--one must pursue every problem thus far. Obversely, however, the
charm of the Platonic mode of thought, which was an ARISTOCRATIC mode,
consisted precisely in RESISTANCE to obvious sense-evidence--perhaps
among men who enjoyed even stronger and more fastidious senses than our
contemporaries, but who knew how to find a higher triumph in remaining
masters of them: and this by means of pale, cold, grey conceptional
networks which they threw over the motley whirl of the senses--the
mob of the senses, as Plato said. In this overcoming of the world, and
interpreting of the world in the manner of Plato, there was an ENJOYMENT
different from that which the physicists of today offer us--and likewise
the Darwinists and anti-teleologists among the physiological workers,
with their principle of the "smallest possible effort," and the greatest
possible blunder. "Where there is nothing more to see or to grasp, there
is also nothing more for men to do"--that is certainly an imperative
different from the Platonic one, but it may notwithstanding be the right
imperative for a hardy, laborious race of machinists and bridge-builders
of the future, who have nothing but ROUGH work to perform.

15. To study physiology with a clear conscience, one must insist on
the fact that the sense-organs are not phenomena in the sense of the
idealistic philosophy; as such they certainly could not be causes!
Sensualism, therefore, at least as regulative hypothesis, if not as
heuristic principle. What? And others say even that the external world
is the work of our organs? But then our body, as a part of this external
world, would be the work of our organs! But then our organs themselves
would be the work of our organs! It seems to me that this is a
complete REDUCTIO AD ABSURDUM, if the conception CAUSA SUI is something
fundamentally absurd. Consequently, the external world is NOT the work
of our organs--?

16. There are still harmless self-observers who believe that there are
"immediate certainties"; for instance, "I think," or as the superstition
of Schopenhauer puts it, "I will"; as though cognition here got hold
of its object purely and simply as "the thing in itself," without any
falsification taking place either on the part of the subject or the
object. I would repeat it, however, a hundred times, that "immediate
certainty," as well as "absolute knowledge" and the "thing in itself,"
involve a CONTRADICTIO IN ADJECTO; we really ought to free ourselves
from the misleading significance of words! The people on their part may
think that cognition is knowing all about things, but the philosopher
must say to himself: "When I analyze the process that is expressed in
the sentence, 'I think,' I find a whole series of daring assertions, the
argumentative proof of which would be difficult, perhaps impossible:
for instance, that it is _I_ who think, that there must necessarily be
something that thinks, that thinking is an activity and operation on the
part of a being who is thought of as a cause, that there is an 'ego,'
and finally, that it is already determined what is to be designated by
thinking--that I KNOW what thinking is. For if I had not already decided
within myself what it is, by what standard could I determine whether
that which is just happening is not perhaps 'willing' or 'feeling'? In
short, the assertion 'I think,' assumes that I COMPARE my state at the
present moment with other states of myself which I know, in order to
determine what it is; on account of this retrospective connection with
further 'knowledge,' it has, at any rate, no immediate certainty for
me."--In place of the "immediate certainty" in which the people may
believe in the special case, the philosopher thus finds a series of
metaphysical questions presented to him, veritable conscience questions
of the intellect, to wit: "Whence did I get the notion of 'thinking'?
Why do I believe in cause and effect? What gives me the right to speak
of an 'ego,' and even of an 'ego' as cause, and finally of an 'ego'
as cause of thought?" He who ventures to answer these metaphysical
questions at once by an appeal to a sort of INTUITIVE perception, like
the person who says, "I think, and know that this, at least, is
true, actual, and certain"--will encounter a smile and two notes of
interrogation in a philosopher nowadays. "Sir," the philosopher will
perhaps give him to understand, "it is improbable that you are not
mistaken, but why should it be the truth?"

17. With regard to the superstitions of logicians, I shall never tire
of emphasizing a small, terse fact, which is unwillingly recognized by
these credulous minds--namely, that a thought comes when "it" wishes,
and not when "I" wish; so that it is a PERVERSION of the facts of the
case to say that the subject "I" is the condition of the predicate
"think." ONE thinks; but that this "one" is precisely the famous old
"ego," is, to put it mildly, only a supposition, an assertion, and
assuredly not an "immediate certainty." After all, one has even gone too
far with this "one thinks"--even the "one" contains an INTERPRETATION of
the process, and does not belong to the process itself. One infers here
according to the usual grammatical formula--"To think is an activity;
every activity requires an agency that is active; consequently"... It
was pretty much on the same lines that the older atomism sought, besides
the operating "power," the material particle wherein it resides and out
of which it operates--the atom. More rigorous minds, however, learnt at
last to get along without this "earth-residuum," and perhaps some day we
shall accustom ourselves, even from the logician's point of view, to
get along without the little "one" (to which the worthy old "ego" has
refined itself).

18. It is certainly not the least charm of a theory that it is
refutable; it is precisely thereby that it attracts the more subtle
minds. It seems that the hundred-times-refuted theory of the "free will"
owes its persistence to this charm alone; some one is always appearing
who feels himself strong enough to refute it.

19. Philosophers are accustomed to speak of the will as though it were
the best-known thing in the world; indeed, Schopenhauer has given us
to understand that the will alone is really known to us, absolutely and
completely known, without deduction or addition. But it again and
again seems to me that in this case Schopenhauer also only did what
philosophers are in the habit of doing--he seems to have adopted a
POPULAR PREJUDICE and exaggerated it. Willing seems to me to be above
all something COMPLICATED, something that is a unity only in name--and
it is precisely in a name that popular prejudice lurks, which has got
the mastery over the inadequate precautions of philosophers in all ages.
So let us for once be more cautious, let us be "unphilosophical": let
us say that in all willing there is firstly a plurality of sensations,
namely, the sensation of the condition "AWAY FROM WHICH we go," the
sensation of the condition "TOWARDS WHICH we go," the sensation of this
"FROM" and "TOWARDS" itself, and then besides, an accompanying muscular
sensation, which, even without our putting in motion "arms and legs,"
commences its action by force of habit, directly we "will" anything.
Therefore, just as sensations (and indeed many kinds of sensations) are
to be recognized as ingredients of the will, so, in the second place,
thinking is also to be recognized; in every act of the will there is
a ruling thought;--and let us not imagine it possible to sever this
thought from the "willing," as if the will would then remain over!
In the third place, the will is not only a complex of sensation and
thinking, but it is above all an EMOTION, and in fact the emotion of the
command. That which is termed "freedom of the will" is essentially the
emotion of supremacy in respect to him who must obey: "I am free, 'he'
must obey"--this consciousness is inherent in every will; and equally
so the straining of the attention, the straight look which fixes itself
exclusively on one thing, the unconditional judgment that "this and
nothing else is necessary now," the inward certainty that obedience
will be rendered--and whatever else pertains to the position of the
commander. A man who WILLS commands something within himself which
renders obedience, or which he believes renders obedience. But now let
us notice what is the strangest thing about the will,--this affair so
extremely complex, for which the people have only one name. Inasmuch as
in the given circumstances we are at the same time the commanding AND
the obeying parties, and as the obeying party we know the sensations of
constraint, impulsion, pressure, resistance, and motion, which usually
commence immediately after the act of will; inasmuch as, on the other
hand, we are accustomed to disregard this duality, and to deceive
ourselves about it by means of the synthetic term "I": a whole series
of erroneous conclusions, and consequently of false judgments about the
will itself, has become attached to the act of willing--to such a degree
that he who wills believes firmly that willing SUFFICES for action.
Since in the majority of cases there has only been exercise of will
when the effect of the command--consequently obedience, and therefore
action--was to be EXPECTED, the APPEARANCE has translated itself into
the sentiment, as if there were a NECESSITY OF EFFECT; in a word, he who
wills believes with a fair amount of certainty that will and action are
somehow one; he ascribes the success, the carrying out of the willing,
to the will itself, and thereby enjoys an increase of the sensation
of power which accompanies all success. "Freedom of Will"--that is the
expression for the complex state of delight of the person exercising
volition, who commands and at the same time identifies himself with
the executor of the order--who, as such, enjoys also the triumph over
obstacles, but thinks within himself that it was really his own will
that overcame them. In this way the person exercising volition adds the
feelings of delight of his successful executive instruments, the useful
"underwills" or under-souls--indeed, our body is but a social structure
composed of many souls--to his feelings of delight as commander. L'EFFET
C'EST MOI. what happens here is what happens in every well-constructed
and happy commonwealth, namely, that the governing class identifies
itself with the successes of the commonwealth. In all willing it is
absolutely a question of commanding and obeying, on the basis, as
already said, of a social structure composed of many "souls", on which
account a philosopher should claim the right to include willing-as-such
within the sphere of morals--regarded as the doctrine of the relations
of supremacy under which the phenomenon of "life" manifests itself.

20. That the separate philosophical ideas are not anything optional or
autonomously evolving, but grow up in connection and relationship with
each other, that, however suddenly and arbitrarily they seem to appear
in the history of thought, they nevertheless belong just as much to
a system as the collective members of the fauna of a Continent--is
betrayed in the end by the circumstance: how unfailingly the most
diverse philosophers always fill in again a definite fundamental scheme
of POSSIBLE philosophies. Under an invisible spell, they always revolve
once more in the same orbit, however independent of each other they
may feel themselves with their critical or systematic wills, something
within them leads them, something impels them in definite order the
one after the other--to wit, the innate methodology and relationship
of their ideas. Their thinking is, in fact, far less a discovery than a
re-recognizing, a remembering, a return and a home-coming to a far-off,
ancient common-household of the soul, out of which those ideas formerly
grew: philosophizing is so far a kind of atavism of the highest order.
The wonderful family resemblance of all Indian, Greek, and German
philosophizing is easily enough explained. In fact, where there is
affinity of language, owing to the common philosophy of grammar--I mean
owing to the unconscious domination and guidance of similar grammatical
functions--it cannot but be that everything is prepared at the outset
for a similar development and succession of philosophical systems,
just as the way seems barred against certain other possibilities of
world-interpretation. It is highly probable that philosophers within the
domain of the Ural-Altaic languages (where the conception of the subject
is least developed) look otherwise "into the world," and will be
found on paths of thought different from those of the Indo-Germans and
Mussulmans, the spell of certain grammatical functions is ultimately
also the spell of PHYSIOLOGICAL valuations and racial conditions.--So
much by way of rejecting Locke's superficiality with regard to the
origin of ideas.

21. The CAUSA SUI is the best self-contradiction that has yet been
conceived, it is a sort of logical violation and unnaturalness; but the
extravagant pride of man has managed to entangle itself profoundly and
frightfully with this very folly. The desire for "freedom of will"
in the superlative, metaphysical sense, such as still holds sway,
unfortunately, in the minds of the half-educated, the desire to bear
the entire and ultimate responsibility for one's actions oneself, and
to absolve God, the world, ancestors, chance, and society therefrom,
involves nothing less than to be precisely this CAUSA SUI, and, with
more than Munchausen daring, to pull oneself up into existence by the
hair, out of the slough of nothingness. If any one should find out in
this manner the crass stupidity of the celebrated conception of "free
will" and put it out of his head altogether, I beg of him to carry
his "enlightenment" a step further, and also put out of his head the
contrary of this monstrous conception of "free will": I mean "non-free
will," which is tantamount to a misuse of cause and effect. One
should not wrongly MATERIALISE "cause" and "effect," as the natural
philosophers do (and whoever like them naturalize in thinking at
present), according to the prevailing mechanical doltishness which makes
the cause press and push until it "effects" its end; one should use
"cause" and "effect" only as pure CONCEPTIONS, that is to say, as
conventional fictions for the purpose of designation and mutual
understanding,--NOT for explanation. In "being-in-itself" there is
nothing of "casual-connection," of "necessity," or of "psychological
non-freedom"; there the effect does NOT follow the cause, there "law"
does not obtain. It is WE alone who have devised cause, sequence,
reciprocity, relativity, constraint, number, law, freedom, motive,
and purpose; and when we interpret and intermix this symbol-world,
as "being-in-itself," with things, we act once more as we have always
acted--MYTHOLOGICALLY. The "non-free will" is mythology; in real life
it is only a question of STRONG and WEAK wills.--It is almost always
a symptom of what is lacking in himself, when a thinker, in every
"causal-connection" and "psychological necessity," manifests something
of compulsion, indigence, obsequiousness, oppression, and non-freedom;
it is suspicious to have such feelings--the person betrays himself. And
in general, if I have observed correctly, the "non-freedom of the will"
is regarded as a problem from two entirely opposite standpoints, but
always in a profoundly PERSONAL manner: some will not give up their
"responsibility," their belief in THEMSELVES, the personal right to
THEIR merits, at any price (the vain races belong to this class); others
on the contrary, do not wish to be answerable for anything, or blamed
for anything, and owing to an inward self-contempt, seek to GET OUT OF
THE BUSINESS, no matter how. The latter, when they write books, are
in the habit at present of taking the side of criminals; a sort of
socialistic sympathy is their favourite disguise. And as a matter of
fact, the fatalism of the weak-willed embellishes itself surprisingly
when it can pose as "la religion de la souffrance humaine"; that is ITS
"good taste."

22. Let me be pardoned, as an old philologist who cannot desist from
the mischief of putting his finger on bad modes of interpretation, but
"Nature's conformity to law," of which you physicists talk so proudly,
as though--why, it exists only owing to your interpretation and bad
"philology." It is no matter of fact, no "text," but rather just a
naively humanitarian adjustment and perversion of meaning, with which
you make abundant concessions to the democratic instincts of the modern
soul! "Everywhere equality before the law--Nature is not different in
that respect, nor better than we": a fine instance of secret motive,
in which the vulgar antagonism to everything privileged and
autocratic--likewise a second and more refined atheism--is once more
disguised. "Ni dieu, ni maitre"--that, also, is what you want; and
therefore "Cheers for natural law!"--is it not so? But, as has been
said, that is interpretation, not text; and somebody might come along,
who, with opposite intentions and modes of interpretation, could read
out of the same "Nature," and with regard to the same phenomena, just
the tyrannically inconsiderate and relentless enforcement of the claims
of power--an interpreter who should so place the unexceptionalness and
unconditionalness of all "Will to Power" before your eyes, that almost
every word, and the word "tyranny" itself, would eventually seem
unsuitable, or like a weakening and softening metaphor--as being too
human; and who should, nevertheless, end by asserting the same about
this world as you do, namely, that it has a "necessary" and "calculable"
course, NOT, however, because laws obtain in it, but because they are
absolutely LACKING, and every power effects its ultimate consequences
every moment. Granted that this also is only interpretation--and you
will be eager enough to make this objection?--well, so much the better.

23. All psychology hitherto has run aground on moral prejudices and
timidities, it has not dared to launch out into the depths. In so far
as it is allowable to recognize in that which has hitherto been written,
evidence of that which has hitherto been kept silent, it seems as if
nobody had yet harboured the notion of psychology as the Morphology
and DEVELOPMENT-DOCTRINE OF THE WILL TO POWER, as I conceive of it.
The power of moral prejudices has penetrated deeply into the most
intellectual world, the world apparently most indifferent and
unprejudiced, and has obviously operated in an injurious, obstructive,
blinding, and distorting manner. A proper physio-psychology has to
contend with unconscious antagonism in the heart of the investigator,
it has "the heart" against it even a doctrine of the reciprocal
conditionalness of the "good" and the "bad" impulses, causes (as
refined immorality) distress and aversion in a still strong and manly
conscience--still more so, a doctrine of the derivation of all good
impulses from bad ones. If, however, a person should regard even
the emotions of hatred, envy, covetousness, and imperiousness
as life-conditioning emotions, as factors which must be present,
fundamentally and essentially, in the general economy of life (which
must, therefore, be further developed if life is to be further
developed), he will suffer from such a view of things as from
sea-sickness. And yet this hypothesis is far from being the strangest
and most painful in this immense and almost new domain of dangerous
knowledge, and there are in fact a hundred good reasons why every one
should keep away from it who CAN do so! On the other hand, if one has
once drifted hither with one's bark, well! very good! now let us set our
teeth firmly! let us open our eyes and keep our hand fast on the helm!
We sail away right OVER morality, we crush out, we destroy perhaps the
remains of our own morality by daring to make our voyage thither--but
what do WE matter. Never yet did a PROFOUNDER world of insight reveal
itself to daring travelers and adventurers, and the psychologist who
thus "makes a sacrifice"--it is not the sacrifizio dell' intelletto,
on the contrary!--will at least be entitled to demand in return that
psychology shall once more be recognized as the queen of the sciences,
for whose service and equipment the other sciences exist. For psychology
is once more the path to the fundamental problems.



CHAPTER II. THE FREE SPIRIT


24. O sancta simplicitas! In what strange simplification and
falsification man lives! One can never cease wondering when once one has
got eyes for beholding this marvel! How we have made everything around
us clear and free and easy and simple! how we have been able to give
our senses a passport to everything superficial, our thoughts a godlike
desire for wanton pranks and wrong inferences!--how from the beginning,
we have contrived to retain our ignorance in order to enjoy an almost
inconceivable freedom, thoughtlessness, imprudence, heartiness,
and gaiety--in order to enjoy life! And only on this solidified,
granite-like foundation of ignorance could knowledge rear itself
hitherto, the will to knowledge on the foundation of a far more powerful
will, the will to ignorance, to the uncertain, to the untrue! Not as
its opposite, but--as its refinement! It is to be hoped, indeed, that
LANGUAGE, here as elsewhere, will not get over its awkwardness, and that
it will continue to talk of opposites where there are only degrees
and many refinements of gradation; it is equally to be hoped that the
incarnated Tartuffery of morals, which now belongs to our unconquerable
"flesh and blood," will turn the words round in the mouths of us
discerning ones. Here and there we understand it, and laugh at the way
in which precisely the best knowledge seeks most to retain us in this
SIMPLIFIED, thoroughly artificial, suitably imagined, and suitably
falsified world: at the way in which, whether it will or not, it loves
error, because, as living itself, it loves life!

25. After such a cheerful commencement, a serious word would fain be
heard; it appeals to the most serious minds. Take care, ye philosophers
and friends of knowledge, and beware of martyrdom! Of suffering "for the
truth's sake"! even in your own defense! It spoils all the innocence
and fine neutrality of your conscience; it makes you headstrong against
objections and red rags; it stupefies, animalizes, and brutalizes, when
in the struggle with danger, slander, suspicion, expulsion, and even
worse consequences of enmity, ye have at last to play your last card
as protectors of truth upon earth--as though "the Truth" were such an
innocent and incompetent creature as to require protectors! and you of
all people, ye knights of the sorrowful countenance, Messrs Loafers and
Cobweb-spinners of the spirit! Finally, ye know sufficiently well that
it cannot be of any consequence if YE just carry your point; ye know
that hitherto no philosopher has carried his point, and that there might
be a more laudable truthfulness in every little interrogative mark
which you place after your special words and favourite doctrines (and
occasionally after yourselves) than in all the solemn pantomime and
trumping games before accusers and law-courts! Rather go out of the way!
Flee into concealment! And have your masks and your ruses, that ye may
be mistaken for what you are, or somewhat feared! And pray, don't forget
the garden, the garden with golden trellis-work! And have people around
you who are as a garden--or as music on the waters at eventide, when
already the day becomes a memory. Choose the GOOD solitude, the free,
wanton, lightsome solitude, which also gives you the right still to
remain good in any sense whatsoever! How poisonous, how crafty, how bad,
does every long war make one, which cannot be waged openly by means
of force! How PERSONAL does a long fear make one, a long watching
of enemies, of possible enemies! These pariahs of society, these
long-pursued, badly-persecuted ones--also the compulsory recluses, the
Spinozas or Giordano Brunos--always become in the end, even under the
most intellectual masquerade, and perhaps without being themselves aware
of it, refined vengeance-seekers and poison-Brewers (just lay bare
the foundation of Spinoza's ethics and theology!), not to speak of
the stupidity of moral indignation, which is the unfailing sign in a
philosopher that the sense of philosophical humour has left him. The
martyrdom of the philosopher, his "sacrifice for the sake of truth,"
forces into the light whatever of the agitator and actor lurks in him;
and if one has hitherto contemplated him only with artistic curiosity,
with regard to many a philosopher it is easy to understand the dangerous
desire to see him also in his deterioration (deteriorated into a
"martyr," into a stage-and-tribune-bawler). Only, that it is necessary
with such a desire to be clear WHAT spectacle one will see in any
case--merely a satyric play, merely an epilogue farce, merely the
continued proof that the long, real tragedy IS AT AN END, supposing that
every philosophy has been a long tragedy in its origin.

26. Every select man strives instinctively for a citadel and a privacy,
where he is FREE from the crowd, the many, the majority--where he may
forget "men who are the rule," as their exception;--exclusive only of
the case in which he is pushed straight to such men by a still stronger
instinct, as a discerner in the great and exceptional sense. Whoever, in
intercourse with men, does not occasionally glisten in all the green
and grey colours of distress, owing to disgust, satiety, sympathy,
gloominess, and solitariness, is assuredly not a man of elevated tastes;
supposing, however, that he does not voluntarily take all this burden
and disgust upon himself, that he persistently avoids it, and remains,
as I said, quietly and proudly hidden in his citadel, one thing is then
certain: he was not made, he was not predestined for knowledge. For as
such, he would one day have to say to himself: "The devil take my good
taste! but 'the rule' is more interesting than the exception--than
myself, the exception!" And he would go DOWN, and above all, he would
go "inside." The long and serious study of the AVERAGE man--and
consequently much disguise, self-overcoming, familiarity, and bad
intercourse (all intercourse is bad intercourse except with one's
equals):--that constitutes a necessary part of the life-history of every
philosopher; perhaps the most disagreeable, odious, and disappointing
part. If he is fortunate, however, as a favourite child of knowledge
should be, he will meet with suitable auxiliaries who will shorten and
lighten his task; I mean so-called cynics, those who simply recognize
the animal, the commonplace and "the rule" in themselves, and at the
same time have so much spirituality and ticklishness as to make them
talk of themselves and their like BEFORE WITNESSES--sometimes they
wallow, even in books, as on their own dung-hill. Cynicism is the only
form in which base souls approach what is called honesty; and the
higher man must open his ears to all the coarser or finer cynicism, and
congratulate himself when the clown becomes shameless right before
him, or the scientific satyr speaks out. There are even cases where
enchantment mixes with the disgust--namely, where by a freak of nature,
genius is bound to some such indiscreet billy-goat and ape, as in the
case of the Abbe Galiani, the profoundest, acutest, and perhaps also
filthiest man of his century--he was far profounder than Voltaire, and
consequently also, a good deal more silent. It happens more frequently,
as has been hinted, that a scientific head is placed on an ape's body, a
fine exceptional understanding in a base soul, an occurrence by no means
rare, especially among doctors and moral physiologists. And whenever
anyone speaks without bitterness, or rather quite innocently, of man
as a belly with two requirements, and a head with one; whenever any one
sees, seeks, and WANTS to see only hunger, sexual instinct, and vanity
as the real and only motives of human actions; in short, when any one
speaks "badly"--and not even "ill"--of man, then ought the lover of
knowledge to hearken attentively and diligently; he ought, in general,
to have an open ear wherever there is talk without indignation. For the
indignant man, and he who perpetually tears and lacerates himself with
his own teeth (or, in place of himself, the world, God, or society),
may indeed, morally speaking, stand higher than the laughing and
self-satisfied satyr, but in every other sense he is the more ordinary,
more indifferent, and less instructive case. And no one is such a LIAR
as the indignant man.

27. It is difficult to be understood, especially when one thinks and
lives gangasrotogati [Footnote: Like the river Ganges: presto.] among
those only who think and live otherwise--namely, kurmagati [Footnote:
Like the tortoise: lento.], or at best "froglike," mandeikagati
[Footnote: Like the frog: staccato.] (I do everything to be "difficultly
understood" myself!)--and one should be heartily grateful for the
good will to some refinement of interpretation. As regards "the good
friends," however, who are always too easy-going, and think that as
friends they have a right to ease, one does well at the very first to
grant them a play-ground and romping-place for misunderstanding--one can
thus laugh still; or get rid of them altogether, these good friends--and
laugh then also!

28. What is most difficult to render from one language into another
is the TEMPO of its style, which has its basis in the character of the
race, or to speak more physiologically, in the average TEMPO of the
assimilation of its nutriment. There are honestly meant translations,
which, as involuntary vulgarizations, are almost falsifications of the
original, merely because its lively and merry TEMPO (which overleaps and
obviates all dangers in word and expression) could not also be
rendered. A German is almost incapacitated for PRESTO in his language;
consequently also, as may be reasonably inferred, for many of the most
delightful and daring NUANCES of free, free-spirited thought. And just
as the buffoon and satyr are foreign to him in body and conscience,
so Aristophanes and Petronius are untranslatable for him. Everything
ponderous, viscous, and pompously clumsy, all long-winded and wearying
species of style, are developed in profuse variety among Germans--pardon
me for stating the fact that even Goethe's prose, in its mixture of
stiffness and elegance, is no exception, as a reflection of the "good
old time" to which it belongs, and as an expression of German taste at a
time when there was still a "German taste," which was a rococo-taste
in moribus et artibus. Lessing is an exception, owing to his histrionic
nature, which understood much, and was versed in many things; he who was
not the translator of Bayle to no purpose, who took refuge willingly in
the shadow of Diderot and Voltaire, and still more willingly among the
Roman comedy-writers--Lessing loved also free-spiritism in the TEMPO,
and flight out of Germany. But how could the German language, even
in the prose of Lessing, imitate the TEMPO of Machiavelli, who in his
"Principe" makes us breathe the dry, fine air of Florence, and cannot
help presenting the most serious events in a boisterous allegrissimo,
perhaps not without a malicious artistic sense of the contrast he
ventures to present--long, heavy, difficult, dangerous thoughts, and
a TEMPO of the gallop, and of the best, wantonest humour? Finally, who
would venture on a German translation of Petronius, who, more than any
great musician hitherto, was a master of PRESTO in invention, ideas, and
words? What matter in the end about the swamps of the sick, evil world,
or of the "ancient world," when like him, one has the feet of a wind,
the rush, the breath, the emancipating scorn of a wind, which makes
everything healthy, by making everything RUN! And with regard to
Aristophanes--that transfiguring, complementary genius, for whose
sake one PARDONS all Hellenism for having existed, provided one has
understood in its full profundity ALL that there requires pardon and
transfiguration; there is nothing that has caused me to meditate more on
PLATO'S secrecy and sphinx-like nature, than the happily preserved petit
fait that under the pillow of his death-bed there was found no
"Bible," nor anything Egyptian, Pythagorean, or Platonic--but a book of
Aristophanes. How could even Plato have endured life--a Greek life which
he repudiated--without an Aristophanes!

29. It is the business of the very few to be independent; it is a
privilege of the strong. And whoever attempts it, even with the best
right, but without being OBLIGED to do so, proves that he is probably
not only strong, but also daring beyond measure. He enters into a
labyrinth, he multiplies a thousandfold the dangers which life in itself
already brings with it; not the least of which is that no one can see
how and where he loses his way, becomes isolated, and is torn piecemeal
by some minotaur of conscience. Supposing such a one comes to grief, it
is so far from the comprehension of men that they neither feel it, nor
sympathize with it. And he cannot any longer go back! He cannot even go
back again to the sympathy of men!

30. Our deepest insights must--and should--appear as follies, and under
certain circumstances as crimes, when they come unauthorizedly to
the ears of those who are not disposed and predestined for them. The
exoteric and the esoteric, as they were formerly distinguished by
philosophers--among the Indians, as among the Greeks, Persians, and
Mussulmans, in short, wherever people believed in gradations of rank and
NOT in equality and equal rights--are not so much in contradistinction
to one another in respect to the exoteric class, standing without, and
viewing, estimating, measuring, and judging from the outside, and not
from the inside; the more essential distinction is that the class in
question views things from below upwards--while the esoteric class views
things FROM ABOVE DOWNWARDS. There are heights of the soul from which
tragedy itself no longer appears to operate tragically; and if all the
woe in the world were taken together, who would dare to decide whether
the sight of it would NECESSARILY seduce and constrain to sympathy, and
thus to a doubling of the woe?... That which serves the higher class of
men for nourishment or refreshment, must be almost poison to an entirely
different and lower order of human beings. The virtues of the common
man would perhaps mean vice and weakness in a philosopher; it might be
possible for a highly developed man, supposing him to degenerate and go
to ruin, to acquire qualities thereby alone, for the sake of which he
would have to be honoured as a saint in the lower world into which he
had sunk. There are books which have an inverse value for the soul and
the health according as the inferior soul and the lower vitality, or the
higher and more powerful, make use of them. In the former case they are
dangerous, disturbing, unsettling books, in the latter case they are
herald-calls which summon the bravest to THEIR bravery. Books for the
general reader are always ill-smelling books, the odour of paltry people
clings to them. Where the populace eat and drink, and even where they
reverence, it is accustomed to stink. One should not go into churches if
one wishes to breathe PURE air.

31. In our youthful years we still venerate and despise without the art
of NUANCE, which is the best gain of life, and we have rightly to do
hard penance for having fallen upon men and things with Yea and Nay.
Everything is so arranged that the worst of all tastes, THE TASTE FOR
THE UNCONDITIONAL, is cruelly befooled and abused, until a man learns
to introduce a little art into his sentiments, and prefers to try
conclusions with the artificial, as do the real artists of life. The
angry and reverent spirit peculiar to youth appears to allow itself no
peace, until it has suitably falsified men and things, to be able
to vent its passion upon them: youth in itself even, is something
falsifying and deceptive. Later on, when the young soul, tortured by
continual disillusions, finally turns suspiciously against itself--still
ardent and savage even in its suspicion and remorse of conscience: how
it upbraids itself, how impatiently it tears itself, how it revenges
itself for its long self-blinding, as though it had been a voluntary
blindness! In this transition one punishes oneself by distrust of one's
sentiments; one tortures one's enthusiasm with doubt, one feels even the
good conscience to be a danger, as if it were the self-concealment and
lassitude of a more refined uprightness; and above all, one espouses
upon principle the cause AGAINST "youth."--A decade later, and one
comprehends that all this was also still--youth!

32. Throughout the longest period of human history--one calls it the
prehistoric period--the value or non-value of an action was inferred
from its CONSEQUENCES; the action in itself was not taken into
consideration, any more than its origin; but pretty much as in China at
present, where the distinction or disgrace of a child redounds to
its parents, the retro-operating power of success or failure was what
induced men to think well or ill of an action. Let us call this period
the PRE-MORAL period of mankind; the imperative, "Know thyself!" was
then still unknown.--In the last ten thousand years, on the other hand,
on certain large portions of the earth, one has gradually got so far,
that one no longer lets the consequences of an action, but its origin,
decide with regard to its worth: a great achievement as a whole, an
important refinement of vision and of criterion, the unconscious effect
of the supremacy of aristocratic values and of the belief in "origin,"
the mark of a period which may be designated in the narrower sense as
the MORAL one: the first attempt at self-knowledge is thereby
made. Instead of the consequences, the origin--what an inversion
of perspective! And assuredly an inversion effected only after long
struggle and wavering! To be sure, an ominous new superstition, a
peculiar narrowness of interpretation, attained supremacy precisely
thereby: the origin of an action was interpreted in the most definite
sense possible, as origin out of an INTENTION; people were agreed in the
belief that the value of an action lay in the value of its intention.
The intention as the sole origin and antecedent history of an action:
under the influence of this prejudice moral praise and blame have been
bestowed, and men have judged and even philosophized almost up to the
present day.--Is it not possible, however, that the necessity may now
have arisen of again making up our minds with regard to the reversing
and fundamental shifting of values, owing to a new self-consciousness
and acuteness in man--is it not possible that we may be standing on
the threshold of a period which to begin with, would be distinguished
negatively as ULTRA-MORAL: nowadays when, at least among us immoralists,
the suspicion arises that the decisive value of an action lies precisely
in that which is NOT INTENTIONAL, and that all its intentionalness, all
that is seen, sensible, or "sensed" in it, belongs to its surface or
skin--which, like every skin, betrays something, but CONCEALS still
more? In short, we believe that the intention is only a sign or symptom,
which first requires an explanation--a sign, moreover, which has too
many interpretations, and consequently hardly any meaning in itself
alone: that morality, in the sense in which it has been understood
hitherto, as intention-morality, has been a prejudice, perhaps a
prematureness or preliminariness, probably something of the same rank
as astrology and alchemy, but in any case something which must be
surmounted. The surmounting of morality, in a certain sense even the
self-mounting of morality--let that be the name for the long-secret
labour which has been reserved for the most refined, the most upright,
and also the most wicked consciences of today, as the living touchstones
of the soul.

33. It cannot be helped: the sentiment of surrender, of sacrifice for
one's neighbour, and all self-renunciation-morality, must be mercilessly
called to account, and brought to judgment; just as the aesthetics
of "disinterested contemplation," under which the emasculation of art
nowadays seeks insidiously enough to create itself a good conscience.
There is far too much witchery and sugar in the sentiments "for others"
and "NOT for myself," for one not needing to be doubly distrustful here,
and for one asking promptly: "Are they not perhaps--DECEPTIONS?"--That
they PLEASE--him who has them, and him who enjoys their fruit, and also
the mere spectator--that is still no argument in their FAVOUR, but just
calls for caution. Let us therefore be cautious!

34. At whatever standpoint of philosophy one may place oneself nowadays,
seen from every position, the ERRONEOUSNESS of the world in which we
think we live is the surest and most certain thing our eyes can light
upon: we find proof after proof thereof, which would fain allure us into
surmises concerning a deceptive principle in the "nature of things."
He, however, who makes thinking itself, and consequently "the spirit,"
responsible for the falseness of the world--an honourable exit, which
every conscious or unconscious advocatus dei avails himself of--he
who regards this world, including space, time, form, and movement, as
falsely DEDUCED, would have at least good reason in the end to become
distrustful also of all thinking; has it not hitherto been playing upon
us the worst of scurvy tricks? and what guarantee would it give that
it would not continue to do what it has always been doing? In all
seriousness, the innocence of thinkers has something touching and
respect-inspiring in it, which even nowadays permits them to wait upon
consciousness with the request that it will give them HONEST answers:
for example, whether it be "real" or not, and why it keeps the outer
world so resolutely at a distance, and other questions of the same
description. The belief in "immediate certainties" is a MORAL NAIVETE
which does honour to us philosophers; but--we have now to cease being
"MERELY moral" men! Apart from morality, such belief is a folly which
does little honour to us! If in middle-class life an ever-ready distrust
is regarded as the sign of a "bad character," and consequently as an
imprudence, here among us, beyond the middle-class world and its Yeas
and Nays, what should prevent our being imprudent and saying: the
philosopher has at length a RIGHT to "bad character," as the being who
has hitherto been most befooled on earth--he is now under OBLIGATION
to distrustfulness, to the wickedest squinting out of every abyss of
suspicion.--Forgive me the joke of this gloomy grimace and turn of
expression; for I myself have long ago learned to think and estimate
differently with regard to deceiving and being deceived, and I keep at
least a couple of pokes in the ribs ready for the blind rage with which
philosophers struggle against being deceived. Why NOT? It is nothing
more than a moral prejudice that truth is worth more than semblance; it
is, in fact, the worst proved supposition in the world. So much must be
conceded: there could have been no life at all except upon the basis
of perspective estimates and semblances; and if, with the virtuous
enthusiasm and stupidity of many philosophers, one wished to do away
altogether with the "seeming world"--well, granted that YOU could do
that,--at least nothing of your "truth" would thereby remain! Indeed,
what is it that forces us in general to the supposition that there is an
essential opposition of "true" and "false"? Is it not enough to suppose
degrees of seemingness, and as it were lighter and darker shades and
tones of semblance--different valeurs, as the painters say? Why might
not the world WHICH CONCERNS US--be a fiction? And to any one who
suggested: "But to a fiction belongs an originator?"--might it not be
bluntly replied: WHY? May not this "belong" also belong to the fiction?
Is it not at length permitted to be a little ironical towards the
subject, just as towards the predicate and object? Might not the
philosopher elevate himself above faith in grammar? All respect
to governesses, but is it not time that philosophy should renounce
governess-faith?

35. O Voltaire! O humanity! O idiocy! There is something ticklish in
"the truth," and in the SEARCH for the truth; and if man goes about it
too humanely--"il ne cherche le vrai que pour faire le bien"--I wager he
finds nothing!

36. Supposing that nothing else is "given" as real but our world of
desires and passions, that we cannot sink or rise to any other "reality"
but just that of our impulses--for thinking is only a relation of these
impulses to one another:--are we not permitted to make the attempt and
to ask the question whether this which is "given" does not SUFFICE, by
means of our counterparts, for the understanding even of the so-called
mechanical (or "material") world? I do not mean as an illusion, a
"semblance," a "representation" (in the Berkeleyan and Schopenhauerian
sense), but as possessing the same degree of reality as our emotions
themselves--as a more primitive form of the world of emotions, in
which everything still lies locked in a mighty unity, which afterwards
branches off and develops itself in organic processes (naturally also,
refines and debilitates)--as a kind of instinctive life in which all
organic functions, including self-regulation, assimilation, nutrition,
secretion, and change of matter, are still synthetically united with
one another--as a PRIMARY FORM of life?--In the end, it is not only
permitted to make this attempt, it is commanded by the conscience of
LOGICAL METHOD. Not to assume several kinds of causality, so long as
the attempt to get along with a single one has not been pushed to its
furthest extent (to absurdity, if I may be allowed to say so): that is
a morality of method which one may not repudiate nowadays--it follows
"from its definition," as mathematicians say. The question is ultimately
whether we really recognize the will as OPERATING, whether we believe in
the causality of the will; if we do so--and fundamentally our belief IN
THIS is just our belief in causality itself--we MUST make the attempt
to posit hypothetically the causality of the will as the only causality.
"Will" can naturally only operate on "will"--and not on "matter" (not
on "nerves," for instance): in short, the hypothesis must be
hazarded, whether will does not operate on will wherever "effects"
are recognized--and whether all mechanical action, inasmuch as a power
operates therein, is not just the power of will, the effect of will.
Granted, finally, that we succeeded in explaining our entire instinctive
life as the development and ramification of one fundamental form of
will--namely, the Will to Power, as my thesis puts it; granted that all
organic functions could be traced back to this Will to Power, and that
the solution of the problem of generation and nutrition--it is one
problem--could also be found therein: one would thus have acquired the
right to define ALL active force unequivocally as WILL TO POWER. The
world seen from within, the world defined and designated according to
its "intelligible character"--it would simply be "Will to Power," and
nothing else.

37. "What? Does not that mean in popular language: God is disproved, but
not the devil?"--On the contrary! On the contrary, my friends! And who
the devil also compels you to speak popularly!

38. As happened finally in all the enlightenment of modern times with
the French Revolution (that terrible farce, quite superfluous when
judged close at hand, into which, however, the noble and visionary
spectators of all Europe have interpreted from a distance their own
indignation and enthusiasm so long and passionately, UNTIL THE TEXT HAS
DISAPPEARED UNDER THE INTERPRETATION), so a noble posterity might once
more misunderstand the whole of the past, and perhaps only thereby make
ITS aspect endurable.--Or rather, has not this already happened? Have
not we ourselves been--that "noble posterity"? And, in so far as we now
comprehend this, is it not--thereby already past?

39. Nobody will very readily regard a doctrine as true merely because
it makes people happy or virtuous--excepting, perhaps, the amiable
"Idealists," who are enthusiastic about the good, true, and beautiful,
and let all kinds of motley, coarse, and good-natured desirabilities
swim about promiscuously in their pond. Happiness and virtue are no
arguments. It is willingly forgotten, however, even on the part of
thoughtful minds, that to make unhappy and to make bad are just as
little counter-arguments. A thing could be TRUE, although it were in
the highest degree injurious and dangerous; indeed, the fundamental
constitution of existence might be such that one succumbed by a full
knowledge of it--so that the strength of a mind might be measured by
the amount of "truth" it could endure--or to speak more plainly, by the
extent to which it REQUIRED truth attenuated, veiled, sweetened, damped,
and falsified. But there is no doubt that for the discovery of certain
PORTIONS of truth the wicked and unfortunate are more favourably
situated and have a greater likelihood of success; not to speak of the
wicked who are happy--a species about whom moralists are silent. Perhaps
severity and craft are more favourable conditions for the development of
strong, independent spirits and philosophers than the gentle, refined,
yielding good-nature, and habit of taking things easily, which are
prized, and rightly prized in a learned man. Presupposing always,
to begin with, that the term "philosopher" be not confined to the
philosopher who writes books, or even introduces HIS philosophy into
books!--Stendhal furnishes a last feature of the portrait of the
free-spirited philosopher, which for the sake of German taste I will
not omit to underline--for it is OPPOSED to German taste. "Pour etre
bon philosophe," says this last great psychologist, "il faut etre sec,
clair, sans illusion. Un banquier, qui a fait fortune, a une partie du
caractere requis pour faire des decouvertes en philosophie, c'est-a-dire
pour voir clair dans ce qui est."

40. Everything that is profound loves the mask: the profoundest things
have a hatred even of figure and likeness. Should not the CONTRARY only
be the right disguise for the shame of a God to go about in? A question
worth asking!--it would be strange if some mystic has not already
ventured on the same kind of thing. There are proceedings of such a
delicate nature that it is well to overwhelm them with coarseness
and make them unrecognizable; there are actions of love and of an
extravagant magnanimity after which nothing can be wiser than to take
a stick and thrash the witness soundly: one thereby obscures his
recollection. Many a one is able to obscure and abuse his own memory, in
order at least to have vengeance on this sole party in the secret:
shame is inventive. They are not the worst things of which one is
most ashamed: there is not only deceit behind a mask--there is so much
goodness in craft. I could imagine that a man with something costly and
fragile to conceal, would roll through life clumsily and rotundly like
an old, green, heavily-hooped wine-cask: the refinement of his shame
requiring it to be so. A man who has depths in his shame meets his
destiny and his delicate decisions upon paths which few ever reach,
and with regard to the existence of which his nearest and most intimate
friends may be ignorant; his mortal danger conceals itself from their
eyes, and equally so his regained security. Such a hidden nature,
which instinctively employs speech for silence and concealment, and is
inexhaustible in evasion of communication, DESIRES and insists that a
mask of himself shall occupy his place in the hearts and heads of his
friends; and supposing he does not desire it, his eyes will some day be
opened to the fact that there is nevertheless a mask of him there--and
that it is well to be so. Every profound spirit needs a mask; nay, more,
around every profound spirit there continually grows a mask, owing to
the constantly false, that is to say, SUPERFICIAL interpretation
of every word he utters, every step he takes, every sign of life he
manifests.

41. One must subject oneself to one's own tests that one is destined
for independence and command, and do so at the right time. One must not
avoid one's tests, although they constitute perhaps the most dangerous
game one can play, and are in the end tests made only before ourselves
and before no other judge. Not to cleave to any person, be it even the
dearest--every person is a prison and also a recess. Not to cleave to
a fatherland, be it even the most suffering and necessitous--it is even
less difficult to detach one's heart from a victorious fatherland. Not
to cleave to a sympathy, be it even for higher men, into whose peculiar
torture and helplessness chance has given us an insight. Not to cleave
to a science, though it tempt one with the most valuable discoveries,
apparently specially reserved for us. Not to cleave to one's own
liberation, to the voluptuous distance and remoteness of the bird, which
always flies further aloft in order always to see more under it--the
danger of the flier. Not to cleave to our own virtues, nor become as
a whole a victim to any of our specialties, to our "hospitality" for
instance, which is the danger of dangers for highly developed
and wealthy souls, who deal prodigally, almost indifferently with
themselves, and push the virtue of liberality so far that it becomes
a vice. One must know how TO CONSERVE ONESELF--the best test of
independence.

42. A new order of philosophers is appearing; I shall venture to baptize
them by a name not without danger. As far as I understand them, as far
as they allow themselves to be understood--for it is their nature to
WISH to remain something of a puzzle--these philosophers of the
future might rightly, perhaps also wrongly, claim to be designated as
"tempters." This name itself is after all only an attempt, or, if it be
preferred, a temptation.

43. Will they be new friends of "truth," these coming philosophers? Very
probably, for all philosophers hitherto have loved their truths. But
assuredly they will not be dogmatists. It must be contrary to their
pride, and also contrary to their taste, that their truth should still
be truth for every one--that which has hitherto been the secret wish
and ultimate purpose of all dogmatic efforts. "My opinion is MY opinion:
another person has not easily a right to it"--such a philosopher of the
future will say, perhaps. One must renounce the bad taste of wishing to
agree with many people. "Good" is no longer good when one's neighbour
takes it into his mouth. And how could there be a "common good"! The
expression contradicts itself; that which can be common is always of
small value. In the end things must be as they are and have always
been--the great things remain for the great, the abysses for the
profound, the delicacies and thrills for the refined, and, to sum up
shortly, everything rare for the rare.


44. Need I say expressly after all this that they will be free, VERY
free spirits, these philosophers of the future--as certainly also they
will not be merely free spirits, but something more, higher, greater,
and fundamentally different, which does not wish to be misunderstood and
mistaken? But while I say this, I feel under OBLIGATION almost as much
to them as to ourselves (we free spirits who are their heralds and
forerunners), to sweep away from ourselves altogether a stupid old
prejudice and misunderstanding, which, like a fog, has too long made the
conception of "free spirit" obscure. In every country of Europe, and the
same in America, there is at present something which makes an abuse of
this name a very narrow, prepossessed, enchained class of spirits,
who desire almost the opposite of what our intentions and instincts
prompt--not to mention that in respect to the NEW philosophers who are
appearing, they must still more be closed windows and bolted doors.
Briefly and regrettably, they belong to the LEVELLERS, these wrongly
named "free spirits"--as glib-tongued and scribe-fingered slaves of
the democratic taste and its "modern ideas" all of them men without
solitude, without personal solitude, blunt honest fellows to whom
neither courage nor honourable conduct ought to be denied, only, they
are not free, and are ludicrously superficial, especially in their
innate partiality for seeing the cause of almost ALL human misery and
failure in the old forms in which society has hitherto existed--a notion
which happily inverts the truth entirely! What they would fain attain
with all their strength, is the universal, green-meadow happiness of the
herd, together with security, safety, comfort, and alleviation of life
for every one, their two most frequently chanted songs and doctrines
are called "Equality of Rights" and "Sympathy with All Sufferers"--and
suffering itself is looked upon by them as something which must be
DONE AWAY WITH. We opposite ones, however, who have opened our eye and
conscience to the question how and where the plant "man" has hitherto
grown most vigorously, believe that this has always taken place under
the opposite conditions, that for this end the dangerousness of his
situation had to be increased enormously, his inventive faculty and
dissembling power (his "spirit") had to develop into subtlety and daring
under long oppression and compulsion, and his Will to Life had to be
increased to the unconditioned Will to Power--we believe that severity,
violence, slavery, danger in the street and in the heart, secrecy,
stoicism, tempter's art and devilry of every kind,--that everything
wicked, terrible, tyrannical, predatory, and serpentine in man, serves
as well for the elevation of the human species as its opposite--we do
not even say enough when we only say THIS MUCH, and in any case we
find ourselves here, both with our speech and our silence, at the OTHER
extreme of all modern ideology and gregarious desirability, as their
antipodes perhaps? What wonder that we "free spirits" are not exactly
the most communicative spirits? that we do not wish to betray in every
respect WHAT a spirit can free itself from, and WHERE perhaps it will
then be driven? And as to the import of the dangerous formula, "Beyond
Good and Evil," with which we at least avoid confusion, we ARE something
else than "libres-penseurs," "liben pensatori" "free-thinkers,"
and whatever these honest advocates of "modern ideas" like to call
themselves. Having been at home, or at least guests, in many realms of
the spirit, having escaped again and again from the gloomy, agreeable
nooks in which preferences and prejudices, youth, origin, the accident
of men and books, or even the weariness of travel seemed to confine us,
full of malice against the seductions of dependency which he concealed
in honours, money, positions, or exaltation of the senses, grateful even
for distress and the vicissitudes of illness, because they always free
us from some rule, and its "prejudice," grateful to the God, devil,
sheep, and worm in us, inquisitive to a fault, investigators to the
point of cruelty, with unhesitating fingers for the intangible, with
teeth and stomachs for the most indigestible, ready for any business
that requires sagacity and acute senses, ready for every adventure,
owing to an excess of "free will", with anterior and posterior souls,
into the ultimate intentions of which it is difficult to pry, with
foregrounds and backgrounds to the end of which no foot may run, hidden
ones under the mantles of light, appropriators, although we resemble
heirs and spendthrifts, arrangers and collectors from morning till
night, misers of our wealth and our full-crammed drawers, economical
in learning and forgetting, inventive in scheming, sometimes proud of
tables of categories, sometimes pedants, sometimes night-owls of
work even in full day, yea, if necessary, even scarecrows--and it is
necessary nowadays, that is to say, inasmuch as we are the born, sworn,
jealous friends of SOLITUDE, of our own profoundest midnight and midday
solitude--such kind of men are we, we free spirits! And perhaps ye are
also something of the same kind, ye coming ones? ye NEW philosophers?



CHAPTER III. THE RELIGIOUS MOOD


45. The human soul and its limits, the range of man's inner experiences
hitherto attained, the heights, depths, and distances of these
experiences, the entire history of the soul UP TO THE PRESENT TIME,
and its still unexhausted possibilities: this is the preordained
hunting-domain for a born psychologist and lover of a "big hunt". But
how often must he say despairingly to himself: "A single individual!
alas, only a single individual! and this great forest, this virgin
forest!" So he would like to have some hundreds of hunting assistants,
and fine trained hounds, that he could send into the history of the
human soul, to drive HIS game together. In vain: again and again he
experiences, profoundly and bitterly, how difficult it is to find
assistants and dogs for all the things that directly excite his
curiosity. The evil of sending scholars into new and dangerous
hunting-domains, where courage, sagacity, and subtlety in every sense
are required, is that they are no longer serviceable just when the "BIG
hunt," and also the great danger commences,--it is precisely then that
they lose their keen eye and nose. In order, for instance, to divine and
determine what sort of history the problem of KNOWLEDGE AND CONSCIENCE
has hitherto had in the souls of homines religiosi, a person would
perhaps himself have to possess as profound, as bruised, as immense an
experience as the intellectual conscience of Pascal; and then he would
still require that wide-spread heaven of clear, wicked spirituality,
which, from above, would be able to oversee, arrange, and effectively
formulize this mass of dangerous and painful experiences.--But who
could do me this service! And who would have time to wait for such
servants!--they evidently appear too rarely, they are so improbable at
all times! Eventually one must do everything ONESELF in order to know
something; which means that one has MUCH to do!--But a curiosity like
mine is once for all the most agreeable of vices--pardon me! I mean to
say that the love of truth has its reward in heaven, and already upon
earth.

46. Faith, such as early Christianity desired, and not infrequently
achieved in the midst of a skeptical and southernly free-spirited world,
which had centuries of struggle between philosophical schools behind
it and in it, counting besides the education in tolerance which
the Imperium Romanum gave--this faith is NOT that sincere, austere
slave-faith by which perhaps a Luther or a Cromwell, or some other
northern barbarian of the spirit remained attached to his God and
Christianity, it is much rather the faith of Pascal, which resembles in
a terrible manner a continuous suicide of reason--a tough, long-lived,
worm-like reason, which is not to be slain at once and with a single
blow. The Christian faith from the beginning, is sacrifice the sacrifice
of all freedom, all pride, all self-confidence of spirit, it is at
the same time subjection, self-derision, and self-mutilation. There is
cruelty and religious Phoenicianism in this faith, which is adapted to a
tender, many-sided, and very fastidious conscience, it takes for granted
that the subjection of the spirit is indescribably PAINFUL, that all the
past and all the habits of such a spirit resist the absurdissimum, in
the form of which "faith" comes to it. Modern men, with their obtuseness
as regards all Christian nomenclature, have no longer the sense for the
terribly superlative conception which was implied to an antique taste by
the paradox of the formula, "God on the Cross". Hitherto there had never
and nowhere been such boldness in inversion, nor anything at once so
dreadful, questioning, and questionable as this formula: it promised a
transvaluation of all ancient values--It was the Orient, the PROFOUND
Orient, it was the Oriental slave who thus took revenge on Rome and its
noble, light-minded toleration, on the Roman "Catholicism" of non-faith,
and it was always not the faith, but the freedom from the faith, the
half-stoical and smiling indifference to the seriousness of the faith,
which made the slaves indignant at their masters and revolt against
them. "Enlightenment" causes revolt, for the slave desires the
unconditioned, he understands nothing but the tyrannous, even in morals,
he loves as he hates, without NUANCE, to the very depths, to the point
of pain, to the point of sickness--his many HIDDEN sufferings make
him revolt against the noble taste which seems to DENY suffering. The
skepticism with regard to suffering, fundamentally only an attitude of
aristocratic morality, was not the least of the causes, also, of the
last great slave-insurrection which began with the French Revolution.

47. Wherever the religious neurosis has appeared on the earth so far,
we find it connected with three dangerous prescriptions as to regimen:
solitude, fasting, and sexual abstinence--but without its being possible
to determine with certainty which is cause and which is effect, or IF
any relation at all of cause and effect exists there. This latter doubt
is justified by the fact that one of the most regular symptoms among
savage as well as among civilized peoples is the most sudden and
excessive sensuality, which then with equal suddenness transforms into
penitential paroxysms, world-renunciation, and will-renunciation, both
symptoms perhaps explainable as disguised epilepsy? But nowhere is it
MORE obligatory to put aside explanations around no other type has there
grown such a mass of absurdity and superstition, no other type seems to
have been more interesting to men and even to philosophers--perhaps it
is time to become just a little indifferent here, to learn caution, or,
better still, to look AWAY, TO GO AWAY--Yet in the background of the
most recent philosophy, that of Schopenhauer, we find almost as the
problem in itself, this terrible note of interrogation of the religious
crisis and awakening. How is the negation of will POSSIBLE? how is the
saint possible?--that seems to have been the very question with which
Schopenhauer made a start and became a philosopher. And thus it was a
genuine Schopenhauerian consequence, that his most convinced adherent
(perhaps also his last, as far as Germany is concerned), namely, Richard
Wagner, should bring his own life-work to an end just here, and should
finally put that terrible and eternal type upon the stage as Kundry,
type vecu, and as it loved and lived, at the very time that the
mad-doctors in almost all European countries had an opportunity to study
the type close at hand, wherever the religious neurosis--or as I call
it, "the religious mood"--made its latest epidemical outbreak and
display as the "Salvation Army"--If it be a question, however, as to
what has been so extremely interesting to men of all sorts in all ages,
and even to philosophers, in the whole phenomenon of the saint, it
is undoubtedly the appearance of the miraculous therein--namely, the
immediate SUCCESSION OF OPPOSITES, of states of the soul regarded as
morally antithetical: it was believed here to be self-evident that
a "bad man" was all at once turned into a "saint," a good man. The
hitherto existing psychology was wrecked at this point, is it not
possible it may have happened principally because psychology had placed
itself under the dominion of morals, because it BELIEVED in oppositions
of moral values, and saw, read, and INTERPRETED these oppositions
into the text and facts of the case? What? "Miracle" only an error of
interpretation? A lack of philology?

48. It seems that the Latin races are far more deeply attached to their
Catholicism than we Northerners are to Christianity generally, and
that consequently unbelief in Catholic countries means something quite
different from what it does among Protestants--namely, a sort of revolt
against the spirit of the race, while with us it is rather a return to
the spirit (or non-spirit) of the race.

We Northerners undoubtedly derive our origin from barbarous races, even
as regards our talents for religion--we have POOR talents for it. One
may make an exception in the case of the Celts, who have theretofore
furnished also the best soil for Christian infection in the North: the
Christian ideal blossomed forth in France as much as ever the pale sun
of the north would allow it. How strangely pious for our taste are still
these later French skeptics, whenever there is any Celtic blood in their
origin! How Catholic, how un-German does Auguste Comte's Sociology
seem to us, with the Roman logic of its instincts! How Jesuitical, that
amiable and shrewd cicerone of Port Royal, Sainte-Beuve, in spite of all
his hostility to Jesuits! And even Ernest Renan: how inaccessible to
us Northerners does the language of such a Renan appear, in whom
every instant the merest touch of religious thrill throws his refined
voluptuous and comfortably couching soul off its balance! Let us repeat
after him these fine sentences--and what wickedness and haughtiness is
immediately aroused by way of answer in our probably less beautiful but
harder souls, that is to say, in our more German souls!--"DISONS DONC
HARDIMENT QUE LA RELIGION EST UN PRODUIT DE L'HOMME NORMAL, QUE L'HOMME
EST LE PLUS DANS LE VRAI QUANT IL EST LE PLUS RELIGIEUX ET LE PLUS
ASSURE D'UNE DESTINEE INFINIE.... C'EST QUAND IL EST BON QU'IL VEUT QUE
LA VIRTU CORRESPONDE A UN ORDER ETERNAL, C'EST QUAND IL CONTEMPLE LES
CHOSES D'UNE MANIERE DESINTERESSEE QU'IL TROUVE LA MORT REVOLTANTE ET
ABSURDE. COMMENT NE PAS SUPPOSER QUE C'EST DANS CES MOMENTS-LA, QUE
L'HOMME VOIT LE MIEUX?"... These sentences are so extremely ANTIPODAL
to my ears and habits of thought, that in my first impulse of rage
on finding them, I wrote on the margin, "LA NIAISERIE RELIGIEUSE PAR
EXCELLENCE!"--until in my later rage I even took a fancy to them, these
sentences with their truth absolutely inverted! It is so nice and such a
distinction to have one's own antipodes!

49. That which is so astonishing in the religious life of the ancient
Greeks is the irrestrainable stream of GRATITUDE which it pours
forth--it is a very superior kind of man who takes SUCH an attitude
towards nature and life.--Later on, when the populace got the upper hand
in Greece, FEAR became rampant also in religion; and Christianity was
preparing itself.

50. The passion for God: there are churlish, honest-hearted, and
importunate kinds of it, like that of Luther--the whole of Protestantism
lacks the southern DELICATEZZA. There is an Oriental exaltation of the
mind in it, like that of an undeservedly favoured or elevated slave, as
in the case of St. Augustine, for instance, who lacks in an offensive
manner, all nobility in bearing and desires. There is a feminine
tenderness and sensuality in it, which modestly and unconsciously longs
for a UNIO MYSTICA ET PHYSICA, as in the case of Madame de Guyon. In
many cases it appears, curiously enough, as the disguise of a girl's
or youth's puberty; here and there even as the hysteria of an old maid,
also as her last ambition. The Church has frequently canonized the woman
in such a case.

51. The mightiest men have hitherto always bowed reverently before
the saint, as the enigma of self-subjugation and utter voluntary
privation--why did they thus bow? They divined in him--and as it were
behind the questionableness of his frail and wretched appearance--the
superior force which wished to test itself by such a subjugation; the
strength of will, in which they recognized their own strength and
love of power, and knew how to honour it: they honoured something
in themselves when they honoured the saint. In addition to this, the
contemplation of the saint suggested to them a suspicion: such an
enormity of self-negation and anti-naturalness will not have been
coveted for nothing--they have said, inquiringly. There is perhaps a
reason for it, some very great danger, about which the ascetic might
wish to be more accurately informed through his secret interlocutors and
visitors? In a word, the mighty ones of the world learned to have a new
fear before him, they divined a new power, a strange, still unconquered
enemy:--it was the "Will to Power" which obliged them to halt before the
saint. They had to question him.

52. In the Jewish "Old Testament," the book of divine justice, there are
men, things, and sayings on such an immense scale, that Greek and Indian
literature has nothing to compare with it. One stands with fear and
reverence before those stupendous remains of what man was formerly, and
one has sad thoughts about old Asia and its little out-pushed peninsula
Europe, which would like, by all means, to figure before Asia as the
"Progress of Mankind." To be sure, he who is himself only a slender,
tame house-animal, and knows only the wants of a house-animal (like
our cultured people of today, including the Christians of "cultured"
Christianity), need neither be amazed nor even sad amid those ruins--the
taste for the Old Testament is a touchstone with respect to "great" and
"small": perhaps he will find that the New Testament, the book of grace,
still appeals more to his heart (there is much of the odour of the
genuine, tender, stupid beadsman and petty soul in it). To have bound
up this New Testament (a kind of ROCOCO of taste in every respect) along
with the Old Testament into one book, as the "Bible," as "The Book in
Itself," is perhaps the greatest audacity and "sin against the Spirit"
which literary Europe has upon its conscience.

53. Why Atheism nowadays? "The father" in God is thoroughly refuted;
equally so "the judge," "the rewarder." Also his "free will": he does
not hear--and even if he did, he would not know how to help. The worst
is that he seems incapable of communicating himself clearly; is he
uncertain?--This is what I have made out (by questioning and listening
at a variety of conversations) to be the cause of the decline of
European theism; it appears to me that though the religious instinct is
in vigorous growth,--it rejects the theistic satisfaction with profound
distrust.

54. What does all modern philosophy mainly do? Since Descartes--and
indeed more in defiance of him than on the basis of his procedure--an
ATTENTAT has been made on the part of all philosophers on the old
conception of the soul, under the guise of a criticism of the subject
and predicate conception--that is to say, an ATTENTAT on the
fundamental presupposition of Christian doctrine. Modern philosophy,
as epistemological skepticism, is secretly or openly ANTI-CHRISTIAN,
although (for keener ears, be it said) by no means anti-religious.
Formerly, in effect, one believed in "the soul" as one believed in
grammar and the grammatical subject: one said, "I" is the condition,
"think" is the predicate and is conditioned--to think is an activity for
which one MUST suppose a subject as cause. The attempt was then made,
with marvelous tenacity and subtlety, to see if one could not get out
of this net,--to see if the opposite was not perhaps true: "think" the
condition, and "I" the conditioned; "I," therefore, only a synthesis
which has been MADE by thinking itself. KANT really wished to prove
that, starting from the subject, the subject could not be proved--nor
the object either: the possibility of an APPARENT EXISTENCE of the
subject, and therefore of "the soul," may not always have been strange
to him,--the thought which once had an immense power on earth as the
Vedanta philosophy.

55. There is a great ladder of religious cruelty, with many rounds; but
three of these are the most important. Once on a time men sacrificed
human beings to their God, and perhaps just those they loved the
best--to this category belong the firstling sacrifices of all primitive
religions, and also the sacrifice of the Emperor Tiberius in the
Mithra-Grotto on the Island of Capri, that most terrible of all Roman
anachronisms. Then, during the moral epoch of mankind, they sacrificed
to their God the strongest instincts they possessed, their "nature";
THIS festal joy shines in the cruel glances of ascetics and
"anti-natural" fanatics. Finally, what still remained to be sacrificed?
Was it not necessary in the end for men to sacrifice everything
comforting, holy, healing, all hope, all faith in hidden harmonies, in
future blessedness and justice? Was it not necessary to sacrifice God
himself, and out of cruelty to themselves to worship stone, stupidity,
gravity, fate, nothingness? To sacrifice God for nothingness--this
paradoxical mystery of the ultimate cruelty has been reserved for the
rising generation; we all know something thereof already.

56. Whoever, like myself, prompted by some enigmatical desire, has long
endeavoured to go to the bottom of the question of pessimism and free it
from the half-Christian, half-German narrowness and stupidity in which
it has finally presented itself to this century, namely, in the form of
Schopenhauer's philosophy; whoever, with an Asiatic and super-Asiatic
eye, has actually looked inside, and into the most world-renouncing of
all possible modes of thought--beyond good and evil, and no longer
like Buddha and Schopenhauer, under the dominion and delusion of
morality,--whoever has done this, has perhaps just thereby, without
really desiring it, opened his eyes to behold the opposite ideal: the
ideal of the most world-approving, exuberant, and vivacious man, who has
not only learnt to compromise and arrange with that which was and
is, but wishes to have it again AS IT WAS AND IS, for all eternity,
insatiably calling out da capo, not only to himself, but to the whole
piece and play; and not only the play, but actually to him who requires
the play--and makes it necessary; because he always requires
himself anew--and makes himself necessary.--What? And this would not
be--circulus vitiosus deus?

57. The distance, and as it were the space around man, grows with the
strength of his intellectual vision and insight: his world becomes
profounder; new stars, new enigmas, and notions are ever coming into
view. Perhaps everything on which the intellectual eye has exercised
its acuteness and profundity has just been an occasion for its exercise,
something of a game, something for children and childish minds. Perhaps
the most solemn conceptions that have caused the most fighting and
suffering, the conceptions "God" and "sin," will one day seem to us of
no more importance than a child's plaything or a child's pain seems to
an old man;--and perhaps another plaything and another pain will then
be necessary once more for "the old man"--always childish enough, an
eternal child!

58. Has it been observed to what extent outward idleness, or
semi-idleness, is necessary to a real religious life (alike for its
favourite microscopic labour of self-examination, and for its soft
placidity called "prayer," the state of perpetual readiness for the
"coming of God"), I mean the idleness with a good conscience, the
idleness of olden times and of blood, to which the aristocratic
sentiment that work is DISHONOURING--that it vulgarizes body and
soul--is not quite unfamiliar? And that consequently the modern, noisy,
time-engrossing, conceited, foolishly proud laboriousness educates
and prepares for "unbelief" more than anything else? Among these, for
instance, who are at present living apart from religion in Germany, I
find "free-thinkers" of diversified species and origin, but above all
a majority of those in whom laboriousness from generation to generation
has dissolved the religious instincts; so that they no longer know what
purpose religions serve, and only note their existence in the world
with a kind of dull astonishment. They feel themselves already fully
occupied, these good people, be it by their business or by their
pleasures, not to mention the "Fatherland," and the newspapers, and
their "family duties"; it seems that they have no time whatever left
for religion; and above all, it is not obvious to them whether it is a
question of a new business or a new pleasure--for it is impossible, they
say to themselves, that people should go to church merely to spoil
their tempers. They are by no means enemies of religious customs;
should certain circumstances, State affairs perhaps, require their
participation in such customs, they do what is required, as so many
things are done--with a patient and unassuming seriousness, and without
much curiosity or discomfort;--they live too much apart and outside
to feel even the necessity for a FOR or AGAINST in such matters. Among
those indifferent persons may be reckoned nowadays the majority of
German Protestants of the middle classes, especially in the great
laborious centres of trade and commerce; also the majority of laborious
scholars, and the entire University personnel (with the exception of
the theologians, whose existence and possibility there always gives
psychologists new and more subtle puzzles to solve). On the part of
pious, or merely church-going people, there is seldom any idea of HOW
MUCH good-will, one might say arbitrary will, is now necessary for a
German scholar to take the problem of religion seriously; his whole
profession (and as I have said, his whole workmanlike laboriousness, to
which he is compelled by his modern conscience) inclines him to a
lofty and almost charitable serenity as regards religion, with which is
occasionally mingled a slight disdain for the "uncleanliness" of spirit
which he takes for granted wherever any one still professes to belong
to the Church. It is only with the help of history (NOT through his own
personal experience, therefore) that the scholar succeeds in bringing
himself to a respectful seriousness, and to a certain timid deference
in presence of religions; but even when his sentiments have reached the
stage of gratitude towards them, he has not personally advanced one
step nearer to that which still maintains itself as Church or as piety;
perhaps even the contrary. The practical indifference to religious
matters in the midst of which he has been born and brought up, usually
sublimates itself in his case into circumspection and cleanliness, which
shuns contact with religious men and things; and it may be just the
depth of his tolerance and humanity which prompts him to avoid the
delicate trouble which tolerance itself brings with it.--Every age has
its own divine type of naivete, for the discovery of which other ages
may envy it: and how much naivete--adorable, childlike, and boundlessly
foolish naivete is involved in this belief of the scholar in
his superiority, in the good conscience of his tolerance, in the
unsuspecting, simple certainty with which his instinct treats the
religious man as a lower and less valuable type, beyond, before, and
ABOVE which he himself has developed--he, the little arrogant dwarf
and mob-man, the sedulously alert, head-and-hand drudge of "ideas," of
"modern ideas"!

59. Whoever has seen deeply into the world has doubtless divined what
wisdom there is in the fact that men are superficial. It is their
preservative instinct which teaches them to be flighty, lightsome, and
false. Here and there one finds a passionate and exaggerated adoration
of "pure forms" in philosophers as well as in artists: it is not to be
doubted that whoever has NEED of the cult of the superficial to that
extent, has at one time or another made an unlucky dive BENEATH it.
Perhaps there is even an order of rank with respect to those burnt
children, the born artists who find the enjoyment of life only in trying
to FALSIFY its image (as if taking wearisome revenge on it), one might
guess to what degree life has disgusted them, by the extent to which
they wish to see its image falsified, attenuated, ultrified, and
deified,--one might reckon the homines religiosi among the artists, as
their HIGHEST rank. It is the profound, suspicious fear of an incurable
pessimism which compels whole centuries to fasten their teeth into a
religious interpretation of existence: the fear of the instinct which
divines that truth might be attained TOO soon, before man has become
strong enough, hard enough, artist enough.... Piety, the "Life in God,"
regarded in this light, would appear as the most elaborate and
ultimate product of the FEAR of truth, as artist-adoration
and artist-intoxication in presence of the most logical of all
falsifications, as the will to the inversion of truth, to untruth at
any price. Perhaps there has hitherto been no more effective means of
beautifying man than piety, by means of it man can become so artful, so
superficial, so iridescent, and so good, that his appearance no longer
offends.

60. To love mankind FOR GOD'S SAKE--this has so far been the noblest and
remotest sentiment to which mankind has attained. That love to mankind,
without any redeeming intention in the background, is only an ADDITIONAL
folly and brutishness, that the inclination to this love has first to
get its proportion, its delicacy, its gram of salt and sprinkling
of ambergris from a higher inclination--whoever first perceived
and "experienced" this, however his tongue may have stammered as it
attempted to express such a delicate matter, let him for all time be
holy and respected, as the man who has so far flown highest and gone
astray in the finest fashion!

61. The philosopher, as WE free spirits understand him--as the man of
the greatest responsibility, who has the conscience for the general
development of mankind,--will use religion for his disciplining and
educating work, just as he will use the contemporary political
and economic conditions. The selecting and disciplining
influence--destructive, as well as creative and fashioning--which can be
exercised by means of religion is manifold and varied, according to the
sort of people placed under its spell and protection. For those who are
strong and independent, destined and trained to command, in whom the
judgment and skill of a ruling race is incorporated, religion is
an additional means for overcoming resistance in the exercise of
authority--as a bond which binds rulers and subjects in common,
betraying and surrendering to the former the conscience of the latter,
their inmost heart, which would fain escape obedience. And in the
case of the unique natures of noble origin, if by virtue of superior
spirituality they should incline to a more retired and contemplative
life, reserving to themselves only the more refined forms of government
(over chosen disciples or members of an order), religion itself may
be used as a means for obtaining peace from the noise and trouble of
managing GROSSER affairs, and for securing immunity from the UNAVOIDABLE
filth of all political agitation. The Brahmins, for instance, understood
this fact. With the help of a religious organization, they secured to
themselves the power of nominating kings for the people, while their
sentiments prompted them to keep apart and outside, as men with a higher
and super-regal mission. At the same time religion gives inducement and
opportunity to some of the subjects to qualify themselves for future
ruling and commanding the slowly ascending ranks and classes, in which,
through fortunate marriage customs, volitional power and delight in
self-control are on the increase. To them religion offers sufficient
incentives and temptations to aspire to higher intellectuality, and to
experience the sentiments of authoritative self-control, of silence, and
of solitude. Asceticism and Puritanism are almost indispensable means of
educating and ennobling a race which seeks to rise above its hereditary
baseness and work itself upwards to future supremacy. And finally, to
ordinary men, to the majority of the people, who exist for service and
general utility, and are only so far entitled to exist, religion gives
invaluable contentedness with their lot and condition, peace of heart,
ennoblement of obedience, additional social happiness and sympathy,
with something of transfiguration and embellishment, something of
justification of all the commonplaceness, all the meanness, all
the semi-animal poverty of their souls. Religion, together with the
religious significance of life, sheds sunshine over such perpetually
harassed men, and makes even their own aspect endurable to them, it
operates upon them as the Epicurean philosophy usually operates upon
sufferers of a higher order, in a refreshing and refining manner,
almost TURNING suffering TO ACCOUNT, and in the end even hallowing and
vindicating it. There is perhaps nothing so admirable in Christianity
and Buddhism as their art of teaching even the lowest to elevate
themselves by piety to a seemingly higher order of things, and thereby
to retain their satisfaction with the actual world in which they find it
difficult enough to live--this very difficulty being necessary.

62. To be sure--to make also the bad counter-reckoning against such
religions, and to bring to light their secret dangers--the cost is
always excessive and terrible when religions do NOT operate as an
educational and disciplinary medium in the hands of the philosopher, but
rule voluntarily and PARAMOUNTLY, when they wish to be the final end,
and not a means along with other means. Among men, as among all other
animals, there is a surplus of defective, diseased, degenerating,
infirm, and necessarily suffering individuals; the successful cases,
among men also, are always the exception; and in view of the fact that
man is THE ANIMAL NOT YET PROPERLY ADAPTED TO HIS ENVIRONMENT, the rare
exception. But worse still. The higher the type a man represents, the
greater is the improbability that he will SUCCEED; the accidental, the
law of irrationality in the general constitution of mankind, manifests
itself most terribly in its destructive effect on the higher orders of
men, the conditions of whose lives are delicate, diverse, and difficult
to determine. What, then, is the attitude of the two greatest religions
above-mentioned to the SURPLUS of failures in life? They endeavour
to preserve and keep alive whatever can be preserved; in fact, as the
religions FOR SUFFERERS, they take the part of these upon principle;
they are always in favour of those who suffer from life as from a
disease, and they would fain treat every other experience of life as
false and impossible. However highly we may esteem this indulgent and
preservative care (inasmuch as in applying to others, it has applied,
and applies also to the highest and usually the most suffering type of
man), the hitherto PARAMOUNT religions--to give a general appreciation
of them--are among the principal causes which have kept the type of
"man" upon a lower level--they have preserved too much THAT WHICH SHOULD
HAVE PERISHED. One has to thank them for invaluable services; and who is
sufficiently rich in gratitude not to feel poor at the contemplation
of all that the "spiritual men" of Christianity have done for Europe
hitherto! But when they had given comfort to the sufferers, courage to
the oppressed and despairing, a staff and support to the helpless,
and when they had allured from society into convents and spiritual
penitentiaries the broken-hearted and distracted: what else had they
to do in order to work systematically in that fashion, and with a good
conscience, for the preservation of all the sick and suffering, which
means, in deed and in truth, to work for the DETERIORATION OF THE
EUROPEAN RACE? To REVERSE all estimates of value--THAT is what they
had to do! And to shatter the strong, to spoil great hopes, to cast
suspicion on the delight in beauty, to break down everything autonomous,
manly, conquering, and imperious--all instincts which are natural to the
highest and most successful type of "man"--into uncertainty, distress
of conscience, and self-destruction; forsooth, to invert all love of the
earthly and of supremacy over the earth, into hatred of the earth and
earthly things--THAT is the task the Church imposed on itself, and
was obliged to impose, until, according to its standard of value,
"unworldliness," "unsensuousness," and "higher man" fused into one
sentiment. If one could observe the strangely painful, equally coarse
and refined comedy of European Christianity with the derisive and
impartial eye of an Epicurean god, I should think one would never cease
marvelling and laughing; does it not actually seem that some single will
has ruled over Europe for eighteen centuries in order to make a SUBLIME
ABORTION of man? He, however, who, with opposite requirements (no longer
Epicurean) and with some divine hammer in his hand, could approach this
almost voluntary degeneration and stunting of mankind, as exemplified in
the European Christian (Pascal, for instance), would he not have to
cry aloud with rage, pity, and horror: "Oh, you bunglers, presumptuous
pitiful bunglers, what have you done! Was that a work for your hands?
How you have hacked and botched my finest stone! What have you presumed
to do!"--I should say that Christianity has hitherto been the most
portentous of presumptions. Men, not great enough, nor hard enough,
to be entitled as artists to take part in fashioning MAN; men,
not sufficiently strong and far-sighted to ALLOW, with sublime
self-constraint, the obvious law of the thousandfold failures and
perishings to prevail; men, not sufficiently noble to see the radically
different grades of rank and intervals of rank that separate man from
man:--SUCH men, with their "equality before God," have hitherto swayed
the destiny of Europe; until at last a dwarfed, almost ludicrous species
has been produced, a gregarious animal, something obliging, sickly,
mediocre, the European of the present day.



CHAPTER IV. APOPHTHEGMS AND INTERLUDES


63. He who is a thorough teacher takes things seriously--and even
himself--only in relation to his pupils.

64. "Knowledge for its own sake"--that is the last snare laid by
morality: we are thereby completely entangled in morals once more.

65. The charm of knowledge would be small, were it not so much shame has
to be overcome on the way to it.

65A. We are most dishonourable towards our God: he is not PERMITTED to
sin.

66. The tendency of a person to allow himself to be degraded, robbed,
deceived, and exploited might be the diffidence of a God among men.

67. Love to one only is a barbarity, for it is exercised at the expense
of all others. Love to God also!

68. "I did that," says my memory. "I could not have done that," says my
pride, and remains inexorable. Eventually--the memory yields.

69. One has regarded life carelessly, if one has failed to see the hand
that--kills with leniency.

70. If a man has character, he has also his typical experience, which
always recurs.

71. THE SAGE AS ASTRONOMER.--So long as thou feelest the stars as an
"above thee," thou lackest the eye of the discerning one.

72. It is not the strength, but the duration of great sentiments that
makes great men.

73. He who attains his ideal, precisely thereby surpasses it.

73A. Many a peacock hides his tail from every eye--and calls it his
pride.

74. A man of genius is unbearable, unless he possess at least two things
besides: gratitude and purity.

75. The degree and nature of a man's sensuality extends to the highest
altitudes of his spirit.

76. Under peaceful conditions the militant man attacks himself.

77. With his principles a man seeks either to dominate, or justify,
or honour, or reproach, or conceal his habits: two men with the same
principles probably seek fundamentally different ends therewith.

78. He who despises himself, nevertheless esteems himself thereby, as a
despiser.

79. A soul which knows that it is loved, but does not itself love,
betrays its sediment: its dregs come up.

80. A thing that is explained ceases to concern us--What did the God
mean who gave the advice, "Know thyself!" Did it perhaps imply "Cease to
be concerned about thyself! become objective!"--And Socrates?--And the
"scientific man"?

81. It is terrible to die of thirst at sea. Is it necessary that you
should so salt your truth that it will no longer--quench thirst?

82. "Sympathy for all"--would be harshness and tyranny for THEE, my good
neighbour.

83. INSTINCT--When the house is on fire one forgets even the
dinner--Yes, but one recovers it from among the ashes.

84. Woman learns how to hate in proportion as she--forgets how to charm.

85. The same emotions are in man and woman, but in different TEMPO, on
that account man and woman never cease to misunderstand each other.

86. In the background of all their personal vanity, women themselves
have still their impersonal scorn--for "woman".

87. FETTERED HEART, FREE SPIRIT--When one firmly fetters one's heart
and keeps it prisoner, one can allow one's spirit many liberties: I said
this once before But people do not believe it when I say so, unless they
know it already.

88. One begins to distrust very clever persons when they become
embarrassed.

89. Dreadful experiences raise the question whether he who experiences
them is not something dreadful also.

90. Heavy, melancholy men turn lighter, and come temporarily to their
surface, precisely by that which makes others heavy--by hatred and love.

91. So cold, so icy, that one burns one's finger at the touch of him!
Every hand that lays hold of him shrinks back!--And for that very reason
many think him red-hot.

92. Who has not, at one time or another--sacrificed himself for the sake
of his good name?

93. In affability there is no hatred of men, but precisely on that
account a great deal too much contempt of men.

94. The maturity of man--that means, to have reacquired the seriousness
that one had as a child at play.

95. To be ashamed of one's immorality is a step on the ladder at the end
of which one is ashamed also of one's morality.

96. One should part from life as Ulysses parted from Nausicaa--blessing
it rather than in love with it.

97. What? A great man? I always see merely the play-actor of his own
ideal.

98. When one trains one's conscience, it kisses one while it bites.

99. THE DISAPPOINTED ONE SPEAKS--"I listened for the echo and I heard
only praise."

100. We all feign to ourselves that we are simpler than we are, we thus
relax ourselves away from our fellows.

101. A discerning one might easily regard himself at present as the
animalization of God.

102. Discovering reciprocal love should really disenchant the lover with
regard to the beloved. "What! She is modest enough to love even you? Or
stupid enough? Or--or---"

103. THE DANGER IN HAPPINESS.--"Everything now turns out best for me, I
now love every fate:--who would like to be my fate?"

104. Not their love of humanity, but the impotence of their love,
prevents the Christians of today--burning us.

105. The pia fraus is still more repugnant to the taste (the "piety")
of the free spirit (the "pious man of knowledge") than the impia fraus.
Hence the profound lack of judgment, in comparison with the Church,
characteristic of the type "free spirit"--as ITS non-freedom.

106. By means of music the very passions enjoy themselves.

107. A sign of strong character, when once the resolution has been
taken, to shut the ear even to the best counter-arguments. Occasionally,
therefore, a will to stupidity.

108. There is no such thing as moral phenomena, but only a moral
interpretation of phenomena.

109. The criminal is often enough not equal to his deed: he extenuates
and maligns it.

110. The advocates of a criminal are seldom artists enough to turn the
beautiful terribleness of the deed to the advantage of the doer.

111. Our vanity is most difficult to wound just when our pride has been
wounded.

112. To him who feels himself preordained to contemplation and not to
belief, all believers are too noisy and obtrusive; he guards against
them.

113. "You want to prepossess him in your favour? Then you must be
embarrassed before him."

114. The immense expectation with regard to sexual love, and the coyness
in this expectation, spoils all the perspectives of women at the outset.

115. Where there is neither love nor hatred in the game, woman's play is
mediocre.

116. The great epochs of our life are at the points when we gain courage
to rebaptize our badness as the best in us.

117. The will to overcome an emotion, is ultimately only the will of
another, or of several other, emotions.

118. There is an innocence of admiration: it is possessed by him to whom
it has not yet occurred that he himself may be admired some day.

119. Our loathing of dirt may be so great as to prevent our cleaning
ourselves--"justifying" ourselves.

120. Sensuality often forces the growth of love too much, so that its
root remains weak, and is easily torn up.

121. It is a curious thing that God learned Greek when he wished to turn
author--and that he did not learn it better.

122. To rejoice on account of praise is in many cases merely politeness
of heart--and the very opposite of vanity of spirit.

123. Even concubinage has been corrupted--by marriage.

124. He who exults at the stake, does not triumph over pain, but because
of the fact that he does not feel pain where he expected it. A parable.

125. When we have to change an opinion about any one, we charge heavily
to his account the inconvenience he thereby causes us.

126. A nation is a detour of nature to arrive at six or seven great
men.--Yes, and then to get round them.

127. In the eyes of all true women science is hostile to the sense of
shame. They feel as if one wished to peep under their skin with it--or
worse still! under their dress and finery.

128. The more abstract the truth you wish to teach, the more must you
allure the senses to it.

129. The devil has the most extensive perspectives for God; on that
account he keeps so far away from him:--the devil, in effect, as the
oldest friend of knowledge.

130. What a person IS begins to betray itself when his talent
decreases,--when he ceases to show what he CAN do. Talent is also an
adornment; an adornment is also a concealment.

131. The sexes deceive themselves about each other: the reason is that
in reality they honour and love only themselves (or their own ideal, to
express it more agreeably). Thus man wishes woman to be peaceable: but
in fact woman is ESSENTIALLY unpeaceable, like the cat, however well she
may have assumed the peaceable demeanour.

132. One is punished best for one's virtues.

133. He who cannot find the way to HIS ideal, lives more frivolously and
shamelessly than the man without an ideal.

134. From the senses originate all trustworthiness, all good conscience,
all evidence of truth.

135. Pharisaism is not a deterioration of the good man; a considerable
part of it is rather an essential condition of being good.

136. The one seeks an accoucheur for his thoughts, the other seeks some
one whom he can assist: a good conversation thus originates.

137. In intercourse with scholars and artists one readily makes mistakes
of opposite kinds: in a remarkable scholar one not infrequently finds
a mediocre man; and often, even in a mediocre artist, one finds a very
remarkable man.

138. We do the same when awake as when dreaming: we only invent and
imagine him with whom we have intercourse--and forget it immediately.

139. In revenge and in love woman is more barbarous than man.

140. ADVICE AS A RIDDLE.--"If the band is not to break, bite it
first--secure to make!"

141. The belly is the reason why man does not so readily take himself
for a God.

142. The chastest utterance I ever heard: "Dans le veritable amour c'est
l'ame qui enveloppe le corps."

143. Our vanity would like what we do best to pass precisely for what is
most difficult to us.--Concerning the origin of many systems of morals.

144. When a woman has scholarly inclinations there is generally
something wrong with her sexual nature. Barrenness itself conduces to a
certain virility of taste; man, indeed, if I may say so, is "the barren
animal."

145. Comparing man and woman generally, one may say that woman would
not have the genius for adornment, if she had not the instinct for the
SECONDARY role.

146. He who fights with monsters should be careful lest he thereby
become a monster. And if thou gaze long into an abyss, the abyss will
also gaze into thee.

147. From old Florentine novels--moreover, from life: Buona femmina e
mala femmina vuol bastone.--Sacchetti, Nov. 86.

148. To seduce their neighbour to a favourable opinion, and afterwards
to believe implicitly in this opinion of their neighbour--who can do
this conjuring trick so well as women?

149. That which an age considers evil is usually an unseasonable echo of
what was formerly considered good--the atavism of an old ideal.

150. Around the hero everything becomes a tragedy; around the
demigod everything becomes a satyr-play; and around God everything
becomes--what? perhaps a "world"?

151. It is not enough to possess a talent: one must also have your
permission to possess it;--eh, my friends?

152. "Where there is the tree of knowledge, there is always Paradise":
so say the most ancient and the most modern serpents.

153. What is done out of love always takes place beyond good and evil.

154. Objection, evasion, joyous distrust, and love of irony are signs of
health; everything absolute belongs to pathology.

155. The sense of the tragic increases and declines with sensuousness.

156. Insanity in individuals is something rare--but in groups, parties,
nations, and epochs it is the rule.

157. The thought of suicide is a great consolation: by means of it one
gets successfully through many a bad night.

158. Not only our reason, but also our conscience, truckles to our
strongest impulse--the tyrant in us.

159. One MUST repay good and ill; but why just to the person who did us
good or ill?

160. One no longer loves one's knowledge sufficiently after one has
communicated it.

161. Poets act shamelessly towards their experiences: they exploit them.

162. "Our fellow-creature is not our neighbour, but our neighbour's
neighbour":--so thinks every nation.

163. Love brings to light the noble and hidden qualities of a lover--his
rare and exceptional traits: it is thus liable to be deceptive as to his
normal character.

164. Jesus said to his Jews: "The law was for servants;--love God as I
love him, as his Son! What have we Sons of God to do with morals!"

165. IN SIGHT OF EVERY PARTY.--A shepherd has always need of a
bell-wether--or he has himself to be a wether occasionally.

166. One may indeed lie with the mouth; but with the accompanying
grimace one nevertheless tells the truth.

167. To vigorous men intimacy is a matter of shame--and something
precious.

168. Christianity gave Eros poison to drink; he did not die of it,
certainly, but degenerated to Vice.

169. To talk much about oneself may also be a means of concealing
oneself.

170. In praise there is more obtrusiveness than in blame.

171. Pity has an almost ludicrous effect on a man of knowledge, like
tender hands on a Cyclops.

172. One occasionally embraces some one or other, out of love to mankind
(because one cannot embrace all); but this is what one must never
confess to the individual.

173. One does not hate as long as one disesteems, but only when one
esteems equal or superior.

174. Ye Utilitarians--ye, too, love the UTILE only as a VEHICLE for
your inclinations,--ye, too, really find the noise of its wheels
insupportable!

175. One loves ultimately one's desires, not the thing desired.

176. The vanity of others is only counter to our taste when it is
counter to our vanity.

177. With regard to what "truthfulness" is, perhaps nobody has ever been
sufficiently truthful.

178. One does not believe in the follies of clever men: what a
forfeiture of the rights of man!

179. The consequences of our actions seize us by the forelock, very
indifferent to the fact that we have meanwhile "reformed."

180. There is an innocence in lying which is the sign of good faith in a
cause.

181. It is inhuman to bless when one is being cursed.

182. The familiarity of superiors embitters one, because it may not be
returned.

183. "I am affected, not because you have deceived me, but because I can
no longer believe in you."

184. There is a haughtiness of kindness which has the appearance of
wickedness.

185. "I dislike him."--Why?--"I am not a match for him."--Did any one
ever answer so?



CHAPTER V. THE NATURAL HISTORY OF MORALS


186. The moral sentiment in Europe at present is perhaps as subtle,
belated, diverse, sensitive, and refined, as the "Science of Morals"
belonging thereto is recent, initial, awkward, and coarse-fingered:--an
interesting contrast, which sometimes becomes incarnate and obvious
in the very person of a moralist. Indeed, the expression, "Science
of Morals" is, in respect to what is designated thereby, far too
presumptuous and counter to GOOD taste,--which is always a foretaste of
more modest expressions. One ought to avow with the utmost fairness WHAT
is still necessary here for a long time, WHAT is alone proper for the
present: namely, the collection of material, the comprehensive survey
and classification of an immense domain of delicate sentiments of worth,
and distinctions of worth, which live, grow, propagate, and perish--and
perhaps attempts to give a clear idea of the recurring and more common
forms of these living crystallizations--as preparation for a THEORY OF
TYPES of morality. To be sure, people have not hitherto been so modest.
All the philosophers, with a pedantic and ridiculous seriousness,
demanded of themselves something very much higher, more pretentious, and
ceremonious, when they concerned themselves with morality as a science:
they wanted to GIVE A BASIC to morality--and every philosopher hitherto
has believed that he has given it a basis; morality itself, however, has
been regarded as something "given." How far from their awkward pride
was the seemingly insignificant problem--left in dust and decay--of a
description of forms of morality, notwithstanding that the finest hands
and senses could hardly be fine enough for it! It was precisely owing to
moral philosophers' knowing the moral facts imperfectly, in an arbitrary
epitome, or an accidental abridgement--perhaps as the morality of
their environment, their position, their church, their Zeitgeist, their
climate and zone--it was precisely because they were badly instructed
with regard to nations, eras, and past ages, and were by no means eager
to know about these matters, that they did not even come in sight of the
real problems of morals--problems which only disclose themselves by
a comparison of MANY kinds of morality. In every "Science of Morals"
hitherto, strange as it may sound, the problem of morality itself
has been OMITTED: there has been no suspicion that there was anything
problematic there! That which philosophers called "giving a basis to
morality," and endeavoured to realize, has, when seen in a right light,
proved merely a learned form of good FAITH in prevailing morality, a new
means of its EXPRESSION, consequently just a matter-of-fact within the
sphere of a definite morality, yea, in its ultimate motive, a sort of
denial that it is LAWFUL for this morality to be called in question--and
in any case the reverse of the testing, analyzing, doubting, and
vivisecting of this very faith. Hear, for instance, with what
innocence--almost worthy of honour--Schopenhauer represents his own
task, and draw your conclusions concerning the scientificness of a
"Science" whose latest master still talks in the strain of children and
old wives: "The principle," he says (page 136 of the Grundprobleme der
Ethik), [Footnote: Pages 54-55 of Schopenhauer's Basis of Morality,
translated by Arthur B. Bullock, M.A. (1903).] "the axiom about the
purport of which all moralists are PRACTICALLY agreed: neminem laede,
immo omnes quantum potes juva--is REALLY the proposition which all moral
teachers strive to establish, ... the REAL basis of ethics which
has been sought, like the philosopher's stone, for centuries."--The
difficulty of establishing the proposition referred to may indeed be
great--it is well known that Schopenhauer also was unsuccessful in his
efforts; and whoever has thoroughly realized how absurdly false and
sentimental this proposition is, in a world whose essence is Will
to Power, may be reminded that Schopenhauer, although a pessimist,
ACTUALLY--played the flute... daily after dinner: one may read about
the matter in his biography. A question by the way: a pessimist, a
repudiator of God and of the world, who MAKES A HALT at morality--who
assents to morality, and plays the flute to laede-neminem morals, what?
Is that really--a pessimist?

187. Apart from the value of such assertions as "there is a categorical
imperative in us," one can always ask: What does such an assertion
indicate about him who makes it? There are systems of morals which are
meant to justify their author in the eyes of other people; other systems
of morals are meant to tranquilize him, and make him self-satisfied;
with other systems he wants to crucify and humble himself, with others
he wishes to take revenge, with others to conceal himself, with others
to glorify himself and gave superiority and distinction,--this system of
morals helps its author to forget, that system makes him, or something
of him, forgotten, many a moralist would like to exercise power and
creative arbitrariness over mankind, many another, perhaps, Kant
especially, gives us to understand by his morals that "what is estimable
in me, is that I know how to obey--and with you it SHALL not be
otherwise than with me!" In short, systems of morals are only a
SIGN-LANGUAGE OF THE EMOTIONS.

188. In contrast to laisser-aller, every system of morals is a sort of
tyranny against "nature" and also against "reason", that is, however, no
objection, unless one should again decree by some system of morals, that
all kinds of tyranny and unreasonableness are unlawful What is
essential and invaluable in every system of morals, is that it is a
long constraint. In order to understand Stoicism, or Port Royal,
or Puritanism, one should remember the constraint under which every
language has attained to strength and freedom--the metrical constraint,
the tyranny of rhyme and rhythm. How much trouble have the poets and
orators of every nation given themselves!--not excepting some of
the prose writers of today, in whose ear dwells an inexorable
conscientiousness--"for the sake of a folly," as utilitarian bunglers
say, and thereby deem themselves wise--"from submission to arbitrary
laws," as the anarchists say, and thereby fancy themselves "free," even
free-spirited. The singular fact remains, however, that everything
of the nature of freedom, elegance, boldness, dance, and masterly
certainty, which exists or has existed, whether it be in thought itself,
or in administration, or in speaking and persuading, in art just as in
conduct, has only developed by means of the tyranny of such arbitrary
law, and in all seriousness, it is not at all improbable that precisely
this is "nature" and "natural"--and not laisser-aller! Every artist
knows how different from the state of letting himself go, is his
"most natural" condition, the free arranging, locating, disposing,
and constructing in the moments of "inspiration"--and how strictly and
delicately he then obeys a thousand laws, which, by their very rigidness
and precision, defy all formulation by means of ideas (even the most
stable idea has, in comparison therewith, something floating, manifold,
and ambiguous in it). The essential thing "in heaven and in earth" is,
apparently (to repeat it once more), that there should be long OBEDIENCE
in the same direction, there thereby results, and has always resulted in
the long run, something which has made life worth living; for instance,
virtue, art, music, dancing, reason, spirituality--anything whatever
that is transfiguring, refined, foolish, or divine. The long bondage of
the spirit, the distrustful constraint in the communicability of
ideas, the discipline which the thinker imposed on himself to think
in accordance with the rules of a church or a court, or conformable
to Aristotelian premises, the persistent spiritual will to interpret
everything that happened according to a Christian scheme, and in every
occurrence to rediscover and justify the Christian God:--all this
violence, arbitrariness, severity, dreadfulness, and unreasonableness,
has proved itself the disciplinary means whereby the European spirit has
attained its strength, its remorseless curiosity and subtle mobility;
granted also that much irrecoverable strength and spirit had to be
stifled, suffocated, and spoilt in the process (for here, as everywhere,
"nature" shows herself as she is, in all her extravagant and INDIFFERENT
magnificence, which is shocking, but nevertheless noble). That
for centuries European thinkers only thought in order to prove
something--nowadays, on the contrary, we are suspicious of every thinker
who "wishes to prove something"--that it was always settled beforehand
what WAS TO BE the result of their strictest thinking, as it was perhaps
in the Asiatic astrology of former times, or as it is still at the
present day in the innocent, Christian-moral explanation of immediate
personal events "for the glory of God," or "for the good of the
soul":--this tyranny, this arbitrariness, this severe and magnificent
stupidity, has EDUCATED the spirit; slavery, both in the coarser and
the finer sense, is apparently an indispensable means even of spiritual
education and discipline. One may look at every system of morals in this
light: it is "nature" therein which teaches to hate the laisser-aller,
the too great freedom, and implants the need for limited horizons, for
immediate duties--it teaches the NARROWING OF PERSPECTIVES, and thus, in
a certain sense, that stupidity is a condition of life and development.
"Thou must obey some one, and for a long time; OTHERWISE thou wilt come
to grief, and lose all respect for thyself"--this seems to me to be the
moral imperative of nature, which is certainly neither "categorical,"
as old Kant wished (consequently the "otherwise"), nor does it address
itself to the individual (what does nature care for the individual!),
but to nations, races, ages, and ranks; above all, however, to the
animal "man" generally, to MANKIND.

189. Industrious races find it a great hardship to be idle: it was a
master stroke of ENGLISH instinct to hallow and begloom Sunday to such
an extent that the Englishman unconsciously hankers for his week--and
work-day again:--as a kind of cleverly devised, cleverly intercalated
FAST, such as is also frequently found in the ancient world (although,
as is appropriate in southern nations, not precisely with respect
to work). Many kinds of fasts are necessary; and wherever powerful
influences and habits prevail, legislators have to see that intercalary
days are appointed, on which such impulses are fettered, and learn to
hunger anew. Viewed from a higher standpoint, whole generations and
epochs, when they show themselves infected with any moral fanaticism,
seem like those intercalated periods of restraint and fasting, during
which an impulse learns to humble and submit itself--at the same time
also to PURIFY and SHARPEN itself; certain philosophical sects likewise
admit of a similar interpretation (for instance, the Stoa, in the midst
of Hellenic culture, with the atmosphere rank and overcharged with
Aphrodisiacal odours).--Here also is a hint for the explanation of the
paradox, why it was precisely in the most Christian period of European
history, and in general only under the pressure of Christian sentiments,
that the sexual impulse sublimated into love (amour-passion).

190. There is something in the morality of Plato which does not really
belong to Plato, but which only appears in his philosophy, one might
say, in spite of him: namely, Socratism, for which he himself was
too noble. "No one desires to injure himself, hence all evil is done
unwittingly. The evil man inflicts injury on himself; he would not do
so, however, if he knew that evil is evil. The evil man, therefore, is
only evil through error; if one free him from error one will necessarily
make him--good."--This mode of reasoning savours of the POPULACE, who
perceive only the unpleasant consequences of evil-doing, and practically
judge that "it is STUPID to do wrong"; while they accept "good" as
identical with "useful and pleasant," without further thought. As
regards every system of utilitarianism, one may at once assume that it
has the same origin, and follow the scent: one will seldom err.--Plato
did all he could to interpret something refined and noble into the
tenets of his teacher, and above all to interpret himself into them--he,
the most daring of all interpreters, who lifted the entire Socrates out
of the street, as a popular theme and song, to exhibit him in endless
and impossible modifications--namely, in all his own disguises and
multiplicities. In jest, and in Homeric language as well, what is the
Platonic Socrates, if not--[Greek words inserted here.]

191. The old theological problem of "Faith" and "Knowledge," or more
plainly, of instinct and reason--the question whether, in respect to the
valuation of things, instinct deserves more authority than rationality,
which wants to appreciate and act according to motives, according to
a "Why," that is to say, in conformity to purpose and utility--it
is always the old moral problem that first appeared in the person of
Socrates, and had divided men's minds long before Christianity. Socrates
himself, following, of course, the taste of his talent--that of a
surpassing dialectician--took first the side of reason; and, in fact,
what did he do all his life but laugh at the awkward incapacity of the
noble Athenians, who were men of instinct, like all noble men, and could
never give satisfactory answers concerning the motives of their actions?
In the end, however, though silently and secretly, he laughed also
at himself: with his finer conscience and introspection, he found
in himself the same difficulty and incapacity. "But why"--he said
to himself--"should one on that account separate oneself from the
instincts! One must set them right, and the reason ALSO--one must follow
the instincts, but at the same time persuade the reason to support them
with good arguments." This was the real FALSENESS of that great and
mysterious ironist; he brought his conscience up to the point that he
was satisfied with a kind of self-outwitting: in fact, he perceived
the irrationality in the moral judgment.--Plato, more innocent in such
matters, and without the craftiness of the plebeian, wished to prove to
himself, at the expenditure of all his strength--the greatest strength
a philosopher had ever expended--that reason and instinct lead
spontaneously to one goal, to the good, to "God"; and since Plato, all
theologians and philosophers have followed the same path--which means
that in matters of morality, instinct (or as Christians call it,
"Faith," or as I call it, "the herd") has hitherto triumphed. Unless
one should make an exception in the case of Descartes, the father of
rationalism (and consequently the grandfather of the Revolution), who
recognized only the authority of reason: but reason is only a tool, and
Descartes was superficial.

192. Whoever has followed the history of a single science, finds in
its development a clue to the understanding of the oldest and commonest
processes of all "knowledge and cognizance": there, as here, the
premature hypotheses, the fictions, the good stupid will to "belief,"
and the lack of distrust and patience are first developed--our senses
learn late, and never learn completely, to be subtle, reliable, and
cautious organs of knowledge. Our eyes find it easier on a given
occasion to produce a picture already often produced, than to seize upon
the divergence and novelty of an impression: the latter requires more
force, more "morality." It is difficult and painful for the ear to
listen to anything new; we hear strange music badly. When we hear
another language spoken, we involuntarily attempt to form the sounds
into words with which we are more familiar and conversant--it was thus,
for example, that the Germans modified the spoken word ARCUBALISTA into
ARMBRUST (cross-bow). Our senses are also hostile and averse to the
new; and generally, even in the "simplest" processes of sensation, the
emotions DOMINATE--such as fear, love, hatred, and the passive emotion
of indolence.--As little as a reader nowadays reads all the single words
(not to speak of syllables) of a page--he rather takes about five out
of every twenty words at random, and "guesses" the probably appropriate
sense to them--just as little do we see a tree correctly and completely
in respect to its leaves, branches, colour, and shape; we find it so
much easier to fancy the chance of a tree. Even in the midst of the
most remarkable experiences, we still do just the same; we fabricate the
greater part of the experience, and can hardly be made to contemplate
any event, EXCEPT as "inventors" thereof. All this goes to prove
that from our fundamental nature and from remote ages we have
been--ACCUSTOMED TO LYING. Or, to express it more politely and
hypocritically, in short, more pleasantly--one is much more of an artist
than one is aware of.--In an animated conversation, I often see the face
of the person with whom I am speaking so clearly and sharply defined
before me, according to the thought he expresses, or which I believe to
be evoked in his mind, that the degree of distinctness far exceeds the
STRENGTH of my visual faculty--the delicacy of the play of the muscles
and of the expression of the eyes MUST therefore be imagined by me.
Probably the person put on quite a different expression, or none at all.

193. Quidquid luce fuit, tenebris agit: but also contrariwise. What we
experience in dreams, provided we experience it often, pertains at
last just as much to the general belongings of our soul as anything
"actually" experienced; by virtue thereof we are richer or poorer, we
have a requirement more or less, and finally, in broad daylight, and
even in the brightest moments of our waking life, we are ruled to some
extent by the nature of our dreams. Supposing that someone has often
flown in his dreams, and that at last, as soon as he dreams, he is
conscious of the power and art of flying as his privilege and his
peculiarly enviable happiness; such a person, who believes that on the
slightest impulse, he can actualize all sorts of curves and angles, who
knows the sensation of a certain divine levity, an "upwards"
without effort or constraint, a "downwards" without descending
or lowering--without TROUBLE!--how could the man with such
dream-experiences and dream-habits fail to find "happiness" differently
coloured and defined, even in his waking hours! How could he fail--to
long DIFFERENTLY for happiness? "Flight," such as is described by poets,
must, when compared with his own "flying," be far too earthly, muscular,
violent, far too "troublesome" for him.

194. The difference among men does not manifest itself only in the
difference of their lists of desirable things--in their regarding
different good things as worth striving for, and being disagreed as to
the greater or less value, the order of rank, of the commonly recognized
desirable things:--it manifests itself much more in what they regard as
actually HAVING and POSSESSING a desirable thing. As regards a woman,
for instance, the control over her body and her sexual gratification
serves as an amply sufficient sign of ownership and possession to the
more modest man; another with a more suspicious and ambitious thirst for
possession, sees the "questionableness," the mere apparentness of such
ownership, and wishes to have finer tests in order to know especially
whether the woman not only gives herself to him, but also gives up for
his sake what she has or would like to have--only THEN does he look upon
her as "possessed." A third, however, has not even here got to the limit
of his distrust and his desire for possession: he asks himself whether
the woman, when she gives up everything for him, does not perhaps do
so for a phantom of him; he wishes first to be thoroughly, indeed,
profoundly well known; in order to be loved at all he ventures to let
himself be found out. Only then does he feel the beloved one fully in
his possession, when she no longer deceives herself about him, when
she loves him just as much for the sake of his devilry and concealed
insatiability, as for his goodness, patience, and spirituality. One
man would like to possess a nation, and he finds all the higher arts of
Cagliostro and Catalina suitable for his purpose. Another, with a more
refined thirst for possession, says to himself: "One may not deceive
where one desires to possess"--he is irritated and impatient at the idea
that a mask of him should rule in the hearts of the people: "I must,
therefore, MAKE myself known, and first of all learn to know myself!"
Among helpful and charitable people, one almost always finds the awkward
craftiness which first gets up suitably him who has to be helped, as
though, for instance, he should "merit" help, seek just THEIR help, and
would show himself deeply grateful, attached, and subservient to them
for all help. With these conceits, they take control of the needy as a
property, just as in general they are charitable and helpful out of a
desire for property. One finds them jealous when they are crossed or
forestalled in their charity. Parents involuntarily make something like
themselves out of their children--they call that "education"; no mother
doubts at the bottom of her heart that the child she has borne is
thereby her property, no father hesitates about his right to HIS OWN
ideas and notions of worth. Indeed, in former times fathers deemed it
right to use their discretion concerning the life or death of the newly
born (as among the ancient Germans). And like the father, so also do the
teacher, the class, the priest, and the prince still see in every new
individual an unobjectionable opportunity for a new possession. The
consequence is...

195. The Jews--a people "born for slavery," as Tacitus and the whole
ancient world say of them; "the chosen people among the nations," as
they themselves say and believe--the Jews performed the miracle of the
inversion of valuations, by means of which life on earth obtained a new
and dangerous charm for a couple of millenniums. Their prophets fused
into one the expressions "rich," "godless," "wicked," "violent,"
"sensual," and for the first time coined the word "world" as a term of
reproach. In this inversion of valuations (in which is also included
the use of the word "poor" as synonymous with "saint" and "friend") the
significance of the Jewish people is to be found; it is with THEM that
the SLAVE-INSURRECTION IN MORALS commences.

196. It is to be INFERRED that there are countless dark bodies near the
sun--such as we shall never see. Among ourselves, this is an allegory;
and the psychologist of morals reads the whole star-writing merely as an
allegorical and symbolic language in which much may be unexpressed.

197. The beast of prey and the man of prey (for instance, Caesar Borgia)
are fundamentally misunderstood, "nature" is misunderstood, so long as
one seeks a "morbidness" in the constitution of these healthiest of
all tropical monsters and growths, or even an innate "hell" in them--as
almost all moralists have done hitherto. Does it not seem that there is
a hatred of the virgin forest and of the tropics among moralists? And
that the "tropical man" must be discredited at all costs, whether
as disease and deterioration of mankind, or as his own hell and
self-torture? And why? In favour of the "temperate zones"? In favour
of the temperate men? The "moral"? The mediocre?--This for the chapter:
"Morals as Timidity."

198. All the systems of morals which address themselves with a view to
their "happiness," as it is called--what else are they but suggestions
for behaviour adapted to the degree of DANGER from themselves in which
the individuals live; recipes for their passions, their good and bad
propensities, insofar as such have the Will to Power and would like
to play the master; small and great expediencies and elaborations,
permeated with the musty odour of old family medicines and old-wife
wisdom; all of them grotesque and absurd in their form--because
they address themselves to "all," because they generalize where
generalization is not authorized; all of them speaking unconditionally,
and taking themselves unconditionally; all of them flavoured not merely
with one grain of salt, but rather endurable only, and sometimes even
seductive, when they are over-spiced and begin to smell dangerously,
especially of "the other world." That is all of little value when
estimated intellectually, and is far from being "science," much less
"wisdom"; but, repeated once more, and three times repeated, it is
expediency, expediency, expediency, mixed with stupidity, stupidity,
stupidity--whether it be the indifference and statuesque coldness
towards the heated folly of the emotions, which the Stoics advised and
fostered; or the no-more-laughing and no-more-weeping of Spinoza, the
destruction of the emotions by their analysis and vivisection, which he
recommended so naively; or the lowering of the emotions to an innocent
mean at which they may be satisfied, the Aristotelianism of morals;
or even morality as the enjoyment of the emotions in a voluntary
attenuation and spiritualization by the symbolism of art, perhaps as
music, or as love of God, and of mankind for God's sake--for in religion
the passions are once more enfranchised, provided that...; or, finally,
even the complaisant and wanton surrender to the emotions, as has
been taught by Hafis and Goethe, the bold letting-go of the reins, the
spiritual and corporeal licentia morum in the exceptional cases of
wise old codgers and drunkards, with whom it "no longer has much
danger."--This also for the chapter: "Morals as Timidity."

199. Inasmuch as in all ages, as long as mankind has existed, there have
also been human herds (family alliances, communities, tribes, peoples,
states, churches), and always a great number who obey in proportion
to the small number who command--in view, therefore, of the fact that
obedience has been most practiced and fostered among mankind hitherto,
one may reasonably suppose that, generally speaking, the need thereof is
now innate in every one, as a kind of FORMAL CONSCIENCE which gives
the command "Thou shalt unconditionally do something, unconditionally
refrain from something", in short, "Thou shalt". This need tries to
satisfy itself and to fill its form with a content, according to its
strength, impatience, and eagerness, it at once seizes as an omnivorous
appetite with little selection, and accepts whatever is shouted into
its ear by all sorts of commanders--parents, teachers, laws, class
prejudices, or public opinion. The extraordinary limitation of human
development, the hesitation, protractedness, frequent retrogression, and
turning thereof, is attributable to the fact that the herd-instinct of
obedience is transmitted best, and at the cost of the art of command. If
one imagine this instinct increasing to its greatest extent, commanders
and independent individuals will finally be lacking altogether, or they
will suffer inwardly from a bad conscience, and will have to impose
a deception on themselves in the first place in order to be able to
command just as if they also were only obeying. This condition of things
actually exists in Europe at present--I call it the moral hypocrisy of
the commanding class. They know no other way of protecting themselves
from their bad conscience than by playing the role of executors of older
and higher orders (of predecessors, of the constitution, of justice, of
the law, or of God himself), or they even justify themselves by maxims
from the current opinions of the herd, as "first servants of their
people," or "instruments of the public weal". On the other hand, the
gregarious European man nowadays assumes an air as if he were the only
kind of man that is allowable, he glorifies his qualities, such as
public spirit, kindness, deference, industry, temperance, modesty,
indulgence, sympathy, by virtue of which he is gentle, endurable, and
useful to the herd, as the peculiarly human virtues. In cases, however,
where it is believed that the leader and bell-wether cannot be dispensed
with, attempt after attempt is made nowadays to replace commanders
by the summing together of clever gregarious men all representative
constitutions, for example, are of this origin. In spite of all, what a
blessing, what a deliverance from a weight becoming unendurable, is the
appearance of an absolute ruler for these gregarious Europeans--of this
fact the effect of the appearance of Napoleon was the last great proof
the history of the influence of Napoleon is almost the history of
the higher happiness to which the entire century has attained in its
worthiest individuals and periods.

200. The man of an age of dissolution which mixes the races with
one another, who has the inheritance of a diversified descent in his
body--that is to say, contrary, and often not only contrary, instincts
and standards of value, which struggle with one another and are seldom
at peace--such a man of late culture and broken lights, will, on an
average, be a weak man. His fundamental desire is that the war which is
IN HIM should come to an end; happiness appears to him in the character
of a soothing medicine and mode of thought (for instance, Epicurean
or Christian); it is above all things the happiness of repose, of
undisturbedness, of repletion, of final unity--it is the "Sabbath of
Sabbaths," to use the expression of the holy rhetorician, St. Augustine,
who was himself such a man.--Should, however, the contrariety and
conflict in such natures operate as an ADDITIONAL incentive and stimulus
to life--and if, on the other hand, in addition to their powerful and
irreconcilable instincts, they have also inherited and indoctrinated
into them a proper mastery and subtlety for carrying on the conflict
with themselves (that is to say, the faculty of self-control and
self-deception), there then arise those marvelously incomprehensible and
inexplicable beings, those enigmatical men, predestined for conquering
and circumventing others, the finest examples of which are Alcibiades
and Caesar (with whom I should like to associate the FIRST of Europeans
according to my taste, the Hohenstaufen, Frederick the Second), and
among artists, perhaps Leonardo da Vinci. They appear precisely in the
same periods when that weaker type, with its longing for repose, comes
to the front; the two types are complementary to each other, and spring
from the same causes.

201. As long as the utility which determines moral estimates is only
gregarious utility, as long as the preservation of the community is only
kept in view, and the immoral is sought precisely and exclusively in
what seems dangerous to the maintenance of the community, there can be
no "morality of love to one's neighbour." Granted even that there is
already a little constant exercise of consideration, sympathy, fairness,
gentleness, and mutual assistance, granted that even in this condition
of society all those instincts are already active which are latterly
distinguished by honourable names as "virtues," and eventually almost
coincide with the conception "morality": in that period they do not
as yet belong to the domain of moral valuations--they are still
ULTRA-MORAL. A sympathetic action, for instance, is neither called good
nor bad, moral nor immoral, in the best period of the Romans; and should
it be praised, a sort of resentful disdain is compatible with this
praise, even at the best, directly the sympathetic action is compared
with one which contributes to the welfare of the whole, to the RES
PUBLICA. After all, "love to our neighbour" is always a secondary
matter, partly conventional and arbitrarily manifested in relation to
our FEAR OF OUR NEIGHBOUR. After the fabric of society seems on the
whole established and secured against external dangers, it is this
fear of our neighbour which again creates new perspectives of moral
valuation. Certain strong and dangerous instincts, such as the love of
enterprise, foolhardiness, revengefulness, astuteness, rapacity, and
love of power, which up till then had not only to be honoured from the
point of view of general utility--under other names, of course, than
those here given--but had to be fostered and cultivated (because they
were perpetually required in the common danger against the common
enemies), are now felt in their dangerousness to be doubly strong--when
the outlets for them are lacking--and are gradually branded as immoral
and given over to calumny. The contrary instincts and inclinations now
attain to moral honour, the gregarious instinct gradually draws its
conclusions. How much or how little dangerousness to the community or
to equality is contained in an opinion, a condition, an emotion, a
disposition, or an endowment--that is now the moral perspective, here
again fear is the mother of morals. It is by the loftiest and strongest
instincts, when they break out passionately and carry the individual
far above and beyond the average, and the low level of the gregarious
conscience, that the self-reliance of the community is destroyed, its
belief in itself, its backbone, as it were, breaks, consequently these
very instincts will be most branded and defamed. The lofty independent
spirituality, the will to stand alone, and even the cogent reason, are
felt to be dangers, everything that elevates the individual above the
herd, and is a source of fear to the neighbour, is henceforth called
EVIL, the tolerant, unassuming, self-adapting, self-equalizing
disposition, the MEDIOCRITY of desires, attains to moral distinction and
honour. Finally, under very peaceful circumstances, there is always
less opportunity and necessity for training the feelings to severity
and rigour, and now every form of severity, even in justice, begins
to disturb the conscience, a lofty and rigorous nobleness and
self-responsibility almost offends, and awakens distrust, "the lamb,"
and still more "the sheep," wins respect. There is a point of diseased
mellowness and effeminacy in the history of society, at which society
itself takes the part of him who injures it, the part of the CRIMINAL,
and does so, in fact, seriously and honestly. To punish, appears to it
to be somehow unfair--it is certain that the idea of "punishment" and
"the obligation to punish" are then painful and alarming to people. "Is
it not sufficient if the criminal be rendered HARMLESS? Why should we
still punish? Punishment itself is terrible!"--with these questions
gregarious morality, the morality of fear, draws its ultimate
conclusion. If one could at all do away with danger, the cause of fear,
one would have done away with this morality at the same time, it
would no longer be necessary, it WOULD NOT CONSIDER ITSELF any longer
necessary!--Whoever examines the conscience of the present-day European,
will always elicit the same imperative from its thousand moral folds
and hidden recesses, the imperative of the timidity of the herd "we wish
that some time or other there may be NOTHING MORE TO FEAR!" Some time
or other--the will and the way THERETO is nowadays called "progress" all
over Europe.

202. Let us at once say again what we have already said a hundred
times, for people's ears nowadays are unwilling to hear such truths--OUR
truths. We know well enough how offensive it sounds when any one
plainly, and without metaphor, counts man among the animals, but it will
be accounted to us almost a CRIME, that it is precisely in respect to
men of "modern ideas" that we have constantly applied the terms "herd,"
"herd-instincts," and such like expressions. What avail is it? We cannot
do otherwise, for it is precisely here that our new insight is. We
have found that in all the principal moral judgments, Europe has become
unanimous, including likewise the countries where European influence
prevails in Europe people evidently KNOW what Socrates thought he
did not know, and what the famous serpent of old once promised to
teach--they "know" today what is good and evil. It must then sound hard
and be distasteful to the ear, when we always insist that that which
here thinks it knows, that which here glorifies itself with praise
and blame, and calls itself good, is the instinct of the herding human
animal, the instinct which has come and is ever coming more and more
to the front, to preponderance and supremacy over other instincts,
according to the increasing physiological approximation and resemblance
of which it is the symptom. MORALITY IN EUROPE AT PRESENT IS
HERDING-ANIMAL MORALITY, and therefore, as we understand the matter,
only one kind of human morality, beside which, before which, and after
which many other moralities, and above all HIGHER moralities, are or
should be possible. Against such a "possibility," against such a "should
be," however, this morality defends itself with all its strength, it
says obstinately and inexorably "I am morality itself and nothing else
is morality!" Indeed, with the help of a religion which has humoured
and flattered the sublimest desires of the herding-animal, things have
reached such a point that we always find a more visible expression of
this morality even in political and social arrangements: the DEMOCRATIC
movement is the inheritance of the Christian movement. That its TEMPO,
however, is much too slow and sleepy for the more impatient ones, for
those who are sick and distracted by the herding-instinct, is indicated
by the increasingly furious howling, and always less disguised
teeth-gnashing of the anarchist dogs, who are now roving through the
highways of European culture. Apparently in opposition to the peacefully
industrious democrats and Revolution-ideologues, and still more so
to the awkward philosophasters and fraternity-visionaries who call
themselves Socialists and want a "free society," those are really at one
with them all in their thorough and instinctive hostility to every form
of society other than that of the AUTONOMOUS herd (to the extent even of
repudiating the notions "master" and "servant"--ni dieu ni maitre, says
a socialist formula); at one in their tenacious opposition to every
special claim, every special right and privilege (this means ultimately
opposition to EVERY right, for when all are equal, no one needs "rights"
any longer); at one in their distrust of punitive justice (as though it
were a violation of the weak, unfair to the NECESSARY consequences of
all former society); but equally at one in their religion of sympathy,
in their compassion for all that feels, lives, and suffers (down to the
very animals, up even to "God"--the extravagance of "sympathy for
God" belongs to a democratic age); altogether at one in the cry and
impatience of their sympathy, in their deadly hatred of suffering
generally, in their almost feminine incapacity for witnessing it or
ALLOWING it; at one in their involuntary beglooming and heart-softening,
under the spell of which Europe seems to be threatened with a new
Buddhism; at one in their belief in the morality of MUTUAL sympathy, as
though it were morality in itself, the climax, the ATTAINED climax of
mankind, the sole hope of the future, the consolation of the present,
the great discharge from all the obligations of the past; altogether at
one in their belief in the community as the DELIVERER, in the herd, and
therefore in "themselves."

203. We, who hold a different belief--we, who regard the democratic
movement, not only as a degenerating form of political organization, but
as equivalent to a degenerating, a waning type of man, as involving his
mediocrising and depreciation: where have WE to fix our hopes? In
NEW PHILOSOPHERS--there is no other alternative: in minds strong and
original enough to initiate opposite estimates of value, to transvalue
and invert "eternal valuations"; in forerunners, in men of the future,
who in the present shall fix the constraints and fasten the knots which
will compel millenniums to take NEW paths. To teach man the future
of humanity as his WILL, as depending on human will, and to make
preparation for vast hazardous enterprises and collective attempts in
rearing and educating, in order thereby to put an end to the frightful
rule of folly and chance which has hitherto gone by the name of
"history" (the folly of the "greatest number" is only its last
form)--for that purpose a new type of philosopher and commander will
some time or other be needed, at the very idea of which everything that
has existed in the way of occult, terrible, and benevolent beings might
look pale and dwarfed. The image of such leaders hovers before OUR
eyes:--is it lawful for me to say it aloud, ye free spirits? The
conditions which one would partly have to create and partly utilize for
their genesis; the presumptive methods and tests by virtue of which
a soul should grow up to such an elevation and power as to feel a
CONSTRAINT to these tasks; a transvaluation of values, under the new
pressure and hammer of which a conscience should be steeled and a heart
transformed into brass, so as to bear the weight of such responsibility;
and on the other hand the necessity for such leaders, the dreadful
danger that they might be lacking, or miscarry and degenerate:--these
are OUR real anxieties and glooms, ye know it well, ye free spirits!
these are the heavy distant thoughts and storms which sweep across the
heaven of OUR life. There are few pains so grievous as to have seen,
divined, or experienced how an exceptional man has missed his way and
deteriorated; but he who has the rare eye for the universal danger
of "man" himself DETERIORATING, he who like us has recognized the
extraordinary fortuitousness which has hitherto played its game in
respect to the future of mankind--a game in which neither the hand, nor
even a "finger of God" has participated!--he who divines the fate that
is hidden under the idiotic unwariness and blind confidence of
"modern ideas," and still more under the whole of Christo-European
morality--suffers from an anguish with which no other is to be compared.
He sees at a glance all that could still BE MADE OUT OF MAN through
a favourable accumulation and augmentation of human powers and
arrangements; he knows with all the knowledge of his conviction how
unexhausted man still is for the greatest possibilities, and how often
in the past the type man has stood in presence of mysterious decisions
and new paths:--he knows still better from his painfulest recollections
on what wretched obstacles promising developments of the highest rank
have hitherto usually gone to pieces, broken down, sunk, and become
contemptible. The UNIVERSAL DEGENERACY OF MANKIND to the level of
the "man of the future"--as idealized by the socialistic fools and
shallow-pates--this degeneracy and dwarfing of man to an absolutely
gregarious animal (or as they call it, to a man of "free society"),
this brutalizing of man into a pigmy with equal rights and claims, is
undoubtedly POSSIBLE! He who has thought out this possibility to its
ultimate conclusion knows ANOTHER loathing unknown to the rest of
mankind--and perhaps also a new MISSION!



CHAPTER VI. WE SCHOLARS


204. At the risk that moralizing may also reveal itself here as that
which it has always been--namely, resolutely MONTRER SES PLAIES,
according to Balzac--I would venture to protest against an improper and
injurious alteration of rank, which quite unnoticed, and as if with the
best conscience, threatens nowadays to establish itself in the relations
of science and philosophy. I mean to say that one must have the right
out of one's own EXPERIENCE--experience, as it seems to me, always
implies unfortunate experience?--to treat of such an important question
of rank, so as not to speak of colour like the blind, or AGAINST science
like women and artists ("Ah! this dreadful science!" sigh their instinct
and their shame, "it always FINDS THINGS OUT!"). The declaration of
independence of the scientific man, his emancipation from philosophy,
is one of the subtler after-effects of democratic organization and
disorganization: the self-glorification and self-conceitedness of
the learned man is now everywhere in full bloom, and in its best
springtime--which does not mean to imply that in this case self-praise
smells sweet. Here also the instinct of the populace cries, "Freedom
from all masters!" and after science has, with the happiest results,
resisted theology, whose "hand-maid" it had been too long, it now
proposes in its wantonness and indiscretion to lay down laws for
philosophy, and in its turn to play the "master"--what am I saying!
to play the PHILOSOPHER on its own account. My memory--the memory of
a scientific man, if you please!--teems with the naivetes of insolence
which I have heard about philosophy and philosophers from young
naturalists and old physicians (not to mention the most cultured and
most conceited of all learned men, the philologists and schoolmasters,
who are both the one and the other by profession). On one occasion it
was the specialist and the Jack Horner who instinctively stood on the
defensive against all synthetic tasks and capabilities; at another time
it was the industrious worker who had got a scent of OTIUM and refined
luxuriousness in the internal economy of the philosopher, and felt
himself aggrieved and belittled thereby. On another occasion it was the
colour-blindness of the utilitarian, who sees nothing in philosophy but
a series of REFUTED systems, and an extravagant expenditure which "does
nobody any good". At another time the fear of disguised mysticism and of
the boundary-adjustment of knowledge became conspicuous, at another
time the disregard of individual philosophers, which had involuntarily
extended to disregard of philosophy generally. In fine, I found most
frequently, behind the proud disdain of philosophy in young scholars,
the evil after-effect of some particular philosopher, to whom on the
whole obedience had been foresworn, without, however, the spell of his
scornful estimates of other philosophers having been got rid of--the
result being a general ill-will to all philosophy. (Such seems to
me, for instance, the after-effect of Schopenhauer on the most modern
Germany: by his unintelligent rage against Hegel, he has succeeded in
severing the whole of the last generation of Germans from its connection
with German culture, which culture, all things considered, has been
an elevation and a divining refinement of the HISTORICAL SENSE, but
precisely at this point Schopenhauer himself was poor, irreceptive,
and un-German to the extent of ingeniousness.) On the whole, speaking
generally, it may just have been the humanness, all-too-humanness of the
modern philosophers themselves, in short, their contemptibleness, which
has injured most radically the reverence for philosophy and opened the
doors to the instinct of the populace. Let it but be acknowledged to
what an extent our modern world diverges from the whole style of the
world of Heraclitus, Plato, Empedocles, and whatever else all the royal
and magnificent anchorites of the spirit were called, and with what
justice an honest man of science MAY feel himself of a better family and
origin, in view of such representatives of philosophy, who, owing to
the fashion of the present day, are just as much aloft as they are down
below--in Germany, for instance, the two lions of Berlin, the anarchist
Eugen Duhring and the amalgamist Eduard von Hartmann. It is especially
the sight of those hotch-potch philosophers, who call themselves
"realists," or "positivists," which is calculated to implant a
dangerous distrust in the soul of a young and ambitious scholar those
philosophers, at the best, are themselves but scholars and specialists,
that is very evident! All of them are persons who have been vanquished
and BROUGHT BACK AGAIN under the dominion of science, who at one time
or another claimed more from themselves, without having a right to the
"more" and its responsibility--and who now, creditably, rancorously, and
vindictively, represent in word and deed, DISBELIEF in the master-task
and supremacy of philosophy After all, how could it be otherwise?
Science flourishes nowadays and has the good conscience clearly visible
on its countenance, while that to which the entire modern philosophy has
gradually sunk, the remnant of philosophy of the present day, excites
distrust and displeasure, if not scorn and pity Philosophy reduced to
a "theory of knowledge," no more in fact than a diffident science of
epochs and doctrine of forbearance a philosophy that never even
gets beyond the threshold, and rigorously DENIES itself the right
to enter--that is philosophy in its last throes, an end, an agony,
something that awakens pity. How could such a philosophy--RULE!

205. The dangers that beset the evolution of the philosopher are, in
fact, so manifold nowadays, that one might doubt whether this fruit
could still come to maturity. The extent and towering structure of the
sciences have increased enormously, and therewith also the probability
that the philosopher will grow tired even as a learner, or will attach
himself somewhere and "specialize" so that he will no longer attain to
his elevation, that is to say, to his superspection, his circumspection,
and his DESPECTION. Or he gets aloft too late, when the best of his
maturity and strength is past, or when he is impaired, coarsened, and
deteriorated, so that his view, his general estimate of things, is no
longer of much importance. It is perhaps just the refinement of his
intellectual conscience that makes him hesitate and linger on the
way, he dreads the temptation to become a dilettante, a millepede, a
milleantenna, he knows too well that as a discerner, one who has lost
his self-respect no longer commands, no longer LEADS, unless he should
aspire to become a great play-actor, a philosophical Cagliostro and
spiritual rat-catcher--in short, a misleader. This is in the last
instance a question of taste, if it has not really been a question of
conscience. To double once more the philosopher's difficulties, there is
also the fact that he demands from himself a verdict, a Yea or Nay, not
concerning science, but concerning life and the worth of life--he learns
unwillingly to believe that it is his right and even his duty to obtain
this verdict, and he has to seek his way to the right and the belief
only through the most extensive (perhaps disturbing and destroying)
experiences, often hesitating, doubting, and dumbfounded. In fact, the
philosopher has long been mistaken and confused by the multitude, either
with the scientific man and ideal scholar, or with the religiously
elevated, desensualized, desecularized visionary and God-intoxicated
man; and even yet when one hears anybody praised, because he lives
"wisely," or "as a philosopher," it hardly means anything more than
"prudently and apart." Wisdom: that seems to the populace to be a kind
of flight, a means and artifice for withdrawing successfully from a
bad game; but the GENUINE philosopher--does it not seem so to US,
my friends?--lives "unphilosophically" and "unwisely," above all,
IMPRUDENTLY, and feels the obligation and burden of a hundred attempts
and temptations of life--he risks HIMSELF constantly, he plays THIS bad
game.

206. In relation to the genius, that is to say, a being who either
ENGENDERS or PRODUCES--both words understood in their fullest sense--the
man of learning, the scientific average man, has always something of
the old maid about him; for, like her, he is not conversant with the two
principal functions of man. To both, of course, to the scholar and
to the old maid, one concedes respectability, as if by way of
indemnification--in these cases one emphasizes the respectability--and
yet, in the compulsion of this concession, one has the same admixture
of vexation. Let us examine more closely: what is the scientific man?
Firstly, a commonplace type of man, with commonplace virtues: that is
to say, a non-ruling, non-authoritative, and non-self-sufficient type
of man; he possesses industry, patient adaptableness to rank and file,
equability and moderation in capacity and requirement; he has the
instinct for people like himself, and for that which they require--for
instance: the portion of independence and green meadow without which
there is no rest from labour, the claim to honour and consideration
(which first and foremost presupposes recognition and recognisability),
the sunshine of a good name, the perpetual ratification of his value and
usefulness, with which the inward DISTRUST which lies at the bottom of
the heart of all dependent men and gregarious animals, has again and
again to be overcome. The learned man, as is appropriate, has also
maladies and faults of an ignoble kind: he is full of petty envy, and
has a lynx-eye for the weak points in those natures to whose elevations
he cannot attain. He is confiding, yet only as one who lets himself go,
but does not FLOW; and precisely before the man of the great current he
stands all the colder and more reserved--his eye is then like a smooth
and irresponsive lake, which is no longer moved by rapture or sympathy.
The worst and most dangerous thing of which a scholar is capable results
from the instinct of mediocrity of his type, from the Jesuitism of
mediocrity, which labours instinctively for the destruction of
the exceptional man, and endeavours to break--or still better, to
relax--every bent bow To relax, of course, with consideration, and
naturally with an indulgent hand--to RELAX with confiding sympathy
that is the real art of Jesuitism, which has always understood how to
introduce itself as the religion of sympathy.

207. However gratefully one may welcome the OBJECTIVE spirit--and
who has not been sick to death of all subjectivity and its confounded
IPSISIMOSITY!--in the end, however, one must learn caution even with
regard to one's gratitude, and put a stop to the exaggeration with
which the unselfing and depersonalizing of the spirit has recently been
celebrated, as if it were the goal in itself, as if it were salvation
and glorification--as is especially accustomed to happen in the
pessimist school, which has also in its turn good reasons for paying the
highest honours to "disinterested knowledge" The objective man, who no
longer curses and scolds like the pessimist, the IDEAL man of learning
in whom the scientific instinct blossoms forth fully after a thousand
complete and partial failures, is assuredly one of the most costly
instruments that exist, but his place is in the hand of one who is more
powerful He is only an instrument, we may say, he is a MIRROR--he is no
"purpose in himself" The objective man is in truth a mirror accustomed
to prostration before everything that wants to be known, with such
desires only as knowing or "reflecting" implies--he waits until
something comes, and then expands himself sensitively, so that even the
light footsteps and gliding-past of spiritual beings may not be lost on
his surface and film Whatever "personality" he still possesses seems to
him accidental, arbitrary, or still oftener, disturbing, so much has he
come to regard himself as the passage and reflection of outside forms
and events He calls up the recollection of "himself" with an effort,
and not infrequently wrongly, he readily confounds himself with other
persons, he makes mistakes with regard to his own needs, and here only
is he unrefined and negligent Perhaps he is troubled about the health,
or the pettiness and confined atmosphere of wife and friend, or the lack
of companions and society--indeed, he sets himself to reflect on his
suffering, but in vain! His thoughts already rove away to the MORE
GENERAL case, and tomorrow he knows as little as he knew yesterday how
to help himself He does not now take himself seriously and devote time
to himself he is serene, NOT from lack of trouble, but from lack
of capacity for grasping and dealing with HIS trouble The habitual
complaisance with respect to all objects and experiences, the radiant
and impartial hospitality with which he receives everything that
comes his way, his habit of inconsiderate good-nature, of dangerous
indifference as to Yea and Nay: alas! there are enough of cases in which
he has to atone for these virtues of his!--and as man generally, he
becomes far too easily the CAPUT MORTUUM of such virtues. Should one
wish love or hatred from him--I mean love and hatred as God, woman, and
animal understand them--he will do what he can, and furnish what he can.
But one must not be surprised if it should not be much--if he should
show himself just at this point to be false, fragile, questionable, and
deteriorated. His love is constrained, his hatred is artificial, and
rather UN TOUR DE FORCE, a slight ostentation and exaggeration. He is
only genuine so far as he can be objective; only in his serene totality
is he still "nature" and "natural." His mirroring and eternally
self-polishing soul no longer knows how to affirm, no longer how to
deny; he does not command; neither does he destroy. "JE NE MEPRISE
PRESQUE RIEN"--he says, with Leibniz: let us not overlook nor undervalue
the PRESQUE! Neither is he a model man; he does not go in advance of any
one, nor after, either; he places himself generally too far off to have
any reason for espousing the cause of either good or evil. If he has
been so long confounded with the PHILOSOPHER, with the Caesarian trainer
and dictator of civilization, he has had far too much honour, and what
is more essential in him has been overlooked--he is an instrument,
something of a slave, though certainly the sublimest sort of slave, but
nothing in himself--PRESQUE RIEN! The objective man is an instrument,
a costly, easily injured, easily tarnished measuring instrument and
mirroring apparatus, which is to be taken care of and respected; but he
is no goal, not outgoing nor upgoing, no complementary man in whom the
REST of existence justifies itself, no termination--and still less a
commencement, an engendering, or primary cause, nothing hardy, powerful,
self-centred, that wants to be master; but rather only a soft, inflated,
delicate, movable potter's-form, that must wait for some kind of content
and frame to "shape" itself thereto--for the most part a man without
frame and content, a "selfless" man. Consequently, also, nothing for
women, IN PARENTHESI.

208. When a philosopher nowadays makes known that he is not a skeptic--I
hope that has been gathered from the foregoing description of the
objective spirit?--people all hear it impatiently; they regard him on
that account with some apprehension, they would like to ask so many,
many questions... indeed among timid hearers, of whom there are now so
many, he is henceforth said to be dangerous. With his repudiation of
skepticism, it seems to them as if they heard some evil-threatening
sound in the distance, as if a new kind of explosive were being tried
somewhere, a dynamite of the spirit, perhaps a newly discovered Russian
NIHILINE, a pessimism BONAE VOLUNTATIS, that not only denies, means
denial, but--dreadful thought! PRACTISES denial. Against this kind of
"good-will"--a will to the veritable, actual negation of life--there is,
as is generally acknowledged nowadays, no better soporific and sedative
than skepticism, the mild, pleasing, lulling poppy of skepticism;
and Hamlet himself is now prescribed by the doctors of the day as an
antidote to the "spirit," and its underground noises. "Are not our ears
already full of bad sounds?" say the skeptics, as lovers of repose, and
almost as a kind of safety police; "this subterranean Nay is terrible!
Be still, ye pessimistic moles!" The skeptic, in effect, that delicate
creature, is far too easily frightened; his conscience is schooled so
as to start at every Nay, and even at that sharp, decided Yea, and feels
something like a bite thereby. Yea! and Nay!--they seem to him opposed
to morality; he loves, on the contrary, to make a festival to his virtue
by a noble aloofness, while perhaps he says with Montaigne: "What do I
know?" Or with Socrates: "I know that I know nothing." Or: "Here I do
not trust myself, no door is open to me." Or: "Even if the door were
open, why should I enter immediately?" Or: "What is the use of any hasty
hypotheses? It might quite well be in good taste to make no hypotheses
at all. Are you absolutely obliged to straighten at once what is
crooked? to stuff every hole with some kind of oakum? Is there not time
enough for that? Has not the time leisure? Oh, ye demons, can ye not
at all WAIT? The uncertain also has its charms, the Sphinx, too, is a
Circe, and Circe, too, was a philosopher."--Thus does a skeptic console
himself; and in truth he needs some consolation. For skepticism is
the most spiritual expression of a certain many-sided physiological
temperament, which in ordinary language is called nervous debility and
sickliness; it arises whenever races or classes which have been long
separated, decisively and suddenly blend with one another. In the new
generation, which has inherited as it were different standards and
valuations in its blood, everything is disquiet, derangement, doubt, and
tentativeness; the best powers operate restrictively, the very virtues
prevent each other growing and becoming strong, equilibrium, ballast,
and perpendicular stability are lacking in body and soul. That, however,
which is most diseased and degenerated in such nondescripts is the
WILL; they are no longer familiar with independence of decision, or
the courageous feeling of pleasure in willing--they are doubtful of the
"freedom of the will" even in their dreams Our present-day Europe,
the scene of a senseless, precipitate attempt at a radical blending of
classes, and CONSEQUENTLY of races, is therefore skeptical in all its
heights and depths, sometimes exhibiting the mobile skepticism which
springs impatiently and wantonly from branch to branch, sometimes with
gloomy aspect, like a cloud over-charged with interrogative signs--and
often sick unto death of its will! Paralysis of will, where do we not
find this cripple sitting nowadays! And yet how bedecked oftentimes' How
seductively ornamented! There are the finest gala dresses and disguises
for this disease, and that, for instance, most of what places itself
nowadays in the show-cases as "objectiveness," "the scientific spirit,"
"L'ART POUR L'ART," and "pure voluntary knowledge," is only decked-out
skepticism and paralysis of will--I am ready to answer for this
diagnosis of the European disease--The disease of the will is diffused
unequally over Europe, it is worst and most varied where civilization
has longest prevailed, it decreases according as "the barbarian"
still--or again--asserts his claims under the loose drapery of Western
culture It is therefore in the France of today, as can be readily
disclosed and comprehended, that the will is most infirm, and France,
which has always had a masterly aptitude for converting even the
portentous crises of its spirit into something charming and seductive,
now manifests emphatically its intellectual ascendancy over Europe,
by being the school and exhibition of all the charms of skepticism The
power to will and to persist, moreover, in a resolution, is already
somewhat stronger in Germany, and again in the North of Germany it
is stronger than in Central Germany, it is considerably stronger in
England, Spain, and Corsica, associated with phlegm in the former and
with hard skulls in the latter--not to mention Italy, which is too young
yet to know what it wants, and must first show whether it can exercise
will, but it is strongest and most surprising of all in that immense
middle empire where Europe as it were flows back to Asia--namely, in
Russia There the power to will has been long stored up and accumulated,
there the will--uncertain whether to be negative or affirmative--waits
threateningly to be discharged (to borrow their pet phrase from our
physicists) Perhaps not only Indian wars and complications in Asia would
be necessary to free Europe from its greatest danger, but also internal
subversion, the shattering of the empire into small states, and above
all the introduction of parliamentary imbecility, together with the
obligation of every one to read his newspaper at breakfast I do not
say this as one who desires it, in my heart I should rather prefer the
contrary--I mean such an increase in the threatening attitude of
Russia, that Europe would have to make up its mind to become equally
threatening--namely, TO ACQUIRE ONE WILL, by means of a new caste to
rule over the Continent, a persistent, dreadful will of its own, that
can set its aims thousands of years ahead; so that the long spun-out
comedy of its petty-statism, and its dynastic as well as its democratic
many-willed-ness, might finally be brought to a close. The time for
petty politics is past; the next century will bring the struggle for the
dominion of the world--the COMPULSION to great politics.

209. As to how far the new warlike age on which we Europeans have
evidently entered may perhaps favour the growth of another and stronger
kind of skepticism, I should like to express myself preliminarily
merely by a parable, which the lovers of German history will already
understand. That unscrupulous enthusiast for big, handsome grenadiers
(who, as King of Prussia, brought into being a military and skeptical
genius--and therewith, in reality, the new and now triumphantly emerged
type of German), the problematic, crazy father of Frederick the Great,
had on one point the very knack and lucky grasp of the genius: he knew
what was then lacking in Germany, the want of which was a hundred times
more alarming and serious than any lack of culture and social form--his
ill-will to the young Frederick resulted from the anxiety of a profound
instinct. MEN WERE LACKING; and he suspected, to his bitterest regret,
that his own son was not man enough. There, however, he deceived
himself; but who would not have deceived himself in his place? He saw
his son lapsed to atheism, to the ESPRIT, to the pleasant frivolity of
clever Frenchmen--he saw in the background the great bloodsucker, the
spider skepticism; he suspected the incurable wretchedness of a heart no
longer hard enough either for evil or good, and of a broken will that no
longer commands, is no longer ABLE to command. Meanwhile, however,
there grew up in his son that new kind of harder and more dangerous
skepticism--who knows TO WHAT EXTENT it was encouraged just by
his father's hatred and the icy melancholy of a will condemned to
solitude?--the skepticism of daring manliness, which is closely related
to the genius for war and conquest, and made its first entrance into
Germany in the person of the great Frederick. This skepticism despises
and nevertheless grasps; it undermines and takes possession; it does
not believe, but it does not thereby lose itself; it gives the spirit a
dangerous liberty, but it keeps strict guard over the heart. It is the
GERMAN form of skepticism, which, as a continued Fredericianism, risen
to the highest spirituality, has kept Europe for a considerable time
under the dominion of the German spirit and its critical and historical
distrust Owing to the insuperably strong and tough masculine character
of the great German philologists and historical critics (who,
rightly estimated, were also all of them artists of destruction
and dissolution), a NEW conception of the German spirit gradually
established itself--in spite of all Romanticism in music and
philosophy--in which the leaning towards masculine skepticism was
decidedly prominent whether, for instance, as fearlessness of gaze, as
courage and sternness of the dissecting hand, or as resolute will to
dangerous voyages of discovery, to spiritualized North Pole expeditions
under barren and dangerous skies. There may be good grounds for it when
warm-blooded and superficial humanitarians cross themselves before this
spirit, CET ESPRIT FATALISTE, IRONIQUE, MEPHISTOPHELIQUE, as Michelet
calls it, not without a shudder. But if one would realize how
characteristic is this fear of the "man" in the German spirit which
awakened Europe out of its "dogmatic slumber," let us call to mind the
former conception which had to be overcome by this new one--and that
it is not so very long ago that a masculinized woman could dare, with
unbridled presumption, to recommend the Germans to the interest of
Europe as gentle, good-hearted, weak-willed, and poetical fools.
Finally, let us only understand profoundly enough Napoleon's
astonishment when he saw Goethe it reveals what had been regarded for
centuries as the "German spirit" "VOILA UN HOMME!"--that was as much as
to say "But this is a MAN! And I only expected to see a German!"

210. Supposing, then, that in the picture of the philosophers of the
future, some trait suggests the question whether they must not perhaps
be skeptics in the last-mentioned sense, something in them would only be
designated thereby--and not they themselves. With equal right they might
call themselves critics, and assuredly they will be men of experiments.
By the name with which I ventured to baptize them, I have already
expressly emphasized their attempting and their love of attempting is
this because, as critics in body and soul, they will love to make use
of experiments in a new, and perhaps wider and more dangerous sense? In
their passion for knowledge, will they have to go further in daring and
painful attempts than the sensitive and pampered taste of a democratic
century can approve of?--There is no doubt these coming ones will be
least able to dispense with the serious and not unscrupulous qualities
which distinguish the critic from the skeptic I mean the certainty as to
standards of worth, the conscious employment of a unity of method,
the wary courage, the standing-alone, and the capacity for
self-responsibility, indeed, they will avow among themselves a DELIGHT
in denial and dissection, and a certain considerate cruelty, which knows
how to handle the knife surely and deftly, even when the heart bleeds
They will be STERNER (and perhaps not always towards themselves only)
than humane people may desire, they will not deal with the "truth" in
order that it may "please" them, or "elevate" and "inspire" them--they
will rather have little faith in "TRUTH" bringing with it such revels
for the feelings. They will smile, those rigorous spirits, when any one
says in their presence "That thought elevates me, why should it not be
true?" or "That work enchants me, why should it not be beautiful?" or
"That artist enlarges me, why should he not be great?" Perhaps they
will not only have a smile, but a genuine disgust for all that is thus
rapturous, idealistic, feminine, and hermaphroditic, and if any one
could look into their inmost hearts, he would not easily find therein
the intention to reconcile "Christian sentiments" with "antique taste,"
or even with "modern parliamentarism" (the kind of reconciliation
necessarily found even among philosophers in our very uncertain and
consequently very conciliatory century). Critical discipline, and every
habit that conduces to purity and rigour in intellectual matters,
will not only be demanded from themselves by these philosophers of
the future, they may even make a display thereof as their special
adornment--nevertheless they will not want to be called critics on that
account. It will seem to them no small indignity to philosophy to
have it decreed, as is so welcome nowadays, that "philosophy itself is
criticism and critical science--and nothing else whatever!" Though this
estimate of philosophy may enjoy the approval of all the Positivists of
France and Germany (and possibly it even flattered the heart and taste
of KANT: let us call to mind the titles of his principal works), our new
philosophers will say, notwithstanding, that critics are instruments of
the philosopher, and just on that account, as instruments, they are
far from being philosophers themselves! Even the great Chinaman of
Konigsberg was only a great critic.

211. I insist upon it that people finally cease confounding
philosophical workers, and in general scientific men, with
philosophers--that precisely here one should strictly give "each his
own," and not give those far too much, these far too little. It may
be necessary for the education of the real philosopher that he himself
should have once stood upon all those steps upon which his servants,
the scientific workers of philosophy, remain standing, and MUST remain
standing he himself must perhaps have been critic, and dogmatist,
and historian, and besides, poet, and collector, and traveler, and
riddle-reader, and moralist, and seer, and "free spirit," and almost
everything, in order to traverse the whole range of human values
and estimations, and that he may BE ABLE with a variety of eyes and
consciences to look from a height to any distance, from a depth up
to any height, from a nook into any expanse. But all these are only
preliminary conditions for his task; this task itself demands something
else--it requires him TO CREATE VALUES. The philosophical workers, after
the excellent pattern of Kant and Hegel, have to fix and formalize some
great existing body of valuations--that is to say, former DETERMINATIONS
OF VALUE, creations of value, which have become prevalent, and are for
a time called "truths"--whether in the domain of the LOGICAL, the
POLITICAL (moral), or the ARTISTIC. It is for these investigators to
make whatever has happened and been esteemed hitherto, conspicuous,
conceivable, intelligible, and manageable, to shorten everything long,
even "time" itself, and to SUBJUGATE the entire past: an immense and
wonderful task, in the carrying out of which all refined pride, all
tenacious will, can surely find satisfaction. THE REAL PHILOSOPHERS,
HOWEVER, ARE COMMANDERS AND LAW-GIVERS; they say: "Thus SHALL it be!"
They determine first the Whither and the Why of mankind, and thereby
set aside the previous labour of all philosophical workers, and all
subjugators of the past--they grasp at the future with a creative
hand, and whatever is and was, becomes for them thereby a means, an
instrument, and a hammer. Their "knowing" is CREATING, their creating
is a law-giving, their will to truth is--WILL TO POWER.--Are there at
present such philosophers? Have there ever been such philosophers? MUST
there not be such philosophers some day? ...

212. It is always more obvious to me that the philosopher, as a man
INDISPENSABLE for the morrow and the day after the morrow, has ever
found himself, and HAS BEEN OBLIGED to find himself, in contradiction
to the day in which he lives; his enemy has always been the ideal of his
day. Hitherto all those extraordinary furtherers of humanity whom one
calls philosophers--who rarely regarded themselves as lovers of wisdom,
but rather as disagreeable fools and dangerous interrogators--have found
their mission, their hard, involuntary, imperative mission (in the end,
however, the greatness of their mission), in being the bad conscience of
their age. In putting the vivisector's knife to the breast of the very
VIRTUES OF THEIR AGE, they have betrayed their own secret; it has been
for the sake of a NEW greatness of man, a new untrodden path to
his aggrandizement. They have always disclosed how much hypocrisy,
indolence, self-indulgence, and self-neglect, how much falsehood was
concealed under the most venerated types of contemporary morality, how
much virtue was OUTLIVED, they have always said "We must remove hence to
where YOU are least at home" In the face of a world of "modern ideas,"
which would like to confine every one in a corner, in a "specialty," a
philosopher, if there could be philosophers nowadays, would be compelled
to place the greatness of man, the conception of "greatness," precisely
in his comprehensiveness and multifariousness, in his all-roundness, he
would even determine worth and rank according to the amount and variety
of that which a man could bear and take upon himself, according to the
EXTENT to which a man could stretch his responsibility Nowadays the
taste and virtue of the age weaken and attenuate the will, nothing is
so adapted to the spirit of the age as weakness of will consequently, in
the ideal of the philosopher, strength of will, sternness, and capacity
for prolonged resolution, must specially be included in the conception
of "greatness", with as good a right as the opposite doctrine, with its
ideal of a silly, renouncing, humble, selfless humanity, was suited to
an opposite age--such as the sixteenth century, which suffered from its
accumulated energy of will, and from the wildest torrents and floods
of selfishness In the time of Socrates, among men only of worn-out
instincts, old conservative Athenians who let themselves go--"for the
sake of happiness," as they said, for the sake of pleasure, as their
conduct indicated--and who had continually on their lips the old pompous
words to which they had long forfeited the right by the life they led,
IRONY was perhaps necessary for greatness of soul, the wicked Socratic
assurance of the old physician and plebeian, who cut ruthlessly into his
own flesh, as into the flesh and heart of the "noble," with a look that
said plainly enough "Do not dissemble before me! here--we are equal!"
At present, on the contrary, when throughout Europe the herding-animal
alone attains to honours, and dispenses honours, when "equality of
right" can too readily be transformed into equality in wrong--I mean to
say into general war against everything rare, strange, and privileged,
against the higher man, the higher soul, the higher duty, the higher
responsibility, the creative plenipotence and lordliness--at present
it belongs to the conception of "greatness" to be noble, to wish to be
apart, to be capable of being different, to stand alone, to have to live
by personal initiative, and the philosopher will betray something of his
own ideal when he asserts "He shall be the greatest who can be the most
solitary, the most concealed, the most divergent, the man beyond good
and evil, the master of his virtues, and of super-abundance of will;
precisely this shall be called GREATNESS: as diversified as can be
entire, as ample as can be full." And to ask once more the question: Is
greatness POSSIBLE--nowadays?

213. It is difficult to learn what a philosopher is, because it cannot
be taught: one must "know" it by experience--or one should have the
pride NOT to know it. The fact that at present people all talk of things
of which they CANNOT have any experience, is true more especially
and unfortunately as concerns the philosopher and philosophical
matters:--the very few know them, are permitted to know them, and
all popular ideas about them are false. Thus, for instance, the truly
philosophical combination of a bold, exuberant spirituality which runs
at presto pace, and a dialectic rigour and necessity which makes no
false step, is unknown to most thinkers and scholars from their own
experience, and therefore, should any one speak of it in their
presence, it is incredible to them. They conceive of every necessity as
troublesome, as a painful compulsory obedience and state of constraint;
thinking itself is regarded by them as something slow and hesitating,
almost as a trouble, and often enough as "worthy of the SWEAT of the
noble"--but not at all as something easy and divine, closely related
to dancing and exuberance! "To think" and to take a matter "seriously,"
"arduously"--that is one and the same thing to them; such only has been
their "experience."--Artists have here perhaps a finer intuition; they
who know only too well that precisely when they no longer do anything
"arbitrarily," and everything of necessity, their feeling of freedom,
of subtlety, of power, of creatively fixing, disposing, and shaping,
reaches its climax--in short, that necessity and "freedom of will" are
then the same thing with them. There is, in fine, a gradation of rank
in psychical states, to which the gradation of rank in the problems
corresponds; and the highest problems repel ruthlessly every one who
ventures too near them, without being predestined for their solution
by the loftiness and power of his spirituality. Of what use is it for
nimble, everyday intellects, or clumsy, honest mechanics and empiricists
to press, in their plebeian ambition, close to such problems, and as
it were into this "holy of holies"--as so often happens nowadays! But
coarse feet must never tread upon such carpets: this is provided for in
the primary law of things; the doors remain closed to those intruders,
though they may dash and break their heads thereon. People have always
to be born to a high station, or, more definitely, they have to be BRED
for it: a person has only a right to philosophy--taking the word in
its higher significance--in virtue of his descent; the ancestors, the
"blood," decide here also. Many generations must have prepared the way
for the coming of the philosopher; each of his virtues must have been
separately acquired, nurtured, transmitted, and embodied; not only the
bold, easy, delicate course and current of his thoughts, but above all
the readiness for great responsibilities, the majesty of ruling glance
and contemning look, the feeling of separation from the multitude with
their duties and virtues, the kindly patronage and defense of whatever
is misunderstood and calumniated, be it God or devil, the delight and
practice of supreme justice, the art of commanding, the amplitude of
will, the lingering eye which rarely admires, rarely looks up, rarely
loves....



CHAPTER VII. OUR VIRTUES


214. OUR Virtues?--It is probable that we, too, have still our virtues,
although naturally they are not those sincere and massive virtues on
account of which we hold our grandfathers in esteem and also at a little
distance from us. We Europeans of the day after tomorrow, we firstlings
of the twentieth century--with all our dangerous curiosity, our
multifariousness and art of disguising, our mellow and seemingly
sweetened cruelty in sense and spirit--we shall presumably, IF we must
have virtues, have those only which have come to agreement with our most
secret and heartfelt inclinations, with our most ardent requirements:
well, then, let us look for them in our labyrinths!--where, as we know,
so many things lose themselves, so many things get quite lost! And is
there anything finer than to SEARCH for one's own virtues? Is it not
almost to BELIEVE in one's own virtues? But this "believing in one's
own virtues"--is it not practically the same as what was formerly called
one's "good conscience," that long, respectable pigtail of an idea,
which our grandfathers used to hang behind their heads, and often enough
also behind their understandings? It seems, therefore, that however
little we may imagine ourselves to be old-fashioned and grandfatherly
respectable in other respects, in one thing we are nevertheless the
worthy grandchildren of our grandfathers, we last Europeans with good
consciences: we also still wear their pigtail.--Ah! if you only knew how
soon, so very soon--it will be different!

215. As in the stellar firmament there are sometimes two suns which
determine the path of one planet, and in certain cases suns of different
colours shine around a single planet, now with red light, now with
green, and then simultaneously illumine and flood it with motley
colours: so we modern men, owing to the complicated mechanism of our
"firmament," are determined by DIFFERENT moralities; our actions shine
alternately in different colours, and are seldom unequivocal--and there
are often cases, also, in which our actions are MOTLEY-COLOURED.

216. To love one's enemies? I think that has been well learnt: it takes
place thousands of times at present on a large and small scale; indeed,
at times the higher and sublimer thing takes place:--we learn to DESPISE
when we love, and precisely when we love best; all of it, however,
unconsciously, without noise, without ostentation, with the shame and
secrecy of goodness, which forbids the utterance of the pompous word
and the formula of virtue. Morality as attitude--is opposed to our taste
nowadays. This is ALSO an advance, as it was an advance in our fathers
that religion as an attitude finally became opposed to their taste,
including the enmity and Voltairean bitterness against religion (and all
that formerly belonged to freethinker-pantomime). It is the music in our
conscience, the dance in our spirit, to which Puritan litanies, moral
sermons, and goody-goodness won't chime.

217. Let us be careful in dealing with those who attach great importance
to being credited with moral tact and subtlety in moral discernment!
They never forgive us if they have once made a mistake BEFORE us
(or even with REGARD to us)--they inevitably become our instinctive
calumniators and detractors, even when they still remain our
"friends."--Blessed are the forgetful: for they "get the better" even of
their blunders.

218. The psychologists of France--and where else are there still
psychologists nowadays?--have never yet exhausted their bitter and
manifold enjoyment of the betise bourgeoise, just as though... in
short, they betray something thereby. Flaubert, for instance, the honest
citizen of Rouen, neither saw, heard, nor tasted anything else in the
end; it was his mode of self-torment and refined cruelty. As this is
growing wearisome, I would now recommend for a change something else
for a pleasure--namely, the unconscious astuteness with which good, fat,
honest mediocrity always behaves towards loftier spirits and the tasks
they have to perform, the subtle, barbed, Jesuitical astuteness, which
is a thousand times subtler than the taste and understanding of the
middle-class in its best moments--subtler even than the understanding of
its victims:--a repeated proof that "instinct" is the most intelligent
of all kinds of intelligence which have hitherto been discovered. In
short, you psychologists, study the philosophy of the "rule" in its
struggle with the "exception": there you have a spectacle fit for Gods
and godlike malignity! Or, in plainer words, practise vivisection on
"good people," on the "homo bonae voluntatis," ON YOURSELVES!

219. The practice of judging and condemning morally, is the favourite
revenge of the intellectually shallow on those who are less so, it is
also a kind of indemnity for their being badly endowed by nature,
and finally, it is an opportunity for acquiring spirit and BECOMING
subtle--malice spiritualises. They are glad in their inmost heart that
there is a standard according to which those who are over-endowed with
intellectual goods and privileges, are equal to them, they contend for
the "equality of all before God," and almost NEED the belief in God for
this purpose. It is among them that the most powerful antagonists of
atheism are found. If any one were to say to them "A lofty spirituality
is beyond all comparison with the honesty and respectability of a merely
moral man"--it would make them furious, I shall take care not to say
so. I would rather flatter them with my theory that lofty spirituality
itself exists only as the ultimate product of moral qualities, that it
is a synthesis of all qualities attributed to the "merely moral" man,
after they have been acquired singly through long training and practice,
perhaps during a whole series of generations, that lofty spirituality
is precisely the spiritualising of justice, and the beneficent severity
which knows that it is authorized to maintain GRADATIONS OF RANK in the
world, even among things--and not only among men.

220. Now that the praise of the "disinterested person" is so popular
one must--probably not without some danger--get an idea of WHAT people
actually take an interest in, and what are the things generally which
fundamentally and profoundly concern ordinary men--including the
cultured, even the learned, and perhaps philosophers also, if
appearances do not deceive. The fact thereby becomes obvious that the
greater part of what interests and charms higher natures, and more
refined and fastidious tastes, seems absolutely "uninteresting" to
the average man--if, notwithstanding, he perceive devotion to these
interests, he calls it desinteresse, and wonders how it is possible to
act "disinterestedly." There have been philosophers who could give this
popular astonishment a seductive and mystical, other-worldly expression
(perhaps because they did not know the higher nature by experience?),
instead of stating the naked and candidly reasonable truth that
"disinterested" action is very interesting and "interested" action,
provided that... "And love?"--What! Even an action for love's sake
shall be "unegoistic"? But you fools--! "And the praise of the
self-sacrificer?"--But whoever has really offered sacrifice knows that
he wanted and obtained something for it--perhaps something from himself
for something from himself; that he relinquished here in order to have
more there, perhaps in general to be more, or even feel himself "more."
But this is a realm of questions and answers in which a more fastidious
spirit does not like to stay: for here truth has to stifle her yawns so
much when she is obliged to answer. And after all, truth is a woman; one
must not use force with her.

221. "It sometimes happens," said a moralistic pedant and
trifle-retailer, "that I honour and respect an unselfish man: not,
however, because he is unselfish, but because I think he has a right to
be useful to another man at his own expense. In short, the question
is always who HE is, and who THE OTHER is. For instance, in a person
created and destined for command, self-denial and modest retirement,
instead of being virtues, would be the waste of virtues: so it seems
to me. Every system of unegoistic morality which takes itself
unconditionally and appeals to every one, not only sins against good
taste, but is also an incentive to sins of omission, an ADDITIONAL
seduction under the mask of philanthropy--and precisely a seduction and
injury to the higher, rarer, and more privileged types of men. Moral
systems must be compelled first of all to bow before the GRADATIONS OF
RANK; their presumption must be driven home to their conscience--until
they thoroughly understand at last that it is IMMORAL to say that 'what
is right for one is proper for another.'"--So said my moralistic pedant
and bonhomme. Did he perhaps deserve to be laughed at when he thus
exhorted systems of morals to practise morality? But one should not be
too much in the right if one wishes to have the laughers on ONE'S OWN
side; a grain of wrong pertains even to good taste.

222. Wherever sympathy (fellow-suffering) is preached nowadays--and,
if I gather rightly, no other religion is any longer preached--let the
psychologist have his ears open through all the vanity, through all the
noise which is natural to these preachers (as to all preachers), he will
hear a hoarse, groaning, genuine note of SELF-CONTEMPT. It belongs
to the overshadowing and uglifying of Europe, which has been on
the increase for a century (the first symptoms of which are already
specified documentarily in a thoughtful letter of Galiani to Madame
d'Epinay)--IF IT IS NOT REALLY THE CAUSE THEREOF! The man of
"modern ideas," the conceited ape, is excessively dissatisfied with
himself--this is perfectly certain. He suffers, and his vanity wants him
only "to suffer with his fellows."

223. The hybrid European--a tolerably ugly plebeian, taken all in
all--absolutely requires a costume: he needs history as a storeroom
of costumes. To be sure, he notices that none of the costumes fit him
properly--he changes and changes. Let us look at the nineteenth century
with respect to these hasty preferences and changes in its masquerades
of style, and also with respect to its moments of desperation on account
of "nothing suiting" us. It is in vain to get ourselves up as romantic,
or classical, or Christian, or Florentine, or barocco, or "national,"
in moribus et artibus: it does not "clothe us"! But the "spirit,"
especially the "historical spirit," profits even by this desperation:
once and again a new sample of the past or of the foreign is tested,
put on, taken off, packed up, and above all studied--we are the first
studious age in puncto of "costumes," I mean as concerns morals,
articles of belief, artistic tastes, and religions; we are prepared as
no other age has ever been for a carnival in the grand style, for the
most spiritual festival--laughter and arrogance, for the transcendental
height of supreme folly and Aristophanic ridicule of the world. Perhaps
we are still discovering the domain of our invention just here, the
domain where even we can still be original, probably as parodists of
the world's history and as God's Merry-Andrews,--perhaps, though nothing
else of the present have a future, our laughter itself may have a
future!

224. The historical sense (or the capacity for divining quickly
the order of rank of the valuations according to which a people, a
community, or an individual has lived, the "divining instinct" for the
relationships of these valuations, for the relation of the authority
of the valuations to the authority of the operating forces),--this
historical sense, which we Europeans claim as our specialty, has come
to us in the train of the enchanting and mad semi-barbarity into which
Europe has been plunged by the democratic mingling of classes and
races--it is only the nineteenth century that has recognized this
faculty as its sixth sense. Owing to this mingling, the past of every
form and mode of life, and of cultures which were formerly closely
contiguous and superimposed on one another, flows forth into us "modern
souls"; our instincts now run back in all directions, we ourselves are
a kind of chaos: in the end, as we have said, the spirit perceives its
advantage therein. By means of our semi-barbarity in body and in desire,
we have secret access everywhere, such as a noble age never had; we have
access above all to the labyrinth of imperfect civilizations, and to
every form of semi-barbarity that has at any time existed on earth; and
in so far as the most considerable part of human civilization hitherto
has just been semi-barbarity, the "historical sense" implies almost the
sense and instinct for everything, the taste and tongue for everything:
whereby it immediately proves itself to be an IGNOBLE sense. For
instance, we enjoy Homer once more: it is perhaps our happiest
acquisition that we know how to appreciate Homer, whom men of
distinguished culture (as the French of the seventeenth century, like
Saint-Evremond, who reproached him for his ESPRIT VASTE, and even
Voltaire, the last echo of the century) cannot and could not so easily
appropriate--whom they scarcely permitted themselves to enjoy. The very
decided Yea and Nay of their palate, their promptly ready disgust, their
hesitating reluctance with regard to everything strange, their horror of
the bad taste even of lively curiosity, and in general the averseness of
every distinguished and self-sufficing culture to avow a new desire,
a dissatisfaction with its own condition, or an admiration of what is
strange: all this determines and disposes them unfavourably even towards
the best things of the world which are not their property or could not
become their prey--and no faculty is more unintelligible to such men
than just this historical sense, with its truckling, plebeian
curiosity. The case is not different with Shakespeare, that marvelous
Spanish-Moorish-Saxon synthesis of taste, over whom an ancient Athenian
of the circle of AEschylus would have half-killed himself with laughter
or irritation: but we--accept precisely this wild motleyness, this
medley of the most delicate, the most coarse, and the most artificial,
with a secret confidence and cordiality; we enjoy it as a refinement
of art reserved expressly for us, and allow ourselves to be as little
disturbed by the repulsive fumes and the proximity of the English
populace in which Shakespeare's art and taste lives, as perhaps on
the Chiaja of Naples, where, with all our senses awake, we go our way,
enchanted and voluntarily, in spite of the drain-odour of the lower
quarters of the town. That as men of the "historical sense" we have
our virtues, is not to be disputed:--we are unpretentious, unselfish,
modest, brave, habituated to self-control and self-renunciation, very
grateful, very patient, very complaisant--but with all this we are
perhaps not very "tasteful." Let us finally confess it, that what is
most difficult for us men of the "historical sense" to grasp, feel,
taste, and love, what finds us fundamentally prejudiced and almost
hostile, is precisely the perfection and ultimate maturity in every
culture and art, the essentially noble in works and men, their moment
of smooth sea and halcyon self-sufficiency, the goldenness and coldness
which all things show that have perfected themselves. Perhaps our great
virtue of the historical sense is in necessary contrast to GOOD taste,
at least to the very bad taste; and we can only evoke in ourselves
imperfectly, hesitatingly, and with compulsion the small, short, and
happy godsends and glorifications of human life as they shine here and
there: those moments and marvelous experiences when a great power has
voluntarily come to a halt before the boundless and infinite,--when a
super-abundance of refined delight has been enjoyed by a sudden checking
and petrifying, by standing firmly and planting oneself fixedly on still
trembling ground. PROPORTIONATENESS is strange to us, let us confess it
to ourselves; our itching is really the itching for the infinite, the
immeasurable. Like the rider on his forward panting horse, we let the
reins fall before the infinite, we modern men, we semi-barbarians--and
are only in OUR highest bliss when we--ARE IN MOST DANGER.

225. Whether it be hedonism, pessimism, utilitarianism, or eudaemonism,
all those modes of thinking which measure the worth of things according
to PLEASURE and PAIN, that is, according to accompanying circumstances
and secondary considerations, are plausible modes of thought and
naivetes, which every one conscious of CREATIVE powers and an artist's
conscience will look down upon with scorn, though not without sympathy.
Sympathy for you!--to be sure, that is not sympathy as you understand
it: it is not sympathy for social "distress," for "society" with its
sick and misfortuned, for the hereditarily vicious and defective who lie
on the ground around us; still less is it sympathy for the grumbling,
vexed, revolutionary slave-classes who strive after power--they call it
"freedom." OUR sympathy is a loftier and further-sighted sympathy:--we
see how MAN dwarfs himself, how YOU dwarf him! and there are moments
when we view YOUR sympathy with an indescribable anguish, when we resist
it,--when we regard your seriousness as more dangerous than any kind
of levity. You want, if possible--and there is not a more foolish "if
possible"--TO DO AWAY WITH SUFFERING; and we?--it really seems that WE
would rather have it increased and made worse than it has ever been!
Well-being, as you understand it--is certainly not a goal; it seems
to us an END; a condition which at once renders man ludicrous and
contemptible--and makes his destruction DESIRABLE! The discipline
of suffering, of GREAT suffering--know ye not that it is only THIS
discipline that has produced all the elevations of humanity hitherto?
The tension of soul in misfortune which communicates to it its energy,
its shuddering in view of rack and ruin, its inventiveness and bravery
in undergoing, enduring, interpreting, and exploiting misfortune, and
whatever depth, mystery, disguise, spirit, artifice, or greatness has
been bestowed upon the soul--has it not been bestowed through suffering,
through the discipline of great suffering? In man CREATURE and CREATOR
are united: in man there is not only matter, shred, excess, clay, mire,
folly, chaos; but there is also the creator, the sculptor, the hardness
of the hammer, the divinity of the spectator, and the seventh day--do
ye understand this contrast? And that YOUR sympathy for the "creature
in man" applies to that which has to be fashioned, bruised, forged,
stretched, roasted, annealed, refined--to that which must necessarily
SUFFER, and IS MEANT to suffer? And our sympathy--do ye not understand
what our REVERSE sympathy applies to, when it resists your sympathy as
the worst of all pampering and enervation?--So it is sympathy AGAINST
sympathy!--But to repeat it once more, there are higher problems than
the problems of pleasure and pain and sympathy; and all systems of
philosophy which deal only with these are naivetes.

226. WE IMMORALISTS.--This world with which WE are concerned, in which
we have to fear and love, this almost invisible, inaudible world of
delicate command and delicate obedience, a world of "almost" in every
respect, captious, insidious, sharp, and tender--yes, it is well
protected from clumsy spectators and familiar curiosity! We are
woven into a strong net and garment of duties, and CANNOT disengage
ourselves--precisely here, we are "men of duty," even we! Occasionally,
it is true, we dance in our "chains" and betwixt our "swords"; it
is none the less true that more often we gnash our teeth under the
circumstances, and are impatient at the secret hardship of our lot. But
do what we will, fools and appearances say of us: "These are men WITHOUT
duty,"--we have always fools and appearances against us!

227. Honesty, granting that it is the virtue of which we cannot rid
ourselves, we free spirits--well, we will labour at it with all our
perversity and love, and not tire of "perfecting" ourselves in OUR
virtue, which alone remains: may its glance some day overspread like
a gilded, blue, mocking twilight this aging civilization with its dull
gloomy seriousness! And if, nevertheless, our honesty should one day
grow weary, and sigh, and stretch its limbs, and find us too hard, and
would fain have it pleasanter, easier, and gentler, like an agreeable
vice, let us remain HARD, we latest Stoics, and let us send to its
help whatever devilry we have in us:--our disgust at the clumsy
and undefined, our "NITIMUR IN VETITUM," our love of adventure,
our sharpened and fastidious curiosity, our most subtle, disguised,
intellectual Will to Power and universal conquest, which rambles and
roves avidiously around all the realms of the future--let us go with all
our "devils" to the help of our "God"! It is probable that people will
misunderstand and mistake us on that account: what does it matter! They
will say: "Their 'honesty'--that is their devilry, and nothing else!"
What does it matter! And even if they were right--have not all Gods
hitherto been such sanctified, re-baptized devils? And after all, what
do we know of ourselves? And what the spirit that leads us wants TO BE
CALLED? (It is a question of names.) And how many spirits we harbour?
Our honesty, we free spirits--let us be careful lest it become our
vanity, our ornament and ostentation, our limitation, our stupidity!
Every virtue inclines to stupidity, every stupidity to virtue; "stupid
to the point of sanctity," they say in Russia,--let us be careful lest
out of pure honesty we eventually become saints and bores! Is not life
a hundred times too short for us--to bore ourselves? One would have to
believe in eternal life in order to...

228. I hope to be forgiven for discovering that all moral philosophy
hitherto has been tedious and has belonged to the soporific
appliances--and that "virtue," in my opinion, has been MORE injured
by the TEDIOUSNESS of its advocates than by anything else; at the same
time, however, I would not wish to overlook their general usefulness. It
is desirable that as few people as possible should reflect upon morals,
and consequently it is very desirable that morals should not some day
become interesting! But let us not be afraid! Things still remain today
as they have always been: I see no one in Europe who has (or DISCLOSES)
an idea of the fact that philosophizing concerning morals might be
conducted in a dangerous, captious, and ensnaring manner--that CALAMITY
might be involved therein. Observe, for example, the indefatigable,
inevitable English utilitarians: how ponderously and respectably they
stalk on, stalk along (a Homeric metaphor expresses it better) in the
footsteps of Bentham, just as he had already stalked in the footsteps of
the respectable Helvetius! (no, he was not a dangerous man, Helvetius,
CE SENATEUR POCOCURANTE, to use an expression of Galiani). No new
thought, nothing of the nature of a finer turning or better expression
of an old thought, not even a proper history of what has been previously
thought on the subject: an IMPOSSIBLE literature, taking it all in all,
unless one knows how to leaven it with some mischief. In effect, the
old English vice called CANT, which is MORAL TARTUFFISM, has insinuated
itself also into these moralists (whom one must certainly read with an
eye to their motives if one MUST read them), concealed this time under
the new form of the scientific spirit; moreover, there is not absent
from them a secret struggle with the pangs of conscience, from which a
race of former Puritans must naturally suffer, in all their scientific
tinkering with morals. (Is not a moralist the opposite of a Puritan?
That is to say, as a thinker who regards morality as questionable,
as worthy of interrogation, in short, as a problem? Is moralizing
not-immoral?) In the end, they all want English morality to be
recognized as authoritative, inasmuch as mankind, or the "general
utility," or "the happiness of the greatest number,"--no! the happiness
of ENGLAND, will be best served thereby. They would like, by all means,
to convince themselves that the striving after English happiness, I
mean after COMFORT and FASHION (and in the highest instance, a seat in
Parliament), is at the same time the true path of virtue; in fact, that
in so far as there has been virtue in the world hitherto, it has
just consisted in such striving. Not one of those ponderous,
conscience-stricken herding-animals (who undertake to advocate the
cause of egoism as conducive to the general welfare) wants to have
any knowledge or inkling of the facts that the "general welfare" is
no ideal, no goal, no notion that can be at all grasped, but is only a
nostrum,--that what is fair to one MAY NOT at all be fair to another,
that the requirement of one morality for all is really a detriment to
higher men, in short, that there is a DISTINCTION OF RANK between man
and man, and consequently between morality and morality. They are an
unassuming and fundamentally mediocre species of men, these utilitarian
Englishmen, and, as already remarked, in so far as they are tedious, one
cannot think highly enough of their utility. One ought even to ENCOURAGE
them, as has been partially attempted in the following rhymes:--

    Hail, ye worthies, barrow-wheeling,
    "Longer--better," aye revealing,

    Stiffer aye in head and knee;
    Unenraptured, never jesting,
    Mediocre everlasting,

    SANS GENIE ET SANS ESPRIT!


229. In these later ages, which may be proud of their humanity, there
still remains so much fear, so much SUPERSTITION of the fear, of the
"cruel wild beast," the mastering of which constitutes the very pride of
these humaner ages--that even obvious truths, as if by the agreement
of centuries, have long remained unuttered, because they have the
appearance of helping the finally slain wild beast back to life again.
I perhaps risk something when I allow such a truth to escape; let
others capture it again and give it so much "milk of pious sentiment"
[FOOTNOTE: An expression from Schiller's William Tell, Act IV, Scene
3.] to drink, that it will lie down quiet and forgotten, in its old
corner.--One ought to learn anew about cruelty, and open one's eyes;
one ought at last to learn impatience, in order that such immodest
gross errors--as, for instance, have been fostered by ancient and
modern philosophers with regard to tragedy--may no longer wander about
virtuously and boldly. Almost everything that we call "higher culture"
is based upon the spiritualising and intensifying of CRUELTY--this is
my thesis; the "wild beast" has not been slain at all, it lives, it
flourishes, it has only been--transfigured. That which constitutes the
painful delight of tragedy is cruelty; that which operates agreeably in
so-called tragic sympathy, and at the basis even of everything sublime,
up to the highest and most delicate thrills of metaphysics, obtains its
sweetness solely from the intermingled ingredient of cruelty. What the
Roman enjoys in the arena, the Christian in the ecstasies of the cross,
the Spaniard at the sight of the faggot and stake, or of the bull-fight,
the present-day Japanese who presses his way to the tragedy, the workman
of the Parisian suburbs who has a homesickness for bloody revolutions,
the Wagnerienne who, with unhinged will, "undergoes" the performance of
"Tristan and Isolde"--what all these enjoy, and strive with mysterious
ardour to drink in, is the philtre of the great Circe "cruelty." Here,
to be sure, we must put aside entirely the blundering psychology of
former times, which could only teach with regard to cruelty that
it originated at the sight of the suffering of OTHERS: there is an
abundant, super-abundant enjoyment even in one's own suffering, in
causing one's own suffering--and wherever man has allowed himself to be
persuaded to self-denial in the RELIGIOUS sense, or to self-mutilation,
as among the Phoenicians and ascetics, or in general, to
desensualisation, decarnalisation, and contrition, to Puritanical
repentance-spasms, to vivisection of conscience and to Pascal-like
SACRIFIZIA DELL' INTELLETO, he is secretly allured and impelled
forwards by his cruelty, by the dangerous thrill of cruelty TOWARDS
HIMSELF.--Finally, let us consider that even the seeker of knowledge
operates as an artist and glorifier of cruelty, in that he compels his
spirit to perceive AGAINST its own inclination, and often enough against
the wishes of his heart:--he forces it to say Nay, where he would like
to affirm, love, and adore; indeed, every instance of taking a thing
profoundly and fundamentally, is a violation, an intentional injuring
of the fundamental will of the spirit, which instinctively aims at
appearance and superficiality,--even in every desire for knowledge there
is a drop of cruelty.

230. Perhaps what I have said here about a "fundamental will of the
spirit" may not be understood without further details; I may be allowed
a word of explanation.--That imperious something which is popularly
called "the spirit," wishes to be master internally and externally,
and to feel itself master; it has the will of a multiplicity for a
simplicity, a binding, taming, imperious, and essentially ruling will.
Its requirements and capacities here, are the same as those assigned by
physiologists to everything that lives, grows, and multiplies. The power
of the spirit to appropriate foreign elements reveals itself in a strong
tendency to assimilate the new to the old, to simplify the manifold,
to overlook or repudiate the absolutely contradictory; just as it
arbitrarily re-underlines, makes prominent, and falsifies for itself
certain traits and lines in the foreign elements, in every portion of
the "outside world." Its object thereby is the incorporation of new
"experiences," the assortment of new things in the old arrangements--in
short, growth; or more properly, the FEELING of growth, the feeling of
increased power--is its object. This same will has at its service an
apparently opposed impulse of the spirit, a suddenly adopted preference
of ignorance, of arbitrary shutting out, a closing of windows, an inner
denial of this or that, a prohibition to approach, a sort of defensive
attitude against much that is knowable, a contentment with obscurity,
with the shutting-in horizon, an acceptance and approval of ignorance:
as that which is all necessary according to the degree of its
appropriating power, its "digestive power," to speak figuratively (and
in fact "the spirit" resembles a stomach more than anything else). Here
also belong an occasional propensity of the spirit to let itself be
deceived (perhaps with a waggish suspicion that it is NOT so and so,
but is only allowed to pass as such), a delight in uncertainty and
ambiguity, an exulting enjoyment of arbitrary, out-of-the-way narrowness
and mystery, of the too-near, of the foreground, of the magnified,
the diminished, the misshapen, the beautified--an enjoyment of the
arbitrariness of all these manifestations of power. Finally, in this
connection, there is the not unscrupulous readiness of the spirit to
deceive other spirits and dissemble before them--the constant pressing
and straining of a creating, shaping, changeable power: the spirit
enjoys therein its craftiness and its variety of disguises, it enjoys
also its feeling of security therein--it is precisely by its Protean
arts that it is best protected and concealed!--COUNTER TO this
propensity for appearance, for simplification, for a disguise, for a
cloak, in short, for an outside--for every outside is a cloak--there
operates the sublime tendency of the man of knowledge, which takes, and
INSISTS on taking things profoundly, variously, and thoroughly; as a
kind of cruelty of the intellectual conscience and taste, which every
courageous thinker will acknowledge in himself, provided, as it ought
to be, that he has sharpened and hardened his eye sufficiently long for
introspection, and is accustomed to severe discipline and even severe
words. He will say: "There is something cruel in the tendency of my
spirit": let the virtuous and amiable try to convince him that it is not
so! In fact, it would sound nicer, if, instead of our cruelty, perhaps
our "extravagant honesty" were talked about, whispered about, and
glorified--we free, VERY free spirits--and some day perhaps SUCH will
actually be our--posthumous glory! Meanwhile--for there is plenty of
time until then--we should be least inclined to deck ourselves out in
such florid and fringed moral verbiage; our whole former work has
just made us sick of this taste and its sprightly exuberance. They are
beautiful, glistening, jingling, festive words: honesty, love of truth,
love of wisdom, sacrifice for knowledge, heroism of the truthful--there
is something in them that makes one's heart swell with pride. But we
anchorites and marmots have long ago persuaded ourselves in all the
secrecy of an anchorite's conscience, that this worthy parade of
verbiage also belongs to the old false adornment, frippery, and
gold-dust of unconscious human vanity, and that even under such
flattering colour and repainting, the terrible original text HOMO NATURA
must again be recognized. In effect, to translate man back again into
nature; to master the many vain and visionary interpretations and
subordinate meanings which have hitherto been scratched and daubed over
the eternal original text, HOMO NATURA; to bring it about that man shall
henceforth stand before man as he now, hardened by the discipline
of science, stands before the OTHER forms of nature, with fearless
Oedipus-eyes, and stopped Ulysses-ears, deaf to the enticements of old
metaphysical bird-catchers, who have piped to him far too long: "Thou
art more! thou art higher! thou hast a different origin!"--this may be
a strange and foolish task, but that it is a TASK, who can deny! Why did
we choose it, this foolish task? Or, to put the question differently:
"Why knowledge at all?" Every one will ask us about this. And thus
pressed, we, who have asked ourselves the question a hundred times, have
not found and cannot find any better answer....

231. Learning alters us, it does what all nourishment does that does not
merely "conserve"--as the physiologist knows. But at the bottom of our
souls, quite "down below," there is certainly something unteachable,
a granite of spiritual fate, of predetermined decision and answer to
predetermined, chosen questions. In each cardinal problem there speaks
an unchangeable "I am this"; a thinker cannot learn anew about man and
woman, for instance, but can only learn fully--he can only follow to the
end what is "fixed" about them in himself. Occasionally we find certain
solutions of problems which make strong beliefs for us; perhaps they
are henceforth called "convictions." Later on--one sees in them only
footsteps to self-knowledge, guide-posts to the problem which we
ourselves ARE--or more correctly to the great stupidity which we embody,
our spiritual fate, the UNTEACHABLE in us, quite "down below."--In view
of this liberal compliment which I have just paid myself, permission
will perhaps be more readily allowed me to utter some truths about
"woman as she is," provided that it is known at the outset how literally
they are merely--MY truths.

232. Woman wishes to be independent, and therefore she begins to
enlighten men about "woman as she is"--THIS is one of the worst
developments of the general UGLIFYING of Europe. For what must these
clumsy attempts of feminine scientificality and self-exposure bring
to light! Woman has so much cause for shame; in woman there is so
much pedantry, superficiality, schoolmasterliness, petty presumption,
unbridledness, and indiscretion concealed--study only woman's behaviour
towards children!--which has really been best restrained and dominated
hitherto by the FEAR of man. Alas, if ever the "eternally tedious in
woman"--she has plenty of it!--is allowed to venture forth! if she
begins radically and on principle to unlearn her wisdom and art-of
charming, of playing, of frightening away sorrow, of alleviating and
taking easily; if she forgets her delicate aptitude for agreeable
desires! Female voices are already raised, which, by Saint Aristophanes!
make one afraid:--with medical explicitness it is stated in a
threatening manner what woman first and last REQUIRES from man. Is
it not in the very worst taste that woman thus sets herself up to be
scientific? Enlightenment hitherto has fortunately been men's affair,
men's gift--we remained therewith "among ourselves"; and in the end,
in view of all that women write about "woman," we may well have
considerable doubt as to whether woman really DESIRES enlightenment
about herself--and CAN desire it. If woman does not thereby seek a new
ORNAMENT for herself--I believe ornamentation belongs to the eternally
feminine?--why, then, she wishes to make herself feared: perhaps she
thereby wishes to get the mastery. But she does not want truth--what
does woman care for truth? From the very first, nothing is more foreign,
more repugnant, or more hostile to woman than truth--her great art is
falsehood, her chief concern is appearance and beauty. Let us confess
it, we men: we honour and love this very art and this very instinct in
woman: we who have the hard task, and for our recreation gladly seek the
company of beings under whose hands, glances, and delicate follies, our
seriousness, our gravity, and profundity appear almost like follies to
us. Finally, I ask the question: Did a woman herself ever acknowledge
profundity in a woman's mind, or justice in a woman's heart? And is it
not true that on the whole "woman" has hitherto been most despised by
woman herself, and not at all by us?--We men desire that woman should
not continue to compromise herself by enlightening us; just as it was
man's care and the consideration for woman, when the church decreed:
mulier taceat in ecclesia. It was to the benefit of woman when Napoleon
gave the too eloquent Madame de Stael to understand: mulier taceat in
politicis!--and in my opinion, he is a true friend of woman who calls
out to women today: mulier taceat de mulierel.

233. It betrays corruption of the instincts--apart from the fact that
it betrays bad taste--when a woman refers to Madame Roland, or Madame de
Stael, or Monsieur George Sand, as though something were proved thereby
in favour of "woman as she is." Among men, these are the three comical
women as they are--nothing more!--and just the best involuntary
counter-arguments against feminine emancipation and autonomy.

234. Stupidity in the kitchen; woman as cook; the terrible
thoughtlessness with which the feeding of the family and the master of
the house is managed! Woman does not understand what food means, and she
insists on being cook! If woman had been a thinking creature, she should
certainly, as cook for thousands of years, have discovered the most
important physiological facts, and should likewise have got possession
of the healing art! Through bad female cooks--through the entire lack
of reason in the kitchen--the development of mankind has been longest
retarded and most interfered with: even today matters are very little
better. A word to High School girls.

235. There are turns and casts of fancy, there are sentences, little
handfuls of words, in which a whole culture, a whole society suddenly
crystallises itself. Among these is the incidental remark of Madame de
Lambert to her son: "MON AMI, NE VOUS PERMETTEZ JAMAIS QUE DES FOLIES,
QUI VOUS FERONT GRAND PLAISIR"--the motherliest and wisest remark, by
the way, that was ever addressed to a son.

236. I have no doubt that every noble woman will oppose what Dante and
Goethe believed about woman--the former when he sang, "ELLA GUARDAVA
SUSO, ED IO IN LEI," and the latter when he interpreted it, "the
eternally feminine draws us ALOFT"; for THIS is just what she believes
of the eternally masculine.

237.

SEVEN APOPHTHEGMS FOR WOMEN

How the longest ennui flees, When a man comes to our knees!

Age, alas! and science staid, Furnish even weak virtue aid.

Sombre garb and silence meet: Dress for every dame--discreet.

Whom I thank when in my bliss? God!--and my good tailoress!

Young, a flower-decked cavern home; Old, a dragon thence doth roam.

Noble title, leg that's fine, Man as well: Oh, were HE mine!

Speech in brief and sense in mass--Slippery for the jenny-ass!

237A. Woman has hitherto been treated by men like birds, which, losing
their way, have come down among them from an elevation: as something
delicate, fragile, wild, strange, sweet, and animating--but as something
also which must be cooped up to prevent it flying away.

238. To be mistaken in the fundamental problem of "man and woman," to
deny here the profoundest antagonism and the necessity for an eternally
hostile tension, to dream here perhaps of equal rights, equal
training, equal claims and obligations: that is a TYPICAL sign of
shallow-mindedness; and a thinker who has proved himself shallow at
this dangerous spot--shallow in instinct!--may generally be regarded as
suspicious, nay more, as betrayed, as discovered; he will probably prove
too "short" for all fundamental questions of life, future as well as
present, and will be unable to descend into ANY of the depths. On the
other hand, a man who has depth of spirit as well as of desires, and
has also the depth of benevolence which is capable of severity and
harshness, and easily confounded with them, can only think of woman as
ORIENTALS do: he must conceive of her as a possession, as confinable
property, as a being predestined for service and accomplishing her
mission therein--he must take his stand in this matter upon the immense
rationality of Asia, upon the superiority of the instinct of Asia, as
the Greeks did formerly; those best heirs and scholars of Asia--who,
as is well known, with their INCREASING culture and amplitude of power,
from Homer to the time of Pericles, became gradually STRICTER towards
woman, in short, more Oriental. HOW necessary, HOW logical, even HOW
humanely desirable this was, let us consider for ourselves!

239. The weaker sex has in no previous age been treated with so
much respect by men as at present--this belongs to the tendency and
fundamental taste of democracy, in the same way as disrespectfulness to
old age--what wonder is it that abuse should be immediately made of
this respect? They want more, they learn to make claims, the tribute
of respect is at last felt to be well-nigh galling; rivalry for rights,
indeed actual strife itself, would be preferred: in a word, woman is
losing modesty. And let us immediately add that she is also losing
taste. She is unlearning to FEAR man: but the woman who "unlearns to
fear" sacrifices her most womanly instincts. That woman should venture
forward when the fear-inspiring quality in man--or more definitely,
the MAN in man--is no longer either desired or fully developed, is
reasonable enough and also intelligible enough; what is more difficult
to understand is that precisely thereby--woman deteriorates. This is
what is happening nowadays: let us not deceive ourselves about it!
Wherever the industrial spirit has triumphed over the military
and aristocratic spirit, woman strives for the economic and legal
independence of a clerk: "woman as clerkess" is inscribed on the portal
of the modern society which is in course of formation. While she
thus appropriates new rights, aspires to be "master," and inscribes
"progress" of woman on her flags and banners, the very opposite realises
itself with terrible obviousness: WOMAN RETROGRADES. Since the French
Revolution the influence of woman in Europe has DECLINED in proportion
as she has increased her rights and claims; and the "emancipation of
woman," insofar as it is desired and demanded by women themselves (and
not only by masculine shallow-pates), thus proves to be a remarkable
symptom of the increased weakening and deadening of the most womanly
instincts. There is STUPIDITY in this movement, an almost masculine
stupidity, of which a well-reared woman--who is always a sensible
woman--might be heartily ashamed. To lose the intuition as to the ground
upon which she can most surely achieve victory; to neglect exercise in
the use of her proper weapons; to let-herself-go before man, perhaps
even "to the book," where formerly she kept herself in control and in
refined, artful humility; to neutralize with her virtuous audacity man's
faith in a VEILED, fundamentally different ideal in woman, something
eternally, necessarily feminine; to emphatically and loquaciously
dissuade man from the idea that woman must be preserved, cared for,
protected, and indulged, like some delicate, strangely wild, and
often pleasant domestic animal; the clumsy and indignant collection of
everything of the nature of servitude and bondage which the position of
woman in the hitherto existing order of society has entailed and still
entails (as though slavery were a counter-argument, and not rather a
condition of every higher culture, of every elevation of culture):--what
does all this betoken, if not a disintegration of womanly instincts,
a defeminising? Certainly, there are enough of idiotic friends and
corrupters of woman among the learned asses of the masculine sex, who
advise woman to defeminize herself in this manner, and to imitate
all the stupidities from which "man" in Europe, European "manliness,"
suffers,--who would like to lower woman to "general culture," indeed
even to newspaper reading and meddling with politics. Here and there
they wish even to make women into free spirits and literary workers: as
though a woman without piety would not be something perfectly obnoxious
or ludicrous to a profound and godless man;--almost everywhere her
nerves are being ruined by the most morbid and dangerous kind of music
(our latest German music), and she is daily being made more hysterical
and more incapable of fulfilling her first and last function, that of
bearing robust children. They wish to "cultivate" her in general still
more, and intend, as they say, to make the "weaker sex" STRONG by
culture: as if history did not teach in the most emphatic manner that
the "cultivating" of mankind and his weakening--that is to say, the
weakening, dissipating, and languishing of his FORCE OF WILL--have
always kept pace with one another, and that the most powerful and
influential women in the world (and lastly, the mother of Napoleon)
had just to thank their force of will--and not their schoolmasters--for
their power and ascendancy over men. That which inspires respect
in woman, and often enough fear also, is her NATURE, which is more
"natural" than that of man, her genuine, carnivora-like, cunning
flexibility, her tiger-claws beneath the glove, her NAIVETE in egoism,
her untrainableness and innate wildness, the incomprehensibleness,
extent, and deviation of her desires and virtues. That which, in spite
of fear, excites one's sympathy for the dangerous and beautiful cat,
"woman," is that she seems more afflicted, more vulnerable, more
necessitous of love, and more condemned to disillusionment than any
other creature. Fear and sympathy it is with these feelings that man has
hitherto stood in the presence of woman, always with one foot already in
tragedy, which rends while it delights--What? And all that is now to
be at an end? And the DISENCHANTMENT of woman is in progress? The
tediousness of woman is slowly evolving? Oh Europe! Europe! We know
the horned animal which was always most attractive to thee, from which
danger is ever again threatening thee! Thy old fable might once more
become "history"--an immense stupidity might once again overmaster
thee and carry thee away! And no God concealed beneath it--no! only an
"idea," a "modern idea"!



CHAPTER VIII. PEOPLES AND COUNTRIES


240. I HEARD, once again for the first time, Richard Wagner's overture
to the Mastersinger: it is a piece of magnificent, gorgeous, heavy,
latter-day art, which has the pride to presuppose two centuries of music
as still living, in order that it may be understood:--it is an honour
to Germans that such a pride did not miscalculate! What flavours
and forces, what seasons and climes do we not find mingled in it! It
impresses us at one time as ancient, at another time as foreign, bitter,
and too modern, it is as arbitrary as it is pompously traditional, it
is not infrequently roguish, still oftener rough and coarse--it has fire
and courage, and at the same time the loose, dun-coloured skin of fruits
which ripen too late. It flows broad and full: and suddenly there is a
moment of inexplicable hesitation, like a gap that opens between cause
and effect, an oppression that makes us dream, almost a nightmare; but
already it broadens and widens anew, the old stream of delight--the most
manifold delight,--of old and new happiness; including ESPECIALLY
the joy of the artist in himself, which he refuses to conceal, his
astonished, happy cognizance of his mastery of the expedients here
employed, the new, newly acquired, imperfectly tested expedients of art
which he apparently betrays to us. All in all, however, no beauty, no
South, nothing of the delicate southern clearness of the sky, nothing
of grace, no dance, hardly a will to logic; a certain clumsiness even,
which is also emphasized, as though the artist wished to say to us: "It
is part of my intention"; a cumbersome drapery, something arbitrarily
barbaric and ceremonious, a flirring of learned and venerable conceits
and witticisms; something German in the best and worst sense of
the word, something in the German style, manifold, formless, and
inexhaustible; a certain German potency and super-plenitude of
soul, which is not afraid to hide itself under the RAFFINEMENTS of
decadence--which, perhaps, feels itself most at ease there; a real,
genuine token of the German soul, which is at the same time young and
aged, too ripe and yet still too rich in futurity. This kind of music
expresses best what I think of the Germans: they belong to the day
before yesterday and the day after tomorrow--THEY HAVE AS YET NO TODAY.

241. We "good Europeans," we also have hours when we allow ourselves a
warm-hearted patriotism, a plunge and relapse into old loves and narrow
views--I have just given an example of it--hours of national excitement,
of patriotic anguish, and all other sorts of old-fashioned floods of
sentiment. Duller spirits may perhaps only get done with what confines
its operations in us to hours and plays itself out in hours--in a
considerable time: some in half a year, others in half a lifetime,
according to the speed and strength with which they digest and "change
their material." Indeed, I could think of sluggish, hesitating races,
which even in our rapidly moving Europe, would require half a century
ere they could surmount such atavistic attacks of patriotism and
soil-attachment, and return once more to reason, that is to say, to
"good Europeanism." And while digressing on this possibility, I
happen to become an ear-witness of a conversation between two old
patriots--they were evidently both hard of hearing and consequently
spoke all the louder. "HE has as much, and knows as much, philosophy as
a peasant or a corps-student," said the one--"he is still innocent. But
what does that matter nowadays! It is the age of the masses: they lie on
their belly before everything that is massive. And so also in politicis.
A statesman who rears up for them a new Tower of Babel, some monstrosity
of empire and power, they call 'great'--what does it matter that we more
prudent and conservative ones do not meanwhile give up the old belief
that it is only the great thought that gives greatness to an action or
affair. Supposing a statesman were to bring his people into the position
of being obliged henceforth to practise 'high politics,' for which they
were by nature badly endowed and prepared, so that they would have
to sacrifice their old and reliable virtues, out of love to a new and
doubtful mediocrity;--supposing a statesman were to condemn his people
generally to 'practise politics,' when they have hitherto had something
better to do and think about, and when in the depths of their souls
they have been unable to free themselves from a prudent loathing of
the restlessness, emptiness, and noisy wranglings of the essentially
politics-practising nations;--supposing such a statesman were to
stimulate the slumbering passions and avidities of his people, were to
make a stigma out of their former diffidence and delight in aloofness,
an offence out of their exoticism and hidden permanency, were to
depreciate their most radical proclivities, subvert their consciences,
make their minds narrow, and their tastes 'national'--what! a statesman
who should do all this, which his people would have to do penance for
throughout their whole future, if they had a future, such a statesman
would be GREAT, would he?"--"Undoubtedly!" replied the other old patriot
vehemently, "otherwise he COULD NOT have done it! It was mad perhaps to
wish such a thing! But perhaps everything great has been just as mad
at its commencement!"--"Misuse of words!" cried his interlocutor,
contradictorily--"strong! strong! Strong and mad! NOT great!"--The old
men had obviously become heated as they thus shouted their "truths" in
each other's faces, but I, in my happiness and apartness, considered how
soon a stronger one may become master of the strong, and also that
there is a compensation for the intellectual superficialising of a
nation--namely, in the deepening of another.

242. Whether we call it "civilization," or "humanising," or "progress,"
which now distinguishes the European, whether we call it simply, without
praise or blame, by the political formula the DEMOCRATIC movement in
Europe--behind all the moral and political foregrounds pointed to by
such formulas, an immense PHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESS goes on, which is ever
extending the process of the assimilation of Europeans, their
increasing detachment from the conditions under which, climatically and
hereditarily, united races originate, their increasing independence of
every definite milieu, that for centuries would fain inscribe itself
with equal demands on soul and body,--that is to say, the slow emergence
of an essentially SUPER-NATIONAL and nomadic species of man, who
possesses, physiologically speaking, a maximum of the art and power
of adaptation as his typical distinction. This process of the EVOLVING
EUROPEAN, which can be retarded in its TEMPO by great relapses, but
will perhaps just gain and grow thereby in vehemence and depth--the
still-raging storm and stress of "national sentiment" pertains to it,
and also the anarchism which is appearing at present--this process
will probably arrive at results on which its naive propagators and
panegyrists, the apostles of "modern ideas," would least care to reckon.
The same new conditions under which on an average a levelling and
mediocrising of man will take place--a useful, industrious, variously
serviceable, and clever gregarious man--are in the highest degree
suitable to give rise to exceptional men of the most dangerous and
attractive qualities. For, while the capacity for adaptation, which is
every day trying changing conditions, and begins a new work with every
generation, almost with every decade, makes the POWERFULNESS of the type
impossible; while the collective impression of such future Europeans
will probably be that of numerous, talkative, weak-willed, and very
handy workmen who REQUIRE a master, a commander, as they require their
daily bread; while, therefore, the democratising of Europe will tend to
the production of a type prepared for SLAVERY in the most subtle
sense of the term: the STRONG man will necessarily in individual and
exceptional cases, become stronger and richer than he has perhaps ever
been before--owing to the unprejudicedness of his schooling, owing to
the immense variety of practice, art, and disguise. I meant to say
that the democratising of Europe is at the same time an involuntary
arrangement for the rearing of TYRANTS--taking the word in all its
meanings, even in its most spiritual sense.

243. I hear with pleasure that our sun is moving rapidly towards the
constellation Hercules: and I hope that the men on this earth will do
like the sun. And we foremost, we good Europeans!

244. There was a time when it was customary to call Germans "deep"
by way of distinction; but now that the most successful type of new
Germanism is covetous of quite other honours, and perhaps misses
"smartness" in all that has depth, it is almost opportune and patriotic
to doubt whether we did not formerly deceive ourselves with that
commendation: in short, whether German depth is not at bottom something
different and worse--and something from which, thank God, we are on the
point of successfully ridding ourselves. Let us try, then, to relearn
with regard to German depth; the only thing necessary for the purpose is
a little vivisection of the German soul.--The German soul is above all
manifold, varied in its source, aggregated and super-imposed, rather
than actually built: this is owing to its origin. A German who would
embolden himself to assert: "Two souls, alas, dwell in my breast," would
make a bad guess at the truth, or, more correctly, he would come far
short of the truth about the number of souls. As a people made up of
the most extraordinary mixing and mingling of races, perhaps even with a
preponderance of the pre-Aryan element as the "people of the centre" in
every sense of the term, the Germans are more intangible, more ample,
more contradictory, more unknown, more incalculable, more surprising,
and even more terrifying than other peoples are to themselves:--they
escape DEFINITION, and are thereby alone the despair of the French. It
IS characteristic of the Germans that the question: "What is German?"
never dies out among them. Kotzebue certainly knew his Germans well
enough: "We are known," they cried jubilantly to him--but Sand also
thought he knew them. Jean Paul knew what he was doing when he declared
himself incensed at Fichte's lying but patriotic flatteries and
exaggerations,--but it is probable that Goethe thought differently about
Germans from Jean Paul, even though he acknowledged him to be right with
regard to Fichte. It is a question what Goethe really thought about the
Germans?--But about many things around him he never spoke explicitly,
and all his life he knew how to keep an astute silence--probably he
had good reason for it. It is certain that it was not the "Wars of
Independence" that made him look up more joyfully, any more than it was
the French Revolution,--the event on account of which he RECONSTRUCTED
his "Faust," and indeed the whole problem of "man," was the appearance
of Napoleon. There are words of Goethe in which he condemns with
impatient severity, as from a foreign land, that which Germans take a
pride in, he once defined the famous German turn of mind as "Indulgence
towards its own and others' weaknesses." Was he wrong? it is
characteristic of Germans that one is seldom entirely wrong about them.
The German soul has passages and galleries in it, there are caves,
hiding-places, and dungeons therein, its disorder has much of the charm
of the mysterious, the German is well acquainted with the bypaths to
chaos. And as everything loves its symbol, so the German loves the
clouds and all that is obscure, evolving, crepuscular, damp, and
shrouded, it seems to him that everything uncertain, undeveloped,
self-displacing, and growing is "deep". The German himself does not
EXIST, he is BECOMING, he is "developing himself". "Development" is
therefore the essentially German discovery and hit in the great domain
of philosophical formulas,--a ruling idea, which, together with German
beer and German music, is labouring to Germanise all Europe. Foreigners
are astonished and attracted by the riddles which the conflicting nature
at the basis of the German soul propounds to them (riddles which
Hegel systematised and Richard Wagner has in the end set to music).
"Good-natured and spiteful"--such a juxtaposition, preposterous in the
case of every other people, is unfortunately only too often justified
in Germany one has only to live for a while among Swabians to know this!
The clumsiness of the German scholar and his social distastefulness
agree alarmingly well with his physical rope-dancing and nimble
boldness, of which all the Gods have learnt to be afraid. If any one
wishes to see the "German soul" demonstrated ad oculos, let him
only look at German taste, at German arts and manners what boorish
indifference to "taste"! How the noblest and the commonest stand there
in juxtaposition! How disorderly and how rich is the whole constitution
of this soul! The German DRAGS at his soul, he drags at everything he
experiences. He digests his events badly; he never gets "done"
with them; and German depth is often only a difficult, hesitating
"digestion." And just as all chronic invalids, all dyspeptics like what
is convenient, so the German loves "frankness" and "honesty"; it is
so CONVENIENT to be frank and honest!--This confidingness, this
complaisance, this showing-the-cards of German HONESTY, is probably the
most dangerous and most successful disguise which the German is up to
nowadays: it is his proper Mephistophelean art; with this he can "still
achieve much"! The German lets himself go, and thereby gazes with
faithful, blue, empty German eyes--and other countries immediately
confound him with his dressing-gown!--I meant to say that, let "German
depth" be what it will--among ourselves alone we perhaps take the
liberty to laugh at it--we shall do well to continue henceforth to
honour its appearance and good name, and not barter away too cheaply our
old reputation as a people of depth for Prussian "smartness," and
Berlin wit and sand. It is wise for a people to pose, and LET itself
be regarded, as profound, clumsy, good-natured, honest, and foolish: it
might even be--profound to do so! Finally, we should do honour to
our name--we are not called the "TIUSCHE VOLK" (deceptive people) for
nothing....

245. The "good old" time is past, it sang itself out in Mozart--how
happy are WE that his ROCOCO still speaks to us, that his "good
company," his tender enthusiasm, his childish delight in the Chinese and
its flourishes, his courtesy of heart, his longing for the elegant, the
amorous, the tripping, the tearful, and his belief in the South, can
still appeal to SOMETHING LEFT in us! Ah, some time or other it will be
over with it!--but who can doubt that it will be over still sooner with
the intelligence and taste for Beethoven! For he was only the last echo
of a break and transition in style, and NOT, like Mozart, the last echo
of a great European taste which had existed for centuries. Beethoven
is the intermediate event between an old mellow soul that is constantly
breaking down, and a future over-young soul that is always COMING;
there is spread over his music the twilight of eternal loss and eternal
extravagant hope,--the same light in which Europe was bathed when it
dreamed with Rousseau, when it danced round the Tree of Liberty of the
Revolution, and finally almost fell down in adoration before Napoleon.
But how rapidly does THIS very sentiment now pale, how difficult
nowadays is even the APPREHENSION of this sentiment, how strangely does
the language of Rousseau, Schiller, Shelley, and Byron sound to our ear,
in whom COLLECTIVELY the same fate of Europe was able to SPEAK, which
knew how to SING in Beethoven!--Whatever German music came afterwards,
belongs to Romanticism, that is to say, to a movement which,
historically considered, was still shorter, more fleeting, and more
superficial than that great interlude, the transition of Europe from
Rousseau to Napoleon, and to the rise of democracy. Weber--but what do
WE care nowadays for "Freischutz" and "Oberon"! Or Marschner's "Hans
Heiling" and "Vampyre"! Or even Wagner's "Tannhauser"! That is extinct,
although not yet forgotten music. This whole music of Romanticism,
besides, was not noble enough, was not musical enough, to maintain its
position anywhere but in the theatre and before the masses; from the
beginning it was second-rate music, which was little thought of by
genuine musicians. It was different with Felix Mendelssohn, that halcyon
master, who, on account of his lighter, purer, happier soul, quickly
acquired admiration, and was equally quickly forgotten: as the beautiful
EPISODE of German music. But with regard to Robert Schumann, who took
things seriously, and has been taken seriously from the first--he
was the last that founded a school,--do we not now regard it as a
satisfaction, a relief, a deliverance, that this very Romanticism
of Schumann's has been surmounted? Schumann, fleeing into the "Saxon
Switzerland" of his soul, with a half Werther-like, half Jean-Paul-like
nature (assuredly not like Beethoven! assuredly not like Byron!)--his
MANFRED music is a mistake and a misunderstanding to the extent of
injustice; Schumann, with his taste, which was fundamentally a PETTY
taste (that is to say, a dangerous propensity--doubly dangerous among
Germans--for quiet lyricism and intoxication of the feelings), going
constantly apart, timidly withdrawing and retiring, a noble weakling who
revelled in nothing but anonymous joy and sorrow, from the beginning
a sort of girl and NOLI ME TANGERE--this Schumann was already merely a
GERMAN event in music, and no longer a European event, as Beethoven had
been, as in a still greater degree Mozart had been; with Schumann German
music was threatened with its greatest danger, that of LOSING THE VOICE
FOR THE SOUL OF EUROPE and sinking into a merely national affair.

246. What a torture are books written in German to a reader who has a
THIRD ear! How indignantly he stands beside the slowly turning swamp
of sounds without tune and rhythms without dance, which Germans call
a "book"! And even the German who READS books! How lazily, how
reluctantly, how badly he reads! How many Germans know, and consider it
obligatory to know, that there is ART in every good sentence--art which
must be divined, if the sentence is to be understood! If there is a
misunderstanding about its TEMPO, for instance, the sentence itself
is misunderstood! That one must not be doubtful about the
rhythm-determining syllables, that one should feel the breaking of the
too-rigid symmetry as intentional and as a charm, that one should lend a
fine and patient ear to every STACCATO and every RUBATO, that one should
divine the sense in the sequence of the vowels and diphthongs, and how
delicately and richly they can be tinted and retinted in the order of
their arrangement--who among book-reading Germans is complaisant enough
to recognize such duties and requirements, and to listen to so much art
and intention in language? After all, one just "has no ear for it";
and so the most marked contrasts of style are not heard, and the most
delicate artistry is as it were SQUANDERED on the deaf.--These were my
thoughts when I noticed how clumsily and unintuitively two masters in
the art of prose-writing have been confounded: one, whose words drop
down hesitatingly and coldly, as from the roof of a damp cave--he counts
on their dull sound and echo; and another who manipulates his language
like a flexible sword, and from his arm down into his toes feels the
dangerous bliss of the quivering, over-sharp blade, which wishes to
bite, hiss, and cut.

247. How little the German style has to do with harmony and with the
ear, is shown by the fact that precisely our good musicians themselves
write badly. The German does not read aloud, he does not read for the
ear, but only with his eyes; he has put his ears away in the drawer for
the time. In antiquity when a man read--which was seldom enough--he read
something to himself, and in a loud voice; they were surprised when
any one read silently, and sought secretly the reason of it. In a
loud voice: that is to say, with all the swellings, inflections, and
variations of key and changes of TEMPO, in which the ancient PUBLIC
world took delight. The laws of the written style were then the same
as those of the spoken style; and these laws depended partly on the
surprising development and refined requirements of the ear and larynx;
partly on the strength, endurance, and power of the ancient lungs. In
the ancient sense, a period is above all a physiological whole, inasmuch
as it is comprised in one breath. Such periods as occur in Demosthenes
and Cicero, swelling twice and sinking twice, and all in one breath,
were pleasures to the men of ANTIQUITY, who knew by their own schooling
how to appreciate the virtue therein, the rareness and the difficulty
in the deliverance of such a period;--WE have really no right to the
BIG period, we modern men, who are short of breath in every sense! Those
ancients, indeed, were all of them dilettanti in speaking, consequently
connoisseurs, consequently critics--they thus brought their orators to
the highest pitch; in the same manner as in the last century, when all
Italian ladies and gentlemen knew how to sing, the virtuosoship of song
(and with it also the art of melody) reached its elevation. In Germany,
however (until quite recently when a kind of platform eloquence began
shyly and awkwardly enough to flutter its young wings), there was
properly speaking only one kind of public and APPROXIMATELY artistical
discourse--that delivered from the pulpit. The preacher was the only one
in Germany who knew the weight of a syllable or a word, in what manner a
sentence strikes, springs, rushes, flows, and comes to a close; he alone
had a conscience in his ears, often enough a bad conscience: for reasons
are not lacking why proficiency in oratory should be especially seldom
attained by a German, or almost always too late. The masterpiece of
German prose is therefore with good reason the masterpiece of its
greatest preacher: the BIBLE has hitherto been the best German
book. Compared with Luther's Bible, almost everything else is merely
"literature"--something which has not grown in Germany, and therefore
has not taken and does not take root in German hearts, as the Bible has
done.

248. There are two kinds of geniuses: one which above all engenders and
seeks to engender, and another which willingly lets itself be fructified
and brings forth. And similarly, among the gifted nations, there are
those on whom the woman's problem of pregnancy has devolved, and the
secret task of forming, maturing, and perfecting--the Greeks, for
instance, were a nation of this kind, and so are the French; and others
which have to fructify and become the cause of new modes of life--like
the Jews, the Romans, and, in all modesty be it asked: like the
Germans?--nations tortured and enraptured by unknown fevers and
irresistibly forced out of themselves, amorous and longing for
foreign races (for such as "let themselves be fructified"), and withal
imperious, like everything conscious of being full of generative force,
and consequently empowered "by the grace of God." These two kinds of
geniuses seek each other like man and woman; but they also misunderstand
each other--like man and woman.

249. Every nation has its own "Tartuffery," and calls that its
virtue.--One does not know--cannot know, the best that is in one.

250. What Europe owes to the Jews?--Many things, good and bad, and above
all one thing of the nature both of the best and the worst: the grand
style in morality, the fearfulness and majesty of infinite demands, of
infinite significations, the whole Romanticism and sublimity of moral
questionableness--and consequently just the most attractive, ensnaring,
and exquisite element in those iridescences and allurements to life,
in the aftersheen of which the sky of our European culture, its evening
sky, now glows--perhaps glows out. For this, we artists among the
spectators and philosophers, are--grateful to the Jews.

251. It must be taken into the bargain, if various clouds and
disturbances--in short, slight attacks of stupidity--pass over the
spirit of a people that suffers and WANTS to suffer from national
nervous fever and political ambition: for instance, among present-day
Germans there is alternately the anti-French folly, the anti-Semitic
folly, the anti-Polish folly, the Christian-romantic folly, the
Wagnerian folly, the Teutonic folly, the Prussian folly (just look at
those poor historians, the Sybels and Treitschkes, and their closely
bandaged heads), and whatever else these little obscurations of the
German spirit and conscience may be called. May it be forgiven me that
I, too, when on a short daring sojourn on very infected ground, did not
remain wholly exempt from the disease, but like every one else, began
to entertain thoughts about matters which did not concern me--the first
symptom of political infection. About the Jews, for instance, listen
to the following:--I have never yet met a German who was favourably
inclined to the Jews; and however decided the repudiation of actual
anti-Semitism may be on the part of all prudent and political men, this
prudence and policy is not perhaps directed against the nature of the
sentiment itself, but only against its dangerous excess, and especially
against the distasteful and infamous expression of this excess of
sentiment;--on this point we must not deceive ourselves. That Germany
has amply SUFFICIENT Jews, that the German stomach, the German blood,
has difficulty (and will long have difficulty) in disposing only of this
quantity of "Jew"--as the Italian, the Frenchman, and the Englishman
have done by means of a stronger digestion:--that is the unmistakable
declaration and language of a general instinct, to which one must listen
and according to which one must act. "Let no more Jews come in! And shut
the doors, especially towards the East (also towards Austria)!"--thus
commands the instinct of a people whose nature is still feeble and
uncertain, so that it could be easily wiped out, easily extinguished, by
a stronger race. The Jews, however, are beyond all doubt the strongest,
toughest, and purest race at present living in Europe, they know how
to succeed even under the worst conditions (in fact better than under
favourable ones), by means of virtues of some sort, which one would like
nowadays to label as vices--owing above all to a resolute faith which
does not need to be ashamed before "modern ideas", they alter only,
WHEN they do alter, in the same way that the Russian Empire makes
its conquest--as an empire that has plenty of time and is not of
yesterday--namely, according to the principle, "as slowly as possible"!
A thinker who has the future of Europe at heart, will, in all his
perspectives concerning the future, calculate upon the Jews, as he
will calculate upon the Russians, as above all the surest and likeliest
factors in the great play and battle of forces. That which is at present
called a "nation" in Europe, and is really rather a RES FACTA than NATA
(indeed, sometimes confusingly similar to a RES FICTA ET PICTA), is in
every case something evolving, young, easily displaced, and not yet
a race, much less such a race AERE PERENNUS, as the Jews are such
"nations" should most carefully avoid all hot-headed rivalry and
hostility! It is certain that the Jews, if they desired--or if they
were driven to it, as the anti-Semites seem to wish--COULD now have the
ascendancy, nay, literally the supremacy, over Europe, that they are NOT
working and planning for that end is equally certain. Meanwhile, they
rather wish and desire, even somewhat importunely, to be insorbed and
absorbed by Europe, they long to be finally settled, authorized, and
respected somewhere, and wish to put an end to the nomadic life, to the
"wandering Jew",--and one should certainly take account of this impulse
and tendency, and MAKE ADVANCES to it (it possibly betokens a mitigation
of the Jewish instincts) for which purpose it would perhaps be useful
and fair to banish the anti-Semitic bawlers out of the country. One
should make advances with all prudence, and with selection, pretty much
as the English nobility do It stands to reason that the more powerful
and strongly marked types of new Germanism could enter into relation
with the Jews with the least hesitation, for instance, the nobleman
officer from the Prussian border it would be interesting in many ways
to see whether the genius for money and patience (and especially some
intellect and intellectuality--sadly lacking in the place referred to)
could not in addition be annexed and trained to the hereditary art of
commanding and obeying--for both of which the country in question has
now a classic reputation But here it is expedient to break off my festal
discourse and my sprightly Teutonomania for I have already reached my
SERIOUS TOPIC, the "European problem," as I understand it, the rearing
of a new ruling caste for Europe.

252. They are not a philosophical race--the English: Bacon represents an
ATTACK on the philosophical spirit generally, Hobbes, Hume, and Locke,
an abasement, and a depreciation of the idea of a "philosopher" for more
than a century. It was AGAINST Hume that Kant uprose and raised himself;
it was Locke of whom Schelling RIGHTLY said, "JE MEPRISE LOCKE"; in the
struggle against the English mechanical stultification of the world,
Hegel and Schopenhauer (along with Goethe) were of one accord; the
two hostile brother-geniuses in philosophy, who pushed in different
directions towards the opposite poles of German thought, and thereby
wronged each other as only brothers will do.--What is lacking in
England, and has always been lacking, that half-actor and rhetorician
knew well enough, the absurd muddle-head, Carlyle, who sought to conceal
under passionate grimaces what he knew about himself: namely, what was
LACKING in Carlyle--real POWER of intellect, real DEPTH of intellectual
perception, in short, philosophy. It is characteristic of such an
unphilosophical race to hold on firmly to Christianity--they NEED its
discipline for "moralizing" and humanizing. The Englishman, more gloomy,
sensual, headstrong, and brutal than the German--is for that very
reason, as the baser of the two, also the most pious: he has all the
MORE NEED of Christianity. To finer nostrils, this English Christianity
itself has still a characteristic English taint of spleen and alcoholic
excess, for which, owing to good reasons, it is used as an antidote--the
finer poison to neutralize the coarser: a finer form of poisoning is
in fact a step in advance with coarse-mannered people, a step towards
spiritualization. The English coarseness and rustic demureness is still
most satisfactorily disguised by Christian pantomime, and by praying
and psalm-singing (or, more correctly, it is thereby explained and
differently expressed); and for the herd of drunkards and rakes who
formerly learned moral grunting under the influence of Methodism (and
more recently as the "Salvation Army"), a penitential fit may really be
the relatively highest manifestation of "humanity" to which they can
be elevated: so much may reasonably be admitted. That, however, which
offends even in the humanest Englishman is his lack of music, to speak
figuratively (and also literally): he has neither rhythm nor dance in
the movements of his soul and body; indeed, not even the desire for
rhythm and dance, for "music." Listen to him speaking; look at the most
beautiful Englishwoman WALKING--in no country on earth are there more
beautiful doves and swans; finally, listen to them singing! But I ask
too much...

253. There are truths which are best recognized by mediocre minds,
because they are best adapted for them, there are truths which only
possess charms and seductive power for mediocre spirits:--one is pushed
to this probably unpleasant conclusion, now that the influence of
respectable but mediocre Englishmen--I may mention Darwin, John
Stuart Mill, and Herbert Spencer--begins to gain the ascendancy in the
middle-class region of European taste. Indeed, who could doubt that it
is a useful thing for SUCH minds to have the ascendancy for a time? It
would be an error to consider the highly developed and independently
soaring minds as specially qualified for determining and collecting many
little common facts, and deducing conclusions from them; as exceptions,
they are rather from the first in no very favourable position towards
those who are "the rules." After all, they have more to do than merely
to perceive:--in effect, they have to BE something new, they have to
SIGNIFY something new, they have to REPRESENT new values! The gulf
between knowledge and capacity is perhaps greater, and also more
mysterious, than one thinks: the capable man in the grand style, the
creator, will possibly have to be an ignorant person;--while on the
other hand, for scientific discoveries like those of Darwin, a certain
narrowness, aridity, and industrious carefulness (in short, something
English) may not be unfavourable for arriving at them.--Finally, let
it not be forgotten that the English, with their profound mediocrity,
brought about once before a general depression of European intelligence.

What is called "modern ideas," or "the ideas of the eighteenth century,"
or "French ideas"--that, consequently, against which the GERMAN mind
rose up with profound disgust--is of English origin, there is no doubt
about it. The French were only the apes and actors of these ideas, their
best soldiers, and likewise, alas! their first and profoundest VICTIMS;
for owing to the diabolical Anglomania of "modern ideas," the AME
FRANCAIS has in the end become so thin and emaciated, that at present
one recalls its sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, its profound,
passionate strength, its inventive excellency, almost with disbelief.
One must, however, maintain this verdict of historical justice in
a determined manner, and defend it against present prejudices and
appearances: the European NOBLESSE--of sentiment, taste, and manners,
taking the word in every high sense--is the work and invention of
FRANCE; the European ignobleness, the plebeianism of modern ideas--is
ENGLAND'S work and invention.

254. Even at present France is still the seat of the most intellectual
and refined culture of Europe, it is still the high school of taste; but
one must know how to find this "France of taste." He who belongs to it
keeps himself well concealed:--they may be a small number in whom it
lives and is embodied, besides perhaps being men who do not stand upon
the strongest legs, in part fatalists, hypochondriacs, invalids, in
part persons over-indulged, over-refined, such as have the AMBITION to
conceal themselves.

They have all something in common: they keep their ears closed in
presence of the delirious folly and noisy spouting of the democratic
BOURGEOIS. In fact, a besotted and brutalized France at present sprawls
in the foreground--it recently celebrated a veritable orgy of bad taste,
and at the same time of self-admiration, at the funeral of Victor Hugo.
There is also something else common to them: a predilection to resist
intellectual Germanizing--and a still greater inability to do so!
In this France of intellect, which is also a France of pessimism,
Schopenhauer has perhaps become more at home, and more indigenous than
he has ever been in Germany; not to speak of Heinrich Heine, who has
long ago been re-incarnated in the more refined and fastidious lyrists
of Paris; or of Hegel, who at present, in the form of Taine--the FIRST
of living historians--exercises an almost tyrannical influence. As
regards Richard Wagner, however, the more French music learns to
adapt itself to the actual needs of the AME MODERNE, the more will it
"Wagnerite"; one can safely predict that beforehand,--it is already
taking place sufficiently! There are, however, three things which the
French can still boast of with pride as their heritage and possession,
and as indelible tokens of their ancient intellectual superiority
in Europe, in spite of all voluntary or involuntary Germanizing and
vulgarizing of taste. FIRSTLY, the capacity for artistic emotion, for
devotion to "form," for which the expression, L'ART POUR L'ART, along
with numerous others, has been invented:--such capacity has not been
lacking in France for three centuries; and owing to its reverence for
the "small number," it has again and again made a sort of chamber
music of literature possible, which is sought for in vain elsewhere
in Europe.--The SECOND thing whereby the French can lay claim to
a superiority over Europe is their ancient, many-sided, MORALISTIC
culture, owing to which one finds on an average, even in the petty
ROMANCIERS of the newspapers and chance BOULEVARDIERS DE PARIS, a
psychological sensitiveness and curiosity, of which, for example, one
has no conception (to say nothing of the thing itself!) in Germany.
The Germans lack a couple of centuries of the moralistic work requisite
thereto, which, as we have said, France has not grudged: those who call
the Germans "naive" on that account give them commendation for a defect.
(As the opposite of the German inexperience and innocence IN VOLUPTATE
PSYCHOLOGICA, which is not too remotely associated with the tediousness
of German intercourse,--and as the most successful expression of
genuine French curiosity and inventive talent in this domain of delicate
thrills, Henri Beyle may be noted; that remarkable anticipatory and
forerunning man, who, with a Napoleonic TEMPO, traversed HIS Europe,
in fact, several centuries of the European soul, as a surveyor and
discoverer thereof:--it has required two generations to OVERTAKE him
one way or other, to divine long afterwards some of the riddles
that perplexed and enraptured him--this strange Epicurean and man of
interrogation, the last great psychologist of France).--There is yet
a THIRD claim to superiority: in the French character there is a
successful half-way synthesis of the North and South, which makes them
comprehend many things, and enjoins upon them other things, which an
Englishman can never comprehend. Their temperament, turned alternately
to and from the South, in which from time to time the Provencal and
Ligurian blood froths over, preserves them from the dreadful, northern
grey-in-grey, from sunless conceptual-spectrism and from poverty of
blood--our GERMAN infirmity of taste, for the excessive prevalence
of which at the present moment, blood and iron, that is to say "high
politics," has with great resolution been prescribed (according to
a dangerous healing art, which bids me wait and wait, but not yet
hope).--There is also still in France a pre-understanding and
ready welcome for those rarer and rarely gratified men, who are too
comprehensive to find satisfaction in any kind of fatherlandism, and
know how to love the South when in the North and the North when in the
South--the born Midlanders, the "good Europeans." For them BIZET
has made music, this latest genius, who has seen a new beauty and
seduction,--who has discovered a piece of the SOUTH IN MUSIC.

255. I hold that many precautions should be taken against German music.
Suppose a person loves the South as I love it--as a great school
of recovery for the most spiritual and the most sensuous ills, as a
boundless solar profusion and effulgence which o'erspreads a sovereign
existence believing in itself--well, such a person will learn to be
somewhat on his guard against German music, because, in injuring his
taste anew, it will also injure his health anew. Such a Southerner, a
Southerner not by origin but by BELIEF, if he should dream of the future
of music, must also dream of it being freed from the influence of the
North; and must have in his ears the prelude to a deeper, mightier, and
perhaps more perverse and mysterious music, a super-German music, which
does not fade, pale, and die away, as all German music does, at the
sight of the blue, wanton sea and the Mediterranean clearness of sky--a
super-European music, which holds its own even in presence of the brown
sunsets of the desert, whose soul is akin to the palm-tree, and can be
at home and can roam with big, beautiful, lonely beasts of prey... I
could imagine a music of which the rarest charm would be that it knew
nothing more of good and evil; only that here and there perhaps some
sailor's home-sickness, some golden shadows and tender weaknesses might
sweep lightly over it; an art which, from the far distance, would see
the colours of a sinking and almost incomprehensible MORAL world fleeing
towards it, and would be hospitable enough and profound enough to
receive such belated fugitives.

256. Owing to the morbid estrangement which the nationality-craze has
induced and still induces among the nations of Europe, owing also to the
short-sighted and hasty-handed politicians, who with the help of this
craze, are at present in power, and do not suspect to what extent the
disintegrating policy they pursue must necessarily be only an interlude
policy--owing to all this and much else that is altogether unmentionable
at present, the most unmistakable signs that EUROPE WISHES TO BE ONE,
are now overlooked, or arbitrarily and falsely misinterpreted. With all
the more profound and large-minded men of this century, the real general
tendency of the mysterious labour of their souls was to prepare the way
for that new SYNTHESIS, and tentatively to anticipate the European of
the future; only in their simulations, or in their weaker moments, in
old age perhaps, did they belong to the "fatherlands"--they only rested
from themselves when they became "patriots." I think of such men as
Napoleon, Goethe, Beethoven, Stendhal, Heinrich Heine, Schopenhauer: it
must not be taken amiss if I also count Richard Wagner among them, about
whom one must not let oneself be deceived by his own misunderstandings
(geniuses like him have seldom the right to understand themselves),
still less, of course, by the unseemly noise with which he is now
resisted and opposed in France: the fact remains, nevertheless, that
Richard Wagner and the LATER FRENCH ROMANTICISM of the forties, are
most closely and intimately related to one another. They are akin,
fundamentally akin, in all the heights and depths of their requirements;
it is Europe, the ONE Europe, whose soul presses urgently and longingly,
outwards and upwards, in their multifarious and boisterous art--whither?
into a new light? towards a new sun? But who would attempt to express
accurately what all these masters of new modes of speech could not
express distinctly? It is certain that the same storm and stress
tormented them, that they SOUGHT in the same manner, these last great
seekers! All of them steeped in literature to their eyes and ears--the
first artists of universal literary culture--for the most part even
themselves writers, poets, intermediaries and blenders of the arts and
the senses (Wagner, as musician is reckoned among painters, as poet
among musicians, as artist generally among actors); all of them fanatics
for EXPRESSION "at any cost"--I specially mention Delacroix, the nearest
related to Wagner; all of them great discoverers in the realm of the
sublime, also of the loathsome and dreadful, still greater discoverers
in effect, in display, in the art of the show-shop; all of them talented
far beyond their genius, out and out VIRTUOSI, with mysterious accesses
to all that seduces, allures, constrains, and upsets; born enemies of
logic and of the straight line, hankering after the strange, the
exotic, the monstrous, the crooked, and the self-contradictory; as men,
Tantaluses of the will, plebeian parvenus, who knew themselves to be
incapable of a noble TEMPO or of a LENTO in life and action--think
of Balzac, for instance,--unrestrained workers, almost destroying
themselves by work; antinomians and rebels in manners, ambitious and
insatiable, without equilibrium and enjoyment; all of them finally
shattering and sinking down at the Christian cross (and with right
and reason, for who of them would have been sufficiently profound and
sufficiently original for an ANTI-CHRISTIAN philosophy?);--on the
whole, a boldly daring, splendidly overbearing, high-flying, and
aloft-up-dragging class of higher men, who had first to teach their
century--and it is the century of the MASSES--the conception "higher
man."... Let the German friends of Richard Wagner advise together as to
whether there is anything purely German in the Wagnerian art, or whether
its distinction does not consist precisely in coming from SUPER-GERMAN
sources and impulses: in which connection it may not be underrated
how indispensable Paris was to the development of his type, which the
strength of his instincts made him long to visit at the most
decisive time--and how the whole style of his proceedings, of his
self-apostolate, could only perfect itself in sight of the French
socialistic original. On a more subtle comparison it will perhaps be
found, to the honour of Richard Wagner's German nature, that he has
acted in everything with more strength, daring, severity, and elevation
than a nineteenth-century Frenchman could have done--owing to the
circumstance that we Germans are as yet nearer to barbarism than the
French;--perhaps even the most remarkable creation of Richard Wagner is
not only at present, but for ever inaccessible, incomprehensible, and
inimitable to the whole latter-day Latin race: the figure of Siegfried,
that VERY FREE man, who is probably far too free, too hard, too
cheerful, too healthy, too ANTI-CATHOLIC for the taste of old and mellow
civilized nations. He may even have been a sin against Romanticism, this
anti-Latin Siegfried: well, Wagner atoned amply for this sin in his old
sad days, when--anticipating a taste which has meanwhile passed into
politics--he began, with the religious vehemence peculiar to him, to
preach, at least, THE WAY TO ROME, if not to walk therein.--That
these last words may not be misunderstood, I will call to my aid a few
powerful rhymes, which will even betray to less delicate ears what I
mean--what I mean COUNTER TO the "last Wagner" and his Parsifal music:--

--Is this our mode?--From German heart came this vexed ululating? From
German body, this self-lacerating? Is ours this priestly hand-dilation,
This incense-fuming exaltation? Is ours this faltering, falling,
shambling, This quite uncertain ding-dong-dangling? This sly
nun-ogling, Ave-hour-bell ringing, This wholly false enraptured
heaven-o'erspringing?--Is this our mode?--Think well!--ye still wait for
admission--For what ye hear is ROME--ROME'S FAITH BY INTUITION!



CHAPTER IX. WHAT IS NOBLE?


257. EVERY elevation of the type "man," has hitherto been the work of an
aristocratic society and so it will always be--a society believing in
a long scale of gradations of rank and differences of worth among human
beings, and requiring slavery in some form or other. Without the PATHOS
OF DISTANCE, such as grows out of the incarnated difference of classes,
out of the constant out-looking and down-looking of the ruling caste on
subordinates and instruments, and out of their equally constant
practice of obeying and commanding, of keeping down and keeping at a
distance--that other more mysterious pathos could never have arisen, the
longing for an ever new widening of distance within the soul itself,
the formation of ever higher, rarer, further, more extended, more
comprehensive states, in short, just the elevation of the type "man,"
the continued "self-surmounting of man," to use a moral formula in
a supermoral sense. To be sure, one must not resign oneself to
any humanitarian illusions about the history of the origin of an
aristocratic society (that is to say, of the preliminary condition for
the elevation of the type "man"): the truth is hard. Let us acknowledge
unprejudicedly how every higher civilization hitherto has ORIGINATED!
Men with a still natural nature, barbarians in every terrible sense of
the word, men of prey, still in possession of unbroken strength of will
and desire for power, threw themselves upon weaker, more moral, more
peaceful races (perhaps trading or cattle-rearing communities), or upon
old mellow civilizations in which the final vital force was flickering
out in brilliant fireworks of wit and depravity. At the commencement,
the noble caste was always the barbarian caste: their superiority did
not consist first of all in their physical, but in their psychical
power--they were more COMPLETE men (which at every point also implies
the same as "more complete beasts").

258. Corruption--as the indication that anarchy threatens to break out
among the instincts, and that the foundation of the emotions, called
"life," is convulsed--is something radically different according to
the organization in which it manifests itself. When, for instance, an
aristocracy like that of France at the beginning of the Revolution,
flung away its privileges with sublime disgust and sacrificed itself
to an excess of its moral sentiments, it was corruption:--it was really
only the closing act of the corruption which had existed for centuries,
by virtue of which that aristocracy had abdicated step by step its
lordly prerogatives and lowered itself to a FUNCTION of royalty (in
the end even to its decoration and parade-dress). The essential thing,
however, in a good and healthy aristocracy is that it should not regard
itself as a function either of the kingship or the commonwealth, but
as the SIGNIFICANCE and highest justification thereof--that it should
therefore accept with a good conscience the sacrifice of a legion
of individuals, who, FOR ITS SAKE, must be suppressed and reduced to
imperfect men, to slaves and instruments. Its fundamental belief must
be precisely that society is NOT allowed to exist for its own sake, but
only as a foundation and scaffolding, by means of which a select class
of beings may be able to elevate themselves to their higher duties, and
in general to a higher EXISTENCE: like those sun-seeking climbing plants
in Java--they are called Sipo Matador,--which encircle an oak so
long and so often with their arms, until at last, high above it, but
supported by it, they can unfold their tops in the open light, and
exhibit their happiness.

259. To refrain mutually from injury, from violence, from exploitation,
and put one's will on a par with that of others: this may result in a
certain rough sense in good conduct among individuals when the necessary
conditions are given (namely, the actual similarity of the individuals
in amount of force and degree of worth, and their co-relation within one
organization). As soon, however, as one wished to take this principle
more generally, and if possible even as the FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE OF
SOCIETY, it would immediately disclose what it really is--namely, a Will
to the DENIAL of life, a principle of dissolution and decay. Here one
must think profoundly to the very basis and resist all sentimental
weakness: life itself is ESSENTIALLY appropriation, injury, conquest
of the strange and weak, suppression, severity, obtrusion of
peculiar forms, incorporation, and at the least, putting it mildest,
exploitation;--but why should one for ever use precisely these words
on which for ages a disparaging purpose has been stamped? Even the
organization within which, as was previously supposed, the
individuals treat each other as equal--it takes place in every
healthy aristocracy--must itself, if it be a living and not a dying
organization, do all that towards other bodies, which the individuals
within it refrain from doing to each other it will have to be the
incarnated Will to Power, it will endeavour to grow, to gain ground,
attract to itself and acquire ascendancy--not owing to any morality or
immorality, but because it LIVES, and because life IS precisely Will to
Power. On no point, however, is the ordinary consciousness of Europeans
more unwilling to be corrected than on this matter, people now rave
everywhere, even under the guise of science, about coming conditions of
society in which "the exploiting character" is to be absent--that sounds
to my ears as if they promised to invent a mode of life which should
refrain from all organic functions. "Exploitation" does not belong to a
depraved, or imperfect and primitive society it belongs to the nature of
the living being as a primary organic function, it is a consequence
of the intrinsic Will to Power, which is precisely the Will to
Life--Granting that as a theory this is a novelty--as a reality it is
the FUNDAMENTAL FACT of all history let us be so far honest towards
ourselves!

260. In a tour through the many finer and coarser moralities which have
hitherto prevailed or still prevail on the earth, I found certain traits
recurring regularly together, and connected with one another, until
finally two primary types revealed themselves to me, and a radical
distinction was brought to light. There is MASTER-MORALITY and
SLAVE-MORALITY,--I would at once add, however, that in all higher and
mixed civilizations, there are also attempts at the reconciliation of
the two moralities, but one finds still oftener the confusion and
mutual misunderstanding of them, indeed sometimes their close
juxtaposition--even in the same man, within one soul. The distinctions
of moral values have either originated in a ruling caste, pleasantly
conscious of being different from the ruled--or among the ruled class,
the slaves and dependents of all sorts. In the first case, when it is
the rulers who determine the conception "good," it is the exalted, proud
disposition which is regarded as the distinguishing feature, and that
which determines the order of rank. The noble type of man separates
from himself the beings in whom the opposite of this exalted, proud
disposition displays itself he despises them. Let it at once be noted
that in this first kind of morality the antithesis "good" and "bad"
means practically the same as "noble" and "despicable",--the antithesis
"good" and "EVIL" is of a different origin. The cowardly, the timid, the
insignificant, and those thinking merely of narrow utility are despised;
moreover, also, the distrustful, with their constrained glances, the
self-abasing, the dog-like kind of men who let themselves be abused,
the mendicant flatterers, and above all the liars:--it is a fundamental
belief of all aristocrats that the common people are untruthful. "We
truthful ones"--the nobility in ancient Greece called themselves. It is
obvious that everywhere the designations of moral value were at first
applied to MEN; and were only derivatively and at a later period applied
to ACTIONS; it is a gross mistake, therefore, when historians of morals
start with questions like, "Why have sympathetic actions been praised?"
The noble type of man regards HIMSELF as a determiner of values; he
does not require to be approved of; he passes the judgment: "What is
injurious to me is injurious in itself;" he knows that it is he himself
only who confers honour on things; he is a CREATOR OF VALUES. He
honours whatever he recognizes in himself: such morality equals
self-glorification. In the foreground there is the feeling of plenitude,
of power, which seeks to overflow, the happiness of high tension, the
consciousness of a wealth which would fain give and bestow:--the noble
man also helps the unfortunate, but not--or scarcely--out of pity, but
rather from an impulse generated by the super-abundance of power. The
noble man honours in himself the powerful one, him also who has power
over himself, who knows how to speak and how to keep silence, who
takes pleasure in subjecting himself to severity and hardness, and has
reverence for all that is severe and hard. "Wotan placed a hard heart in
my breast," says an old Scandinavian Saga: it is thus rightly expressed
from the soul of a proud Viking. Such a type of man is even proud of not
being made for sympathy; the hero of the Saga therefore adds warningly:
"He who has not a hard heart when young, will never have one." The noble
and brave who think thus are the furthest removed from the morality
which sees precisely in sympathy, or in acting for the good of others,
or in DESINTERESSEMENT, the characteristic of the moral; faith
in oneself, pride in oneself, a radical enmity and irony towards
"selflessness," belong as definitely to noble morality, as do a careless
scorn and precaution in presence of sympathy and the "warm heart."--It
is the powerful who KNOW how to honour, it is their art, their domain
for invention. The profound reverence for age and for tradition--all law
rests on this double reverence,--the belief and prejudice in favour of
ancestors and unfavourable to newcomers, is typical in the morality of
the powerful; and if, reversely, men of "modern ideas" believe almost
instinctively in "progress" and the "future," and are more and more
lacking in respect for old age, the ignoble origin of these "ideas" has
complacently betrayed itself thereby. A morality of the ruling class,
however, is more especially foreign and irritating to present-day taste
in the sternness of its principle that one has duties only to one's
equals; that one may act towards beings of a lower rank, towards all
that is foreign, just as seems good to one, or "as the heart desires,"
and in any case "beyond good and evil": it is here that sympathy and
similar sentiments can have a place. The ability and obligation to
exercise prolonged gratitude and prolonged revenge--both only within the
circle of equals,--artfulness in retaliation, RAFFINEMENT of the idea
in friendship, a certain necessity to have enemies (as outlets for the
emotions of envy, quarrelsomeness, arrogance--in fact, in order to be
a good FRIEND): all these are typical characteristics of the noble
morality, which, as has been pointed out, is not the morality of "modern
ideas," and is therefore at present difficult to realize, and also to
unearth and disclose.--It is otherwise with the second type of morality,
SLAVE-MORALITY. Supposing that the abused, the oppressed, the suffering,
the unemancipated, the weary, and those uncertain of themselves should
moralize, what will be the common element in their moral estimates?
Probably a pessimistic suspicion with regard to the entire situation of
man will find expression, perhaps a condemnation of man, together with
his situation. The slave has an unfavourable eye for the virtues of the
powerful; he has a skepticism and distrust, a REFINEMENT of distrust of
everything "good" that is there honoured--he would fain persuade himself
that the very happiness there is not genuine. On the other hand, THOSE
qualities which serve to alleviate the existence of sufferers are
brought into prominence and flooded with light; it is here that
sympathy, the kind, helping hand, the warm heart, patience, diligence,
humility, and friendliness attain to honour; for here these are the most
useful qualities, and almost the only means of supporting the burden of
existence. Slave-morality is essentially the morality of utility.
Here is the seat of the origin of the famous antithesis "good" and
"evil":--power and dangerousness are assumed to reside in the evil,
a certain dreadfulness, subtlety, and strength, which do not admit of
being despised. According to slave-morality, therefore, the "evil" man
arouses fear; according to master-morality, it is precisely the "good"
man who arouses fear and seeks to arouse it, while the bad man is
regarded as the despicable being. The contrast attains its maximum when,
in accordance with the logical consequences of slave-morality, a shade
of depreciation--it may be slight and well-intentioned--at last attaches
itself to the "good" man of this morality; because, according to the
servile mode of thought, the good man must in any case be the SAFE
man: he is good-natured, easily deceived, perhaps a little stupid, un
bonhomme. Everywhere that slave-morality gains the ascendancy, language
shows a tendency to approximate the significations of the words "good"
and "stupid."--A last fundamental difference: the desire for FREEDOM,
the instinct for happiness and the refinements of the feeling of liberty
belong as necessarily to slave-morals and morality, as artifice and
enthusiasm in reverence and devotion are the regular symptoms of an
aristocratic mode of thinking and estimating.--Hence we can understand
without further detail why love AS A PASSION--it is our European
specialty--must absolutely be of noble origin; as is well known, its
invention is due to the Provencal poet-cavaliers, those brilliant,
ingenious men of the "gai saber," to whom Europe owes so much, and
almost owes itself.

261. Vanity is one of the things which are perhaps most difficult for
a noble man to understand: he will be tempted to deny it, where another
kind of man thinks he sees it self-evidently. The problem for him is
to represent to his mind beings who seek to arouse a good opinion of
themselves which they themselves do not possess--and consequently also
do not "deserve,"--and who yet BELIEVE in this good opinion
afterwards. This seems to him on the one hand such bad taste and so
self-disrespectful, and on the other hand so grotesquely unreasonable,
that he would like to consider vanity an exception, and is doubtful
about it in most cases when it is spoken of. He will say, for
instance: "I may be mistaken about my value, and on the other hand
may nevertheless demand that my value should be acknowledged by others
precisely as I rate it:--that, however, is not vanity (but self-conceit,
or, in most cases, that which is called 'humility,' and also
'modesty')." Or he will even say: "For many reasons I can delight in
the good opinion of others, perhaps because I love and honour them,
and rejoice in all their joys, perhaps also because their good opinion
endorses and strengthens my belief in my own good opinion, perhaps
because the good opinion of others, even in cases where I do not share
it, is useful to me, or gives promise of usefulness:--all this, however,
is not vanity." The man of noble character must first bring it home
forcibly to his mind, especially with the aid of history, that, from
time immemorial, in all social strata in any way dependent, the ordinary
man WAS only that which he PASSED FOR:--not being at all accustomed to
fix values, he did not assign even to himself any other value than that
which his master assigned to him (it is the peculiar RIGHT OF MASTERS to
create values). It may be looked upon as the result of an extraordinary
atavism, that the ordinary man, even at present, is still always WAITING
for an opinion about himself, and then instinctively submitting himself
to it; yet by no means only to a "good" opinion, but also to a bad
and unjust one (think, for instance, of the greater part of the
self-appreciations and self-depreciations which believing women learn
from their confessors, and which in general the believing Christian
learns from his Church). In fact, conformably to the slow rise of the
democratic social order (and its cause, the blending of the blood
of masters and slaves), the originally noble and rare impulse of
the masters to assign a value to themselves and to "think well" of
themselves, will now be more and more encouraged and extended; but
it has at all times an older, ampler, and more radically ingrained
propensity opposed to it--and in the phenomenon of "vanity" this older
propensity overmasters the younger. The vain person rejoices over EVERY
good opinion which he hears about himself (quite apart from the point
of view of its usefulness, and equally regardless of its truth or
falsehood), just as he suffers from every bad opinion: for he subjects
himself to both, he feels himself subjected to both, by that oldest
instinct of subjection which breaks forth in him.--It is "the slave"
in the vain man's blood, the remains of the slave's craftiness--and how
much of the "slave" is still left in woman, for instance!--which
seeks to SEDUCE to good opinions of itself; it is the slave, too, who
immediately afterwards falls prostrate himself before these opinions, as
though he had not called them forth.--And to repeat it again: vanity is
an atavism.

262. A SPECIES originates, and a type becomes established and strong in
the long struggle with essentially constant UNFAVOURABLE conditions. On
the other hand, it is known by the experience of breeders that species
which receive super-abundant nourishment, and in general a surplus of
protection and care, immediately tend in the most marked way to develop
variations, and are fertile in prodigies and monstrosities (also in
monstrous vices). Now look at an aristocratic commonwealth, say
an ancient Greek polis, or Venice, as a voluntary or involuntary
contrivance for the purpose of REARING human beings; there are there men
beside one another, thrown upon their own resources, who want to make
their species prevail, chiefly because they MUST prevail, or else
run the terrible danger of being exterminated. The favour, the
super-abundance, the protection are there lacking under which variations
are fostered; the species needs itself as species, as something which,
precisely by virtue of its hardness, its uniformity, and simplicity of
structure, can in general prevail and make itself permanent in
constant struggle with its neighbours, or with rebellious or
rebellion-threatening vassals. The most varied experience teaches it
what are the qualities to which it principally owes the fact that
it still exists, in spite of all Gods and men, and has hitherto been
victorious: these qualities it calls virtues, and these virtues alone
it develops to maturity. It does so with severity, indeed it desires
severity; every aristocratic morality is intolerant in the education
of youth, in the control of women, in the marriage customs, in the
relations of old and young, in the penal laws (which have an eye only
for the degenerating): it counts intolerance itself among the virtues,
under the name of "justice." A type with few, but very marked features,
a species of severe, warlike, wisely silent, reserved, and reticent
men (and as such, with the most delicate sensibility for the charm and
nuances of society) is thus established, unaffected by the vicissitudes
of generations; the constant struggle with uniform UNFAVOURABLE
conditions is, as already remarked, the cause of a type becoming
stable and hard. Finally, however, a happy state of things results, the
enormous tension is relaxed; there are perhaps no more enemies among the
neighbouring peoples, and the means of life, even of the enjoyment
of life, are present in superabundance. With one stroke the bond and
constraint of the old discipline severs: it is no longer regarded as
necessary, as a condition of existence--if it would continue, it can
only do so as a form of LUXURY, as an archaizing TASTE. Variations,
whether they be deviations (into the higher, finer, and rarer), or
deteriorations and monstrosities, appear suddenly on the scene in the
greatest exuberance and splendour; the individual dares to be individual
and detach himself. At this turning-point of history there manifest
themselves, side by side, and often mixed and entangled together, a
magnificent, manifold, virgin-forest-like up-growth and up-striving, a
kind of TROPICAL TEMPO in the rivalry of growth, and an extraordinary
decay and self-destruction, owing to the savagely opposing and seemingly
exploding egoisms, which strive with one another "for sun and light,"
and can no longer assign any limit, restraint, or forbearance for
themselves by means of the hitherto existing morality. It was this
morality itself which piled up the strength so enormously, which bent
the bow in so threatening a manner:--it is now "out of date," it is
getting "out of date." The dangerous and disquieting point has been
reached when the greater, more manifold, more comprehensive life IS
LIVED BEYOND the old morality; the "individual" stands out, and is
obliged to have recourse to his own law-giving, his own arts and
artifices for self-preservation, self-elevation, and self-deliverance.
Nothing but new "Whys," nothing but new "Hows," no common formulas any
longer, misunderstanding and disregard in league with each other, decay,
deterioration, and the loftiest desires frightfully entangled, the
genius of the race overflowing from all the cornucopias of good and bad,
a portentous simultaneousness of Spring and Autumn, full of new charms
and mysteries peculiar to the fresh, still inexhausted, still unwearied
corruption. Danger is again present, the mother of morality, great
danger; this time shifted into the individual, into the neighbour and
friend, into the street, into their own child, into their own heart,
into all the most personal and secret recesses of their desires and
volitions. What will the moral philosophers who appear at this time have
to preach? They discover, these sharp onlookers and loafers, that the
end is quickly approaching, that everything around them decays and
produces decay, that nothing will endure until the day after tomorrow,
except one species of man, the incurably MEDIOCRE. The mediocre alone
have a prospect of continuing and propagating themselves--they will
be the men of the future, the sole survivors; "be like them! become
mediocre!" is now the only morality which has still a significance,
which still obtains a hearing.--But it is difficult to preach this
morality of mediocrity! it can never avow what it is and what it
desires! it has to talk of moderation and dignity and duty and brotherly
love--it will have difficulty IN CONCEALING ITS IRONY!

263. There is an INSTINCT FOR RANK, which more than anything else is
already the sign of a HIGH rank; there is a DELIGHT in the NUANCES
of reverence which leads one to infer noble origin and habits. The
refinement, goodness, and loftiness of a soul are put to a perilous test
when something passes by that is of the highest rank, but is not
yet protected by the awe of authority from obtrusive touches and
incivilities: something that goes its way like a living touchstone,
undistinguished, undiscovered, and tentative, perhaps voluntarily veiled
and disguised. He whose task and practice it is to investigate souls,
will avail himself of many varieties of this very art to determine the
ultimate value of a soul, the unalterable, innate order of rank to which
it belongs: he will test it by its INSTINCT FOR REVERENCE. DIFFERENCE
ENGENDRE HAINE: the vulgarity of many a nature spurts up suddenly like
dirty water, when any holy vessel, any jewel from closed shrines, any
book bearing the marks of great destiny, is brought before it; while
on the other hand, there is an involuntary silence, a hesitation of the
eye, a cessation of all gestures, by which it is indicated that a soul
FEELS the nearness of what is worthiest of respect. The way in which, on
the whole, the reverence for the BIBLE has hitherto been maintained
in Europe, is perhaps the best example of discipline and refinement of
manners which Europe owes to Christianity: books of such profoundness
and supreme significance require for their protection an external
tyranny of authority, in order to acquire the PERIOD of thousands of
years which is necessary to exhaust and unriddle them. Much has been
achieved when the sentiment has been at last instilled into the masses
(the shallow-pates and the boobies of every kind) that they are not
allowed to touch everything, that there are holy experiences before
which they must take off their shoes and keep away the unclean hand--it
is almost their highest advance towards humanity. On the contrary, in
the so-called cultured classes, the believers in "modern ideas," nothing
is perhaps so repulsive as their lack of shame, the easy insolence of
eye and hand with which they touch, taste, and finger everything; and it
is possible that even yet there is more RELATIVE nobility of taste, and
more tact for reverence among the people, among the lower classes of
the people, especially among peasants, than among the newspaper-reading
DEMIMONDE of intellect, the cultured class.

264. It cannot be effaced from a man's soul what his ancestors have
preferably and most constantly done: whether they were perhaps diligent
economizers attached to a desk and a cash-box, modest and citizen-like
in their desires, modest also in their virtues; or whether they were
accustomed to commanding from morning till night, fond of rude pleasures
and probably of still ruder duties and responsibilities; or whether,
finally, at one time or another, they have sacrificed old privileges of
birth and possession, in order to live wholly for their faith--for their
"God,"--as men of an inexorable and sensitive conscience, which blushes
at every compromise. It is quite impossible for a man NOT to have
the qualities and predilections of his parents and ancestors in his
constitution, whatever appearances may suggest to the contrary. This is
the problem of race. Granted that one knows something of the parents,
it is admissible to draw a conclusion about the child: any kind
of offensive incontinence, any kind of sordid envy, or of clumsy
self-vaunting--the three things which together have constituted the
genuine plebeian type in all times--such must pass over to the child, as
surely as bad blood; and with the help of the best education and culture
one will only succeed in DECEIVING with regard to such heredity.--And
what else does education and culture try to do nowadays! In our very
democratic, or rather, very plebeian age, "education" and "culture" MUST
be essentially the art of deceiving--deceiving with regard to origin,
with regard to the inherited plebeianism in body and soul. An educator
who nowadays preached truthfulness above everything else, and called out
constantly to his pupils: "Be true! Be natural! Show yourselves as you
are!"--even such a virtuous and sincere ass would learn in a short time
to have recourse to the FURCA of Horace, NATURAM EXPELLERE: with what
results? "Plebeianism" USQUE RECURRET. [FOOTNOTE: Horace's "Epistles,"
I. x. 24.]

265. At the risk of displeasing innocent ears, I submit that egoism
belongs to the essence of a noble soul, I mean the unalterable belief
that to a being such as "we," other beings must naturally be in
subjection, and have to sacrifice themselves. The noble soul accepts the
fact of his egoism without question, and also without consciousness of
harshness, constraint, or arbitrariness therein, but rather as something
that may have its basis in the primary law of things:--if he sought a
designation for it he would say: "It is justice itself." He acknowledges
under certain circumstances, which made him hesitate at first, that
there are other equally privileged ones; as soon as he has settled this
question of rank, he moves among those equals and equally privileged
ones with the same assurance, as regards modesty and delicate respect,
which he enjoys in intercourse with himself--in accordance with an
innate heavenly mechanism which all the stars understand. It is an
ADDITIONAL instance of his egoism, this artfulness and self-limitation
in intercourse with his equals--every star is a similar egoist; he
honours HIMSELF in them, and in the rights which he concedes to them, he
has no doubt that the exchange of honours and rights, as the ESSENCE of
all intercourse, belongs also to the natural condition of things. The
noble soul gives as he takes, prompted by the passionate and sensitive
instinct of requital, which is at the root of his nature. The notion of
"favour" has, INTER PARES, neither significance nor good repute; there
may be a sublime way of letting gifts as it were light upon one from
above, and of drinking them thirstily like dew-drops; but for those
arts and displays the noble soul has no aptitude. His egoism hinders him
here: in general, he looks "aloft" unwillingly--he looks either FORWARD,
horizontally and deliberately, or downwards--HE KNOWS THAT HE IS ON A
HEIGHT.

266. "One can only truly esteem him who does not LOOK OUT FOR
himself."--Goethe to Rath Schlosser.

267. The Chinese have a proverb which mothers even teach their children:
"SIAO-SIN" ("MAKE THY HEART SMALL"). This is the essentially fundamental
tendency in latter-day civilizations. I have no doubt that an ancient
Greek, also, would first of all remark the self-dwarfing in us Europeans
of today--in this respect alone we should immediately be "distasteful"
to him.

268. What, after all, is ignobleness?--Words are vocal symbols for
ideas; ideas, however, are more or less definite mental symbols
for frequently returning and concurring sensations, for groups of
sensations. It is not sufficient to use the same words in order to
understand one another: we must also employ the same words for the same
kind of internal experiences, we must in the end have experiences IN
COMMON. On this account the people of one nation understand one another
better than those belonging to different nations, even when they use
the same language; or rather, when people have lived long together under
similar conditions (of climate, soil, danger, requirement, toil) there
ORIGINATES therefrom an entity that "understands itself"--namely, a
nation. In all souls a like number of frequently recurring experiences
have gained the upper hand over those occurring more rarely: about
these matters people understand one another rapidly and always more
rapidly--the history of language is the history of a process of
abbreviation; on the basis of this quick comprehension people always
unite closer and closer. The greater the danger, the greater is the
need of agreeing quickly and readily about what is necessary; not to
misunderstand one another in danger--that is what cannot at all be
dispensed with in intercourse. Also in all loves and friendships one has
the experience that nothing of the kind continues when the discovery
has been made that in using the same words, one of the two parties has
feelings, thoughts, intuitions, wishes, or fears different from those of
the other. (The fear of the "eternal misunderstanding": that is the good
genius which so often keeps persons of different sexes from too
hasty attachments, to which sense and heart prompt them--and NOT some
Schopenhauerian "genius of the species"!) Whichever groups of sensations
within a soul awaken most readily, begin to speak, and give the word of
command--these decide as to the general order of rank of its values, and
determine ultimately its list of desirable things. A man's estimates of
value betray something of the STRUCTURE of his soul, and wherein it
sees its conditions of life, its intrinsic needs. Supposing now that
necessity has from all time drawn together only such men as could
express similar requirements and similar experiences by similar symbols,
it results on the whole that the easy COMMUNICABILITY of need,
which implies ultimately the undergoing only of average and COMMON
experiences, must have been the most potent of all the forces which
have hitherto operated upon mankind. The more similar, the more ordinary
people, have always had and are still having the advantage; the more
select, more refined, more unique, and difficultly comprehensible, are
liable to stand alone; they succumb to accidents in their isolation, and
seldom propagate themselves. One must appeal to immense opposing forces,
in order to thwart this natural, all-too-natural PROGRESSUS IN SIMILE,
the evolution of man to the similar, the ordinary, the average, the
gregarious--to the IGNOBLE--!

269. The more a psychologist--a born, an unavoidable psychologist
and soul-diviner--turns his attention to the more select cases and
individuals, the greater is his danger of being suffocated by sympathy:
he NEEDS sternness and cheerfulness more than any other man. For
the corruption, the ruination of higher men, of the more unusually
constituted souls, is in fact, the rule: it is dreadful to have such a
rule always before one's eyes. The manifold torment of the psychologist
who has discovered this ruination, who discovers once, and then
discovers ALMOST repeatedly throughout all history, this universal
inner "desperateness" of higher men, this eternal "too late!" in every
sense--may perhaps one day be the cause of his turning with
bitterness against his own lot, and of his making an attempt at
self-destruction--of his "going to ruin" himself. One may perceive
in almost every psychologist a tell-tale inclination for delightful
intercourse with commonplace and well-ordered men; the fact is thereby
disclosed that he always requires healing, that he needs a sort
of flight and forgetfulness, away from what his insight and
incisiveness--from what his "business"--has laid upon his conscience.
The fear of his memory is peculiar to him. He is easily silenced by the
judgment of others; he hears with unmoved countenance how people honour,
admire, love, and glorify, where he has PERCEIVED--or he even conceals
his silence by expressly assenting to some plausible opinion. Perhaps
the paradox of his situation becomes so dreadful that, precisely
where he has learnt GREAT SYMPATHY, together with great CONTEMPT, the
multitude, the educated, and the visionaries, have on their part learnt
great reverence--reverence for "great men" and marvelous animals, for
the sake of whom one blesses and honours the fatherland, the earth, the
dignity of mankind, and one's own self, to whom one points the young,
and in view of whom one educates them. And who knows but in all great
instances hitherto just the same happened: that the multitude worshipped
a God, and that the "God" was only a poor sacrificial animal! SUCCESS
has always been the greatest liar--and the "work" itself is a success;
the great statesman, the conqueror, the discoverer, are disguised in
their creations until they are unrecognizable; the "work" of the artist,
of the philosopher, only invents him who has created it, is REPUTED
to have created it; the "great men," as they are reverenced, are poor
little fictions composed afterwards; in the world of historical values
spurious coinage PREVAILS. Those great poets, for example, such as
Byron, Musset, Poe, Leopardi, Kleist, Gogol (I do not venture to mention
much greater names, but I have them in my mind), as they now appear, and
were perhaps obliged to be: men of the moment, enthusiastic, sensuous,
and childish, light-minded and impulsive in their trust and distrust;
with souls in which usually some flaw has to be concealed; often taking
revenge with their works for an internal defilement, often seeking
forgetfulness in their soaring from a too true memory, often lost in
the mud and almost in love with it, until they become like the
Will-o'-the-Wisps around the swamps, and PRETEND TO BE stars--the people
then call them idealists,--often struggling with protracted disgust,
with an ever-reappearing phantom of disbelief, which makes them cold,
and obliges them to languish for GLORIA and devour "faith as it is"
out of the hands of intoxicated adulators:--what a TORMENT these great
artists are and the so-called higher men in general, to him who has once
found them out! It is thus conceivable that it is just from woman--who
is clairvoyant in the world of suffering, and also unfortunately eager
to help and save to an extent far beyond her powers--that THEY have
learnt so readily those outbreaks of boundless devoted SYMPATHY, which
the multitude, above all the reverent multitude, do not understand,
and overwhelm with prying and self-gratifying interpretations. This
sympathizing invariably deceives itself as to its power; woman would
like to believe that love can do EVERYTHING--it is the SUPERSTITION
peculiar to her. Alas, he who knows the heart finds out how poor,
helpless, pretentious, and blundering even the best and deepest love
is--he finds that it rather DESTROYS than saves!--It is possible that
under the holy fable and travesty of the life of Jesus there is hidden
one of the most painful cases of the martyrdom of KNOWLEDGE ABOUT LOVE:
the martyrdom of the most innocent and most craving heart, that
never had enough of any human love, that DEMANDED love, that demanded
inexorably and frantically to be loved and nothing else, with terrible
outbursts against those who refused him their love; the story of a poor
soul insatiated and insatiable in love, that had to invent hell to send
thither those who WOULD NOT love him--and that at last, enlightened
about human love, had to invent a God who is entire love, entire
CAPACITY for love--who takes pity on human love, because it is so
paltry, so ignorant! He who has such sentiments, he who has such
KNOWLEDGE about love--SEEKS for death!--But why should one deal with
such painful matters? Provided, of course, that one is not obliged to do
so.

270. The intellectual haughtiness and loathing of every man who has
suffered deeply--it almost determines the order of rank HOW deeply men
can suffer--the chilling certainty, with which he is thoroughly imbued
and coloured, that by virtue of his suffering he KNOWS MORE than the
shrewdest and wisest can ever know, that he has been familiar with,
and "at home" in, many distant, dreadful worlds of which "YOU know
nothing"!--this silent intellectual haughtiness of the sufferer, this
pride of the elect of knowledge, of the "initiated," of the almost
sacrificed, finds all forms of disguise necessary to protect itself from
contact with officious and sympathizing hands, and in general from all
that is not its equal in suffering. Profound suffering makes noble:
it separates.--One of the most refined forms of disguise is Epicurism,
along with a certain ostentatious boldness of taste, which takes
suffering lightly, and puts itself on the defensive against all that
is sorrowful and profound. They are "gay men" who make use of gaiety,
because they are misunderstood on account of it--they WISH to be
misunderstood. There are "scientific minds" who make use of science,
because it gives a gay appearance, and because scientificness leads to
the conclusion that a person is superficial--they WISH to mislead to a
false conclusion. There are free insolent minds which would fain conceal
and deny that they are broken, proud, incurable hearts (the cynicism of
Hamlet--the case of Galiani); and occasionally folly itself is the mask
of an unfortunate OVER-ASSURED knowledge.--From which it follows that it
is the part of a more refined humanity to have reverence "for the mask,"
and not to make use of psychology and curiosity in the wrong place.

271. That which separates two men most profoundly is a different sense
and grade of purity. What does it matter about all their honesty and
reciprocal usefulness, what does it matter about all their mutual
good-will: the fact still remains--they "cannot smell each other!" The
highest instinct for purity places him who is affected with it in the
most extraordinary and dangerous isolation, as a saint: for it is just
holiness--the highest spiritualization of the instinct in question. Any
kind of cognizance of an indescribable excess in the joy of the bath,
any kind of ardour or thirst which perpetually impels the soul out
of night into the morning, and out of gloom, out of "affliction" into
clearness, brightness, depth, and refinement:--just as much as such a
tendency DISTINGUISHES--it is a noble tendency--it also SEPARATES.--The
pity of the saint is pity for the FILTH of the human, all-too-human.
And there are grades and heights where pity itself is regarded by him as
impurity, as filth.

272. Signs of nobility: never to think of lowering our duties to the
rank of duties for everybody; to be unwilling to renounce or to share
our responsibilities; to count our prerogatives, and the exercise of
them, among our DUTIES.

273. A man who strives after great things, looks upon every one whom
he encounters on his way either as a means of advance, or a delay and
hindrance--or as a temporary resting-place. His peculiar lofty BOUNTY
to his fellow-men is only possible when he attains his elevation and
dominates. Impatience, and the consciousness of being always condemned
to comedy up to that time--for even strife is a comedy, and conceals the
end, as every means does--spoil all intercourse for him; this kind of
man is acquainted with solitude, and what is most poisonous in it.

274. THE PROBLEM OF THOSE WHO WAIT.--Happy chances are necessary, and
many incalculable elements, in order that a higher man in whom the
solution of a problem is dormant, may yet take action, or "break forth,"
as one might say--at the right moment. On an average it DOES NOT happen;
and in all corners of the earth there are waiting ones sitting who
hardly know to what extent they are waiting, and still less that they
wait in vain. Occasionally, too, the waking call comes too late--the
chance which gives "permission" to take action--when their best youth,
and strength for action have been used up in sitting still; and how many
a one, just as he "sprang up," has found with horror that his limbs are
benumbed and his spirits are now too heavy! "It is too late," he has
said to himself--and has become self-distrustful and henceforth for ever
useless.--In the domain of genius, may not the "Raphael without
hands" (taking the expression in its widest sense) perhaps not be the
exception, but the rule?--Perhaps genius is by no means so rare: but
rather the five hundred HANDS which it requires in order to tyrannize
over the [GREEK INSERTED HERE], "the right time"--in order to take
chance by the forelock!

275. He who does not WISH to see the height of a man, looks all the
more sharply at what is low in him, and in the foreground--and thereby
betrays himself.

276. In all kinds of injury and loss the lower and coarser soul is
better off than the nobler soul: the dangers of the latter must be
greater, the probability that it will come to grief and perish is in
fact immense, considering the multiplicity of the conditions of its
existence.--In a lizard a finger grows again which has been lost; not so
in man.--

277. It is too bad! Always the old story! When a man has finished
building his house, he finds that he has learnt unawares something
which he OUGHT absolutely to have known before he--began to build. The
eternal, fatal "Too late!" The melancholia of everything COMPLETED--!

278.--Wanderer, who art thou? I see thee follow thy path without scorn,
without love, with unfathomable eyes, wet and sad as a plummet which has
returned to the light insatiated out of every depth--what did it seek
down there?--with a bosom that never sighs, with lips that conceal their
loathing, with a hand which only slowly grasps: who art thou? what
hast thou done? Rest thee here: this place has hospitality for every
one--refresh thyself! And whoever thou art, what is it that now pleases
thee? What will serve to refresh thee? Only name it, whatever I have
I offer thee! "To refresh me? To refresh me? Oh, thou prying one,
what sayest thou! But give me, I pray thee---" What? what? Speak out!
"Another mask! A second mask!"

279. Men of profound sadness betray themselves when they are happy: they
have a mode of seizing upon happiness as though they would choke and
strangle it, out of jealousy--ah, they know only too well that it will
flee from them!

280. "Bad! Bad! What? Does he not--go back?" Yes! But you misunderstand
him when you complain about it. He goes back like every one who is about
to make a great spring.

281.--"Will people believe it of me? But I insist that they believe it
of me: I have always thought very unsatisfactorily of myself and about
myself, only in very rare cases, only compulsorily, always without
delight in 'the subject,' ready to digress from 'myself,' and always
without faith in the result, owing to an unconquerable distrust of the
POSSIBILITY of self-knowledge, which has led me so far as to feel a
CONTRADICTIO IN ADJECTO even in the idea of 'direct knowledge' which
theorists allow themselves:--this matter of fact is almost the most
certain thing I know about myself. There must be a sort of repugnance
in me to BELIEVE anything definite about myself.--Is there perhaps
some enigma therein? Probably; but fortunately nothing for my own
teeth.--Perhaps it betrays the species to which I belong?--but not to
myself, as is sufficiently agreeable to me."

282.--"But what has happened to you?"--"I do not know," he said,
hesitatingly; "perhaps the Harpies have flown over my table."--It
sometimes happens nowadays that a gentle, sober, retiring man becomes
suddenly mad, breaks the plates, upsets the table, shrieks, raves,
and shocks everybody--and finally withdraws, ashamed, and raging at
himself--whither? for what purpose? To famish apart? To suffocate with
his memories?--To him who has the desires of a lofty and dainty soul,
and only seldom finds his table laid and his food prepared, the danger
will always be great--nowadays, however, it is extraordinarily so.
Thrown into the midst of a noisy and plebeian age, with which he does
not like to eat out of the same dish, he may readily perish of hunger
and thirst--or, should he nevertheless finally "fall to," of sudden
nausea.--We have probably all sat at tables to which we did not belong;
and precisely the most spiritual of us, who are most difficult to
nourish, know the dangerous DYSPEPSIA which originates from a sudden
insight and disillusionment about our food and our messmates--the
AFTER-DINNER NAUSEA.

283. If one wishes to praise at all, it is a delicate and at the
same time a noble self-control, to praise only where one DOES NOT
agree--otherwise in fact one would praise oneself, which is contrary
to good taste:--a self-control, to be sure, which offers excellent
opportunity and provocation to constant MISUNDERSTANDING. To be able to
allow oneself this veritable luxury of taste and morality, one must
not live among intellectual imbeciles, but rather among men whose
misunderstandings and mistakes amuse by their refinement--or one will
have to pay dearly for it!--"He praises me, THEREFORE he acknowledges me
to be right"--this asinine method of inference spoils half of the life
of us recluses, for it brings the asses into our neighbourhood and
friendship.

284. To live in a vast and proud tranquility; always beyond... To have,
or not to have, one's emotions, one's For and Against, according to
choice; to lower oneself to them for hours; to SEAT oneself on them as
upon horses, and often as upon asses:--for one must know how to make
use of their stupidity as well as of their fire. To conserve one's
three hundred foregrounds; also one's black spectacles: for there are
circumstances when nobody must look into our eyes, still less into our
"motives." And to choose for company that roguish and cheerful vice,
politeness. And to remain master of one's four virtues, courage,
insight, sympathy, and solitude. For solitude is a virtue with us, as
a sublime bent and bias to purity, which divines that in the contact of
man and man--"in society"--it must be unavoidably impure. All society
makes one somehow, somewhere, or sometime--"commonplace."

285. The greatest events and thoughts--the greatest thoughts, however,
are the greatest events--are longest in being comprehended: the
generations which are contemporary with them do not EXPERIENCE such
events--they live past them. Something happens there as in the realm of
stars. The light of the furthest stars is longest in reaching man; and
before it has arrived man DENIES--that there are stars there. "How
many centuries does a mind require to be understood?"--that is also a
standard, one also makes a gradation of rank and an etiquette therewith,
such as is necessary for mind and for star.

286. "Here is the prospect free, the mind exalted." [FOOTNOTE: Goethe's
"Faust," Part II, Act V. The words of Dr. Marianus.]--But there is a
reverse kind of man, who is also upon a height, and has also a free
prospect--but looks DOWNWARDS.

287. What is noble? What does the word "noble" still mean for us
nowadays? How does the noble man betray himself, how is he recognized
under this heavy overcast sky of the commencing plebeianism, by which
everything is rendered opaque and leaden?--It is not his actions which
establish his claim--actions are always ambiguous, always inscrutable;
neither is it his "works." One finds nowadays among artists and scholars
plenty of those who betray by their works that a profound longing for
nobleness impels them; but this very NEED of nobleness is radically
different from the needs of the noble soul itself, and is in fact the
eloquent and dangerous sign of the lack thereof. It is not the works,
but the BELIEF which is here decisive and determines the order of
rank--to employ once more an old religious formula with a new and deeper
meaning--it is some fundamental certainty which a noble soul has about
itself, something which is not to be sought, is not to be found, and
perhaps, also, is not to be lost.--THE NOBLE SOUL HAS REVERENCE FOR
ITSELF.--

288. There are men who are unavoidably intellectual, let them turn
and twist themselves as they will, and hold their hands before their
treacherous eyes--as though the hand were not a betrayer; it always
comes out at last that they have something which they hide--namely,
intellect. One of the subtlest means of deceiving, at least as long as
possible, and of successfully representing oneself to be stupider
than one really is--which in everyday life is often as desirable as
an umbrella,--is called ENTHUSIASM, including what belongs to it, for
instance, virtue. For as Galiani said, who was obliged to know it: VERTU
EST ENTHOUSIASME.

289. In the writings of a recluse one always hears something of the echo
of the wilderness, something of the murmuring tones and timid vigilance
of solitude; in his strongest words, even in his cry itself, there
sounds a new and more dangerous kind of silence, of concealment. He who
has sat day and night, from year's end to year's end, alone with his
soul in familiar discord and discourse, he who has become a cave-bear,
or a treasure-seeker, or a treasure-guardian and dragon in his cave--it
may be a labyrinth, but can also be a gold-mine--his ideas themselves
eventually acquire a twilight-colour of their own, and an odour, as much
of the depth as of the mould, something uncommunicative and repulsive,
which blows chilly upon every passer-by. The recluse does not believe
that a philosopher--supposing that a philosopher has always in the first
place been a recluse--ever expressed his actual and ultimate opinions in
books: are not books written precisely to hide what is in us?--indeed,
he will doubt whether a philosopher CAN have "ultimate and actual"
opinions at all; whether behind every cave in him there is not, and must
necessarily be, a still deeper cave: an ampler, stranger, richer
world beyond the surface, an abyss behind every bottom, beneath every
"foundation." Every philosophy is a foreground philosophy--this is a
recluse's verdict: "There is something arbitrary in the fact that the
PHILOSOPHER came to a stand here, took a retrospect, and looked around;
that he HERE laid his spade aside and did not dig any deeper--there
is also something suspicious in it." Every philosophy also CONCEALS a
philosophy; every opinion is also a LURKING-PLACE, every word is also a
MASK.

290. Every deep thinker is more afraid of being understood than of being
misunderstood. The latter perhaps wounds his vanity; but the former
wounds his heart, his sympathy, which always says: "Ah, why would you
also have as hard a time of it as I have?"

291. Man, a COMPLEX, mendacious, artful, and inscrutable animal, uncanny
to the other animals by his artifice and sagacity, rather than by his
strength, has invented the good conscience in order finally to enjoy his
soul as something SIMPLE; and the whole of morality is a long, audacious
falsification, by virtue of which generally enjoyment at the sight of
the soul becomes possible. From this point of view there is perhaps much
more in the conception of "art" than is generally believed.

292. A philosopher: that is a man who constantly experiences, sees,
hears, suspects, hopes, and dreams extraordinary things; who is struck
by his own thoughts as if they came from the outside, from above and
below, as a species of events and lightning-flashes PECULIAR TO HIM; who
is perhaps himself a storm pregnant with new lightnings; a portentous
man, around whom there is always rumbling and mumbling and gaping and
something uncanny going on. A philosopher: alas, a being who often
runs away from himself, is often afraid of himself--but whose curiosity
always makes him "come to himself" again.

293. A man who says: "I like that, I take it for my own, and mean to
guard and protect it from every one"; a man who can conduct a case,
carry out a resolution, remain true to an opinion, keep hold of a woman,
punish and overthrow insolence; a man who has his indignation and his
sword, and to whom the weak, the suffering, the oppressed, and even the
animals willingly submit and naturally belong; in short, a man who is a
MASTER by nature--when such a man has sympathy, well! THAT sympathy has
value! But of what account is the sympathy of those who suffer! Or of
those even who preach sympathy! There is nowadays, throughout almost the
whole of Europe, a sickly irritability and sensitiveness towards pain,
and also a repulsive irrestrainableness in complaining, an effeminizing,
which, with the aid of religion and philosophical nonsense, seeks
to deck itself out as something superior--there is a regular cult of
suffering. The UNMANLINESS of that which is called "sympathy" by such
groups of visionaries, is always, I believe, the first thing that
strikes the eye.--One must resolutely and radically taboo this latest
form of bad taste; and finally I wish people to put the good amulet,
"GAI SABER" ("gay science," in ordinary language), on heart and neck, as
a protection against it.

294. THE OLYMPIAN VICE.--Despite the philosopher who, as a genuine
Englishman, tried to bring laughter into bad repute in all thinking
minds--"Laughing is a bad infirmity of human nature, which every
thinking mind will strive to overcome" (Hobbes),--I would even
allow myself to rank philosophers according to the quality of their
laughing--up to those who are capable of GOLDEN laughter. And supposing
that Gods also philosophize, which I am strongly inclined to believe,
owing to many reasons--I have no doubt that they also know how to laugh
thereby in an overman-like and new fashion--and at the expense of all
serious things! Gods are fond of ridicule: it seems that they cannot
refrain from laughter even in holy matters.

295. The genius of the heart, as that great mysterious one possesses
it, the tempter-god and born rat-catcher of consciences, whose voice can
descend into the nether-world of every soul, who neither speaks a word
nor casts a glance in which there may not be some motive or touch
of allurement, to whose perfection it pertains that he knows how to
appear,--not as he is, but in a guise which acts as an ADDITIONAL
constraint on his followers to press ever closer to him, to follow him
more cordially and thoroughly;--the genius of the heart, which imposes
silence and attention on everything loud and self-conceited, which
smoothes rough souls and makes them taste a new longing--to lie placid
as a mirror, that the deep heavens may be reflected in them;--the genius
of the heart, which teaches the clumsy and too hasty hand to hesitate,
and to grasp more delicately; which scents the hidden and forgotten
treasure, the drop of goodness and sweet spirituality under thick dark
ice, and is a divining-rod for every grain of gold, long buried and
imprisoned in mud and sand; the genius of the heart, from contact with
which every one goes away richer; not favoured or surprised, not as
though gratified and oppressed by the good things of others; but richer
in himself, newer than before, broken up, blown upon, and sounded by a
thawing wind; more uncertain, perhaps, more delicate, more fragile, more
bruised, but full of hopes which as yet lack names, full of a new will
and current, full of a new ill-will and counter-current... but what am I
doing, my friends? Of whom am I talking to you? Have I forgotten myself
so far that I have not even told you his name? Unless it be that you
have already divined of your own accord who this questionable God
and spirit is, that wishes to be PRAISED in such a manner? For, as it
happens to every one who from childhood onward has always been on his
legs, and in foreign lands, I have also encountered on my path many
strange and dangerous spirits; above all, however, and again and again,
the one of whom I have just spoken: in fact, no less a personage than
the God DIONYSUS, the great equivocator and tempter, to whom, as you
know, I once offered in all secrecy and reverence my first-fruits--the
last, as it seems to me, who has offered a SACRIFICE to him, for I
have found no one who could understand what I was then doing. In
the meantime, however, I have learned much, far too much, about the
philosophy of this God, and, as I said, from mouth to mouth--I, the last
disciple and initiate of the God Dionysus: and perhaps I might at last
begin to give you, my friends, as far as I am allowed, a little taste of
this philosophy? In a hushed voice, as is but seemly: for it has to do
with much that is secret, new, strange, wonderful, and uncanny. The
very fact that Dionysus is a philosopher, and that therefore Gods also
philosophize, seems to me a novelty which is not unensnaring, and might
perhaps arouse suspicion precisely among philosophers;--among you, my
friends, there is less to be said against it, except that it comes too
late and not at the right time; for, as it has been disclosed to me, you
are loth nowadays to believe in God and gods. It may happen, too, that
in the frankness of my story I must go further than is agreeable to the
strict usages of your ears? Certainly the God in question went further,
very much further, in such dialogues, and was always many paces ahead of
me... Indeed, if it were allowed, I should have to give him, according
to human usage, fine ceremonious tides of lustre and merit, I should
have to extol his courage as investigator and discoverer, his fearless
honesty, truthfulness, and love of wisdom. But such a God does not know
what to do with all that respectable trumpery and pomp. "Keep that," he
would say, "for thyself and those like thee, and whoever else require
it! I--have no reason to cover my nakedness!" One suspects that this
kind of divinity and philosopher perhaps lacks shame?--He once said:
"Under certain circumstances I love mankind"--and referred thereby to
Ariadne, who was present; "in my opinion man is an agreeable, brave,
inventive animal, that has not his equal upon earth, he makes his way
even through all labyrinths. I like man, and often think how I can
still further advance him, and make him stronger, more evil, and more
profound."--"Stronger, more evil, and more profound?" I asked in horror.
"Yes," he said again, "stronger, more evil, and more profound; also more
beautiful"--and thereby the tempter-god smiled with his halcyon smile,
as though he had just paid some charming compliment. One here sees at
once that it is not only shame that this divinity lacks;--and in general
there are good grounds for supposing that in some things the Gods could
all of them come to us men for instruction. We men are--more human.--

296. Alas! what are you, after all, my written and painted thoughts! Not
long ago you were so variegated, young and malicious, so full of thorns
and secret spices, that you made me sneeze and laugh--and now? You
have already doffed your novelty, and some of you, I fear, are ready
to become truths, so immortal do they look, so pathetically honest, so
tedious! And was it ever otherwise? What then do we write and paint,
we mandarins with Chinese brush, we immortalisers of things which LEND
themselves to writing, what are we alone capable of painting? Alas, only
that which is just about to fade and begins to lose its odour! Alas,
only exhausted and departing storms and belated yellow sentiments! Alas,
only birds strayed and fatigued by flight, which now let themselves be
captured with the hand--with OUR hand! We immortalize what cannot live
and fly much longer, things only which are exhausted and mellow! And it
is only for your AFTERNOON, you, my written and painted thoughts, for
which alone I have colours, many colours, perhaps, many variegated
softenings, and fifty yellows and browns and greens and reds;--but
nobody will divine thereby how ye looked in your morning, you sudden
sparks and marvels of my solitude, you, my old, beloved--EVIL thoughts!




FROM THE HEIGHTS

By F W Nietzsche

Translated by L. A. Magnus


                       1.

     MIDDAY of Life! Oh, season of delight!
                      My summer's park!
     Uneaseful joy to look, to lurk, to hark--
     I peer for friends, am ready day and night,--
     Where linger ye, my friends? The time is right!

                       2.

     Is not the glacier's grey today for you
                         Rose-garlanded?
     The brooklet seeks you, wind, cloud, with longing thread
     And thrust themselves yet higher to the blue,
     To spy for you from farthest eagle's view.

                       3.

     My table was spread out for you on high--
                      Who dwelleth so
     Star-near, so near the grisly pit below?--
     My realm--what realm hath wider boundary?
     My honey--who hath sipped its fragrancy?

                       4.

     Friends, ye are there! Woe me,--yet I am not
                        He whom ye seek?
     Ye stare and stop--better your wrath could speak!
     I am not I? Hand, gait, face, changed? And what
     I am, to you my friends, now am I not?

                       5.

     Am I an other? Strange am I to Me?
                      Yet from Me sprung?
     A wrestler, by himself too oft self-wrung?
     Hindering too oft my own self's potency,
     Wounded and hampered by self-victory?

                       6.

     I sought where-so the wind blows keenest. There
                     I learned to dwell
     Where no man dwells, on lonesome ice-lorn fell,
     And unlearned Man and God and curse and prayer?
     Became a ghost haunting the glaciers bare?

                       7.

     Ye, my old friends! Look! Ye turn pale, filled o'er
                      With love and fear!
     Go! Yet not in wrath. Ye could ne'er live here.
     Here in the farthest realm of ice and scaur,
     A huntsman must one be, like chamois soar.

                       8.

     An evil huntsman was I? See how taut
                    My bow was bent!
     Strongest was he by whom such bolt were sent--
     Woe now! That arrow is with peril fraught,
     Perilous as none.--Have yon safe home ye sought!

                       9.

     Ye go! Thou didst endure enough, oh, heart;--
                     Strong was thy hope;
     Unto new friends thy portals widely ope,
     Let old ones be. Bid memory depart!
     Wast thou young then, now--better young thou art!

                       10.

     What linked us once together, one hope's tie--
                    (Who now doth con
     Those lines, now fading, Love once wrote thereon?)--
     Is like a parchment, which the hand is shy
     To touch--like crackling leaves, all seared, all dry.

                       11.

     Oh! Friends no more! They are--what name for those?--
                           Friends' phantom-flight
     Knocking at my heart's window-pane at night,
     Gazing on me, that speaks "We were" and goes,--
     Oh, withered words, once fragrant as the rose!

                       12.

     Pinings of youth that might not understand!
                       For which I pined,
     Which I deemed changed with me, kin of my kind:
     But they grew old, and thus were doomed and banned:
     None but new kith are native of my land!

                       13.

     Midday of life! My second youth's delight!
                       My summer's park!
     Unrestful joy to long, to lurk, to hark!
     I peer for friends!--am ready day and night,
     For my new friends. Come! Come! The time is right!

                       14.

     This song is done,--the sweet sad cry of rue
                       Sang out its end;
     A wizard wrought it, he the timely friend,
     The midday-friend,--no, do not ask me who;
     At midday 'twas, when one became as two.

                       15.

     We keep our Feast of Feasts, sure of our bourne,
                      Our aims self-same:
     The Guest of Guests, friend Zarathustra, came!
     The world now laughs, the grisly veil was torn,
     And Light and Dark were one that wedding-morn.






End of Project Gutenberg's Beyond Good and Evil, by Friedrich Nietzsche


================================================================================
[The Twilight of the Idols (우상의 황혼)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Twilight of the Idols; or, How to Philosophize with the Hammer. The Antichrist
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Twilight of the Idols; or, How to Philosophize with the Hammer. The Antichrist

Author: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

Editor: Oscar Levy

Translator: Anthony M. Ludovici


        
Release date: June 7, 2016 [eBook #52263]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/52263

Credits: Marc D'Hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
        (Images generouly made available by the Hathi Trust.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS; OR, HOW TO PHILOSOPHIZE WITH THE HAMMER. THE ANTICHRIST ***

THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

BY

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE

Or, How to Philosophise with the Hammer


THE ANTICHRIST

_NOTES TO ZARATHUSTRA, AND ETERNAL RECURRENCE_


TRANSLATED BY

ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI


The Complete Works of Friedrich Nietzsche

The First Complete and Authorised English Translation

Edited by Dr Oscar Levy

Volume Sixteen

T.N. FOULIS

13 & 15 FREDERICK STREET

EDINBURGH: AND LONDON

1911




    CONTENTS

    TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS

    TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE
    PREFACE
    MAXIMS AND MISSILES
    THE PROBLEM OF SOCRATES
    “REASON” IN PHILOSOPHY
    HOW THE “TRUE WORLD” ULTIMATELY BECAME A FABLE
    MORALITY AS THE ENEMY OF NATURE
    THE FOUR GREAT ERRORS
    THE “IMPROVERS” OF MANKIND
    THINGS THE GERMANS LACK
    SKIRMISHES IN A WAR WITH THE ACT
    THINGS I OWE TO THE ANCIENTS

    THE ANTICHRIST

    ETERNAL RECURRENCE

    NOTES TO ZARATHUSTRA




TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE


_The Twilight of the Idols_ was written towards the end of the summer
of 1888, its composition seems to have occupied only a few days,—so
few indeed that, in _Ecce Homo_ (p. 118), Nietzsche says he hesitates
to give their number; but, in any case, we know it was completed on the
3rd of September in Sils Maria. The manuscript which was dispatched to
the printers on the 7th of September bore the title: “_Idle Hours of a
Psychologist_”; this, however, was abandoned in favour of the present
title, while the work was going through the press. During September
and the early part of October 1888, Nietzsche added to the original
contents of the book by inserting the whole section entitled “Things
the Germans Lack,” and aphorisms 32-43 of “Skirmishes in a War with the
Age”; and the book, as it now stands, represents exactly the form in
which Nietzsche intended to publish it in the course of the year 1889.
Unfortunately its author was already stricken down with illness when
the work first appeared at the end of January 1889, and he was denied
the joy of seeing it run into nine editions, of one thousand each,
before his death in 1900.

Of _The Twilight of the Idols,_ Nietzsche says in _Ecce Homo_ (p.
118):—“If anyone should desire to obtain a rapid sketch of how
everything before my time was standing on its head, he should begin
reading me in this book. That which is called ‘Idols’ on the title-page
is simply the old truth that has been believed in hitherto. In plain
English, _The Twilight of the Idols_ means that the old truth is on its
last legs.”

Certain it is that, for a rapid survey of the whole of Nietzsche’s
doctrine, no book, save perhaps the section entitled “Of Old and New
Tables” in _Thus Spake Zarathustra,_ could be of more real value than
_The Twilight of the Idols._ Here Nietzsche is quite at his best. He
is ripe for the marvellous feat of the transvaluation of all values.
Nowhere is his language—that marvellous weapon which in his hand
became at once so supple and so murderous—more forcible and more
condensed. Nowhere are his thoughts more profound. But all this does
not by any means imply that this book is the easiest of Nietzsche’s
works. On the contrary, I very much fear that, unless the reader is
well prepared, not only in Nietzscheism, but also in the habit of
grappling with uncommon and elusive problems, a good deal of the
contents of this work will tend rather to confuse than to enlighten
him in regard to what Nietzsche actually wishes to make clear in these
pages.

How much prejudice, for instance, how many traditional and deep-seated
opinions, must be uprooted, if we are to see even so much as an
important note of interrogation in the section entitled “The Problem
of Socrates”—not to speak of such sections as “Morality as the Enemy
of Nature,” “The Four Great Errors,” &c. The errors exposed in these
sections have a tradition of two thousand years behind them; and only a
fantastic dreamer could expect them to be eradicated by a mere casual
study of these pages. Indeed, Nietzsche himself looked forward only to
a gradual change in the general view of the questions he discussed; he
knew only too well what the conversion of “light heads” was worth, and
what kind of man would probably be the first to rush into his arms;
and, grand psychologist that he was, he guarded himself beforehand
against bad company by means of his famous warning:—“The first
adherents of a creed do not prove anything against it.”

To the aspiring student of Nietzsche, however, it ought not to be
necessary to become an immediate convert in order to be interested in
the treasure of thought which Nietzsche here lavishes upon us. For
such a man it will be quite difficult enough to regard the questions
raised in this work as actual problems. Once, however, he has succeeded
in doing this, and has given his imagination time to play round these
questions _as_ problems, the particular turn or twist that Nietzsche
gives to their elucidation, may then perhaps strike him, not only as
valuable, but as absolutely necessary.

With regard to the substance of _The Twilight of the Idols,_ Nietzsche
says in _Ecce Homo_ (p. 119):—“There is the waste of an all-too-rich
autumn in this book: you trip over truths. You even crush some to
death, there are too many of them.”

And what are these truths? They are things that are not yet held to
be true. They are the utterances of a man who, as a single exception,
escaped for a while the general insanity of Europe, with its blind
idealism in the midst of squalor, with its unscrupulous praise of
so-called “Progress” while it stood knee-deep in the belittlement
of “Man,” and with its vulgar levity in the face of effeminacy and
decay;—they are the utterances of one who voiced the hopes, the
aims, and the realities of another world, not of an ideal world, not
of a world beyond, but of a real world, of _this_ world regenerated
and reorganised upon a sounder, a more virile, and a more orderly
basis,—in fact, of a perfectly _possible_ world, one that has already
existed in the past, and could exist again, if only the stupendous
revolution of a transvaluation of all values were made possible.

This then is the nature of the truths uttered by this one sane man in
the whole of Europe at the end of last century; and when, owing to his
unequal struggle against the overwhelming hostile forces of his time,
his highly sensitive personality was at last forced to surrender itself
to the enemy and become one with them—that is to say, insane!—at
least the record of his sanity had been safely stored away, beyond the
reach of time and change, in the volumes which constitute his life-work.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nietzsche must have started upon the “Antichrist,” immediately after
having dispatched the “Idle Hours of a Psychologist” to the printers,
and the work appears to have been finished at the end of September
1888. It was intended by Nietzsche to form the first book of a large
work entitled “The Transvaluation of all Values”; but, though this work
was never completed, we can form some idea from the substance of the
“Antichrist” and from the titles of the remaining three books, which
alas! were never written, of what its contents would have been. These
titles are:—Book II. The Free Spirit. A Criticism of Philosophy as a
Nihilistic Movement. Book III. The Immoralist. A Criticism of the most
Fatal Kind of Ignorance,—Morality. Book IV. Dionysus. The Philosophy
of Eternal Recurrence.

Nietzsche calls this book “An Attempted Criticism of Christianity.”
Modest as this sub-title is, it will probably seem not quite modest
enough to those who think that Nietzsche fell far short of doing
justice to their Holy Creed. Be this as it may, there is the solution
of a certain profound problem in this book, which, while it is the key
to all Nietzscheism, is also the justification and the sanctification
of Nietzsche’s cause. The problem stated quite plainly is this: “_To
what end_ did Christianity avail itself of falsehood?”

Many readers of this amazing little work, who happen to be acquainted
with Nietzsche’s doctrine of Art and of Ruling, will probably feel
slightly confused at the constant deprecation of falsehood, of
deception, and of arbitrary make-believe, which seems to run through
this book like a litany in praise of a certain Absolute Truth.

Remembering Nietzsche’s utterance in volume ii. (p. 26) of the _Will
to Power,_ to wit:—“The prerequisite of all living things and of
their lives is: that there should be a large amount of faith, that
it should be possible to pass definite judgments on things, and
that there should be no doubt at all concerning values. Thus it is
necessary that something should be assumed to be true, _not_ that it
is true;”—remembering these words, as I say, the reader may stand
somewhat aghast before all those passages in the second half of this
volume, where the very falsehoods of Christianity, its assumptions, its
unwarrantable claims to Truth, are declared to be pernicious, base and
corrupt.

Again and again, if we commit the error of supposing that Nietzsche
believed in a truth that was absolute, we shall find throughout his
works reasons for charging him with apparently the very same crimes
that he here lays at the door of Christianity. What then is the
explanation of his seeming inconsistency?

It is simple enough. Nietzsche’s charge of falsehood against
Christianity is not a moral one,—in fact it may be taken as a general
rule that Nietzsche scrupulously avoids making moral charges, and that
he emains throughout faithful to his position Beyond Good and Evil
(see, for instance Aph. 6 (Antichrist) where he repudiates all moral
prejudice in charging humanity with corruption). A man who maintained
that “truth is that form of error which enables a particular species to
prevail,” could not make a _moral_ charge of falsehood against any one,
or any institution; but he could do so from another standpoint He could
well say, for instance, “falsehood is that kind of error which causes a
particular species to degenerate and to decay.”

Thus the fact that Christianity “lied” becomes a subject of alarm
to Nietzsche, not owing to the fact that it is immoral to lie, but
because in this particular instance, the lie was harmful, hostile to
life, and dangerous to humanity; for “a belief might be false and yet
life-preserving” (_Beyond Good and Evil,_ pp. 8, 9).

Suppose, therefore, we say with Nietzsche that there is no absolute
truth, but that all that has been true in the past which has been
the means of making the “plant man flourish best”—or, since the
meaning of “best” is open to some debate, let us say, flourish in a
Nietzschean sense, that is to say, thanks to a mastery of life, and
to a preponderance of all those qualities which say yea to existence,
and which suggest no flight from this world and all its pleasure and
pain. And suppose we add that, wherever we may find the plant man
flourishing, in this sense, we should there suspect the existence of
truth?—I If we say this with Nietzsche, any sort of assumption or
arbitrary valuation which aims at a reverse order of things, becomes a
dangerous lie in a super-moral and purely physiological sense.

With these preparatory remarks we are now prepared to read aphorism
56 with a complete understanding of what Nietzsche means, and
to recognise in this particular aphorism the key to the whole of
Nietzsche’s attitude towards Christianity. It is at once a solution of
our problem, and a justification of its author’s position. Naturally,
it still remains open to Nietzsche’s opponents to argue, if they
choose, that man has flourished best under the sway of nihilistic
religions—religions which deny life,—and that consequently the
falsehoods of Christianity are not only warrantable but also in the
highest degree blessed; but, in any case, the aphorism in question
completely exonerates Nietzsche from a charge of inconsistency in the
use of the terms “truth” and “falsehood” throughout his works, and
it moreover settles once and for all the exact altitude from which
our author looked down upon the religions of the world, not only to
criticise them, but also to _place_ them in the order of their merit as
disciplinary systems aiming at the cultivation of particular types of
men.

Nietzsche says in aphorism 56:—“After all, the question is, to what
end are falsehoods perpetrated? The fact that, in Christianity, ‘holy’
ends are entirely absent, constitutes _my_ objection to the means it
employs. Its ends are only _bad_ ends: the poisoning, the calumniation
and the denial of life, the contempt of the body, the degradation and
self-pollution of man by virtue of the concept sin,—consequently its
means are bad as well.”

Thus, to repeat it once more, it is not because Christianity availed
itself of all kinds of lies that Nietzsche condemns it; for the Book
of Manu—which he admires—is just as full of falsehood as the Semitic
Book of Laws; but, in the Book of Manu the lies are calculated to
preserve and to create a strong and noble type of man, whereas in
Christianity the opposite type was the aim,—an aim which has been
achieved in a manner far exceeding even the expectations of the
faithful.

This then is the main argument of the book and its conclusion; but, in
the course of the general elaboration of this argument, many important
side-issues are touched upon and developed, wherein Nietzsche reveals
himself as something very much more valuable than a mere iconoclast.
Of course, on every page of his philosophy,—whatever his enemies may
maintain to the contrary,—he never once ceases to construct, since he
is incessantly enumerating and emphasising those qualities and types
which he fain would rear, as against those he fain would see destroyed;
but it is in aphorism 57 of this book that Nietzsche makes the
plainest and most complete statement of his actual taste in Sociology,
and it is upon this aphorism that all his followers and disciples will
ultimately have to build, if Nietzscheism is ever to become something
more than a merely intellectual movement.

ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.




PREFACE


To maintain a cheerful attitude of mind in the midst of a gloomy and
exceedingly responsible task, is no slight artistic feat. And yet, what
could be more necessary than cheerfulness? Nothing ever succeeds which
exuberant spirits have not helped to produce. Surplus power, alone,
is the proof of power.—A _transvaluation of all values,_—this note
of interrogation which is so black, so huge, that it casts a shadow
even upon him who affixes it,—is a task of such fatal import, that
he who undertakes it is compelled every now and then to rush out into
the sunlight in order to shake himself free from an earnestness that
becomes crushing, far too crushing. This end justifies every means,
every event on the road to it is a windfall. Above all _war._ War has
always been the great policy of all spirits who have penetrated too
far into themselves or who have grown too deep; a wound stimulates the
recuperative powers. For many years, a maxim, the origin of which I
withhold from learned curiosity, has been my motto:

_    increscunt animi, virescit volnere virtus._

At other times another means of recovery which is even more to my
taste, is to cross-examine idols. There are more idols than realities
in the world: this constitutes my “evil eye” for this world: it is
also my “evil ear.” To put questions in this quarter with a hammer, and
to hear perchance that well-known hollow sound which tells of blown-out
frogs,—what a joy this is for one who has ears even behind his ears,
for an old psychologist and Pied Piper like myself in whose presence
precisely that which would fain be silent, _must betray itself._

Even this treatise—as its title shows—is above all a recreation,
a ray of sunshine, a leap sideways of a psychologist in his leisure
moments. Maybe, too, a new war? And are we again cross-examining new
idols? This little work is a great declaration of war; and with regard
to the cross-examining of idols, this time it is not the idols of the
age but eternal idols which are here struck with a hammer as with
a tuning fork,—there are certainly no idols which are older, more
convinced, and more inflated. Neither are there any more hollow. This
does not alter the fact that they are believed in more than any others,
besides they are never called idols,—at least, not the most exalted
among their number.

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.

TURIN, the 30th _September_ 1888.
    on the day when the first
    book of the Transvaluation
    of all Values was finished.




MAXIMS AND MISSILES


1

Idleness is the parent of all psychology. What? Is psychology then
a—vice?


2

Even the pluckiest among us has but seldom the courage of what he
really knows.


3

Aristotle says that in order to live alone, a man must be either an
animal or a god. The third alternative is lacking: a man must be
both—a _philosopher._


4

“All truth is simple.”—Is not this a double lie?


5

Once for all I wish to be blind to many things.—Wisdom sets bounds
even to knowledge.


6

A man recovers best from his exceptional nature—his
intellectuality—by giving his animal instincts a chance.


7

Which is it? Is man only a blunder of God? Or is God only a blunder of
man?


8

_From the military school of life._—That which does not kill me, makes
me stronger.


9

Help thyself, then everyone will help thee. A principle of
neighbour-love.


10

A man should not play the coward to his deeds. He should not repudiate
them once he has performed them. Pangs of conscience are indecent.


11

Can a donkey be tragic?—To perish beneath a load that one can neither
bear nor throw off? This is the case of the Philosopher.


12

If a man knows the wherefore of his existence, then the manner of it
can take care of itself. Man does not aspire to happiness; only the
Englishman does that.


13

Man created woman—out of what? Out of a rib of his god,—of his
“ideal.”


14

What? Art thou looking for something? Thou wouldst fain multiply
thyself tenfold, a hundredfold? Thou seekest followers? Seek ciphers!


15

Posthumous men, like myself, are not so well understood as men who
reflect their age, but they are heard with more respect. In plain
English: we are never understood—hence our authority.


16

_Among women._—“Truth? Oh, you do not know truth! Is it not an outrage
on all our _pudeurs?_”—


17

There is an artist after my own heart, modest in his needs: he really
wants only two things, his bread and his art—_panem et Circem._


18

He who knows not how to plant his will in things, at least endows them
with some meaning: that is to say, he believes that a will is already
present in them. (A principle of faith.)


19

What? Ye chose virtue and the heaving breast, and at the same time
ye squint covetously at the advantages of the unscrupulous.—But
with virtue ye renounce all “advantages” ... (to be nailed to an
Antisemite’s door).


20

The perfect woman perpetrates literature as if it were a petty vice: as
an experiment, _en passant,_ and looking about her all the while to
see whether anybody is noticing her, hoping that somebody _is_ noticing
her.


21

One should adopt only those situations in which one is in no need of
sham virtues, but rather, like the tight-rope dancer on his tight rope,
in which one must either fall or stand—or escape.


22

“Evil men have no songs.”[1]—How is it that the Russians have songs?


23

“German intellect”; for eighteen years this has been a _contradictio in
adjecto._


24

By seeking the beginnings of things, a man becomes a crab. The
historian looks backwards: in the end he also _believes_ backwards.


25

Contentment preserves one even from catching cold. Has a woman who knew
that she was well-dressed ever caught cold?—No, not even when she had
scarcely a rag to her back.


26

I distrust all systematisers, and avoid them. The will to a system,
shows a lack of honesty.


27

Man thinks woman profound—why? Because he can never fathom her depths.
Woman is not even shallow.


28

When woman possesses masculine virtues, she is enough to make you run
away. When she possesses no masculine virtues, she herself runs away.

29

“How often conscience had to bite in times gone by! What good teeth it
must have had! And to-day, what is amiss?”—A dentist’s question.


30

Errors of haste are seldom committed singly. The first time a man
always docs too much. And precisely on that account he commits a second
error, and then he does too little.


31

The trodden worm curls up. This testifies to its caution. It thus
reduces its chances of being trodden upon again. In the language of
morality: Humility.—


32

There is such a thing as a hatred of lies and dissimulation, which is
the outcome of a delicate sense of humour; there is also the selfsame
hatred but as the result of cowardice, in so far as falsehood is
forbidden by Divine law. Too cowardly to lie....


33

What trifles constitute happiness! The sound of a bagpipe. Without
music life would be a mistake. The German imagines even God as a
songster.


34

_On ne peut penser et écrire qu’assis_ (G. Flaubert). Here I have got
you, you nihilist! A sedentary life is the real sin against the Holy
Spirit. Only those thoughts that come by walking have any value.


35

There are times when we psychologists are like horses, and grow
fretful. We see our own shadow rise and fall before us. The
psychologist must look away from himself if he wishes to see anything
at all.


36

Do we immoralists injure virtue in any way? Just as little as the
anarchists injure royalty. Only since they have been shot at do princes
sit firmly on their thrones once more. Moral: _morality must be shot
at._


37

Thou runnest _ahead?_—Dost thou do so as a shepherd or as an
exception? A third alternative would be the fugitive.... First question
of conscience.


38

Art thou genuine or art thou only an actor? Art thou a representative
or the thing represented, itself? Finally, art thou perhaps simply a
copy of an actor? ... Second question of conscience.


39

_The disappointed man speaks:_—I sought for great men, but all I found
were the apes of their ideal.


40

Art thou one who looks on, or one who puts his own shoulder to the
wheel?—Or art thou one who looks away, or who turns aside?... Third
question of conscience.


41

Wilt thou go in company, or lead, or go by thyself?... A man should
know what he desires, and that he desires something.—Fourth question
of conscience.


42

They were but rungs in my ladder, on them I made my ascent:—to that
end I had to go beyond them. But they imagined that I wanted to lay
myself to rest upon them.


43

What matters it whether I am acknowledged to be right! I am much too
right. And he who laughs best to-day, will also laugh last.


44

The formula of my happiness: a Yea, a Nay, a straight line, _goal...._


[1] This is a reference to Seume’s poem “_Die Gesänge_,” the first verse
of which is:—

    _“Wo man singet, lass dich ruhig nieder,_
    _Ohne Furcht, was man im Lande glaubt_;
    _Wo man singet, wird kein Mensch beraubt_:
    _Bösewichter haben keine Lieder_.”

(Wherever people sing thou canst safely settle down without a qualm
as to what the general faith of the land may be Wherever people sing,
no man is ever robbed; _rascals_ have no songs.) Popular tradition,
however, renders the lines thus:—

    _“Wo man singt, da lass dich ruhig nieder;_
    _Base Menschen_ [evil men] _haben keine Lieder.”_




THE PROBLEM OF SOCRATES


1

In all ages the wisest have always agreed in their judgment of life:
_it is no good._ At all times and places the same words have been
on their lips,—words full of doubt, full of melancholy, full of
weariness of life, full of hostility to life. Even Socrates’ dying
words were:—“To live—means to be ill a long while: I owe a cock to
the god Æsculapius.” Even Socrates had had enough of it. What does that
prove? What does it point to? Formerly people would have said (—oh,
it has been said, and loudly enough too; by our Pessimists loudest of
all!): “In any case there must be some truth in this! The _consensus
sapientium_ is a proof of truth.”—Shall we say the same to-day? _May_
we do so? “In any case there must be some sickness here,” we make
reply. These great sages of all periods should first be examined more
closely! Is it possible that they were, everyone of them, a little
shaky on their legs, effete, rocky, decadent? Does wisdom perhaps
appear on earth after the manner of a crow attracted by a slight smell
of carrion?


2

This irreverent belief that the great sages were decadent types, first
occurred to me precisely in regard to that case concerning which both
learned and vulgar prejudice was most opposed to my view. I recognised
Socrates and Plato as symptoms of decline, as instruments in the
disintegration of Hellas, as pseudo-Greek, as anti-Greek (“The Birth
of Tragedy,” 1872). That _consensus sapientium,_ as I perceived ever
more and more clearly, did not in the least prove that they were right
in the matter on which they agreed. It proved rather that these sages
themselves must have been alike in some physiological particular, in
order to assume the same negative attitude towards life—in order to
be bound to assume that attitude. After all, judgments and valuations
of life, whether for or against, cannot be true: their only value lies
in the fact that they are symptoms; they can be considered only as
symptoms,—_per se_ such judgments are nonsense. You must therefore
endeavour by all means to reach out and try to grasp this astonishingly
subtle axiom, _that the value of life cannot be estimated._ A living
man cannot do so, because he is a contending party, or rather the very
object in the dispute, and not a judge; nor can a dead man estimate
it—for other reasons. For a philosopher to see a problem in the value
of life, is almost an objection against him, a note of interrogation
set against his wisdom—a lack of wisdom. What? Is it possible that all
these great sages were not only decadents, but that they were not even
wise? Let me however return to the problem of Socrates.


3

To judge from his origin, Socrates belonged to the lowest of the low:
Socrates was mob. You know, and you can still see it for yourself,
how ugly he was. But ugliness, which in itself is an objection, was
almost a refutation among the Greeks. Was Socrates really a Greek?
Ugliness is not infrequently the expression of thwarted development,
or of development arrested by crossing. In other cases it appears
as a decadent development. The anthropologists among the criminal
specialists declare that I the typical criminal is ugly: _monstrum
in fronte, monstrum in animo._ But the criminal is a decadent?[1]
Was Socrates a typical criminal?—At all events this would not clash
with that famous physiognomist’s judgment which was so repugnant to
Socrates’ friends. While on his way through Athens a certain foreigner
who was no fool at judging by looks, told Socrates to his face that
he was a monster, that his body harboured all the worst vices and
passions. And Socrates replied simply: “You know me, sir!”—


4

Not only are the acknowledged wildness and anarchy of Socrates’
instincts indicative of decadence, but also that preponderance of the
logical faculties and that malignity of the misshapen which was his
special characteristic. Neither should we forget those aural delusions
which were religiously interpreted as “the demon of Socrates.”
Everything in him is exaggerated, _buffo,_ caricature, his nature is
also full of concealment, of ulterior motives, and of underground
currents. I try to understand the idiosyncrasy from which the Socratic
equation:—Reason = Virtue = Happiness, could have arisen: the
weirdest equation ever seen, and one which was essentially opposed to
all the instincts of the older Hellenes.


5

With Socrates Greek taste veers round in favour of dialectics: what
actually occurs? In the first place a noble taste is vanquished:
with dialectics the mob comes to the top. Before Socrates’ time,
dialectical manners were avoided in good society: they were regarded
as bad manners, they were compromising. Young men were cautioned
against them. All such proffering of one’s reasons was looked upon with
suspicion. Honest things like honest men do not carry their reasons
on their sleeve in such fashion. It is not good form to make a show
of everything. That which needs to be proved cannot be worth much.
Wherever authority still belongs to good usage, wherever men do not
prove but command, the dialectician is regarded as a sort of clown.
People laugh at him, they do not take him seriously. Socrates was a
clown who succeeded in making men take him seriously: what then was the
matter?


6

A man resorts to dialectics only when he has no other means to hand.
People know that they excite suspicion with it and that it is not
very convincing. Nothing is more easily dispelled than a dialectical
effect: this is proved by the experience of every gathering in which
discussions are held. It can be only the last defence of those who have
no other weapons. One must require to extort one’s right, otherwise one
makes no use of it. That is why the Jews were dialecticians. Reynard
the Fox was a dialectician: what?—and was Socrates one as well?


7

Is the Socratic irony an expression of revolt, of mob resentment?
Does Socrates, as a creature suffering under oppression, enjoy his
innate ferocity in the knife-thrusts of the syllogism? Does he wreak
his revenge on the noblemen he fascinates?—As a dialectician a man
has a merciless instrument to wield; he can play the tyrant with it:
he compromises when he conquers with it. The dialectician leaves it to
his opponent to prove that he is no idiot: he infuriates, he likewise
paralyses. The dialectician cripples the intellect of his opponent. Can
it be that dialectics was only a form of revenge in Socrates?


8

I have given you to understand in what way Socrates was able to repel:
now it is all the more necessary to explain how he fascinated.—One
reason is that he discovered a new kind of _Agon,_ and that he was the
first fencing-master in the best circles in Athens. He fascinated by
appealing to the combative instinct of the Greeks,—he introduced a
variation into the contests between men and youths. Socrates was also a
great erotic.


9

But Socrates divined still more. He saw right through his noble
Athenians; he perceived that his case, his peculiar case, was no
exception even in his time. The same kind of degeneracy was silently
preparing itself everywhere: ancient Athens was dying out. And Socrates
understood that the whole world needed him,—his means, his remedy, his
special artifice for self-preservation. Everywhere the instincts were
in a state of anarchy; everywhere people were within an ace of excess:
the _monstrum in animo_ was the general danger. “The instincts would
play the tyrant; we must discover a counter-tyrant who is stronger than
they.” On the occasion when that physiognomist had unmasked Socrates,
and had told him what he was, a crater full of evil desires, the great
Master of Irony let fall one or two words more, which provide the key
to his nature. “This is true,” he said, “but I overcame them all.” How
did Socrates succeed in mastering himself? His case was at bottom only
the extreme and most apparent example of a state of distress which
was beginning to be general: that state in which no one was able to
master himself and in which the instincts turned one against the other.
As the extreme example of this state, he fascinated—his terrifying
ugliness made him conspicuous to every eye: it is quite obvious that he
fascinated still more as a reply, as a solution, as an apparent cure of
this case.


10

When a man finds it necessary, as Socrates did, to create a tyrant out
of reason, there is no small danger that something else wishes to play
the tyrant. Reason was then discovered as a saviour; neither Socrates
nor his “patients” were at liberty to be rational or not, as they
pleased; at that time it was _de rigueur,_ it had become a last shift.
The fanaticism with which the whole of Greek thought plunges into
reason, betrays a critical condition of things: men were in danger;
there were only two alternatives: either perish or else be absurdly
rational. The moral bias of Greek philosophy from Plato onward, is the
outcome of a pathological condition, as is also its appreciation of
dialectics. Reason = Virtue = Happiness, simply means: we must imitate
Socrates, and confront the dark passions permanently with the light
of day—the light of reason. We must at all costs be clever, precise,
clear: all yielding to the instincts, to the unconscious, leads
downwards.


11

I have now explained how Socrates fascinated: he seemed to be a
doctor, a Saviour. Is it necessary to expose the errors which lay in
his faith in “reason at any price”?—It is a piece of self-deception
on the part of philosophers and moralists to suppose that they can
extricate themselves from degeneration by merely waging war upon it.
They cannot thus extricate themselves; that which they choose as a
means, as the road to salvation, is in itself again only an expression
of degeneration—they only modify its mode of manifesting itself:
they do not abolish it. Socrates was a misunderstanding. _The whole
of the morality of amelioration—that of Christianity as well—was
a misunderstanding._ The most blinding light of day: reason at any
price; life made clear, cold, cautious, conscious, without instincts,
opposed to the instincts, was in itself only a disease, another kind
of disease—and by no means a return to “virtue,” to “health,” and to
happiness. To be obliged to fight the instincts—this is the formula of
degeneration: as long as life is in the ascending line, happiness is
the same as instinct.


12

—Did he understand this himself, this most intelligent of
self-deceivers? Did he confess this to himself in the end, in the
wisdom of his courage before death. Socrates wished to die. Not Athens,
but his own hand gave him the draught of hemlock; he drove Athens to
the poisoned cup. “Socrates is not a doctor,” he whispered to himself,
“death alone can be a doctor here.... Socrates himself has only been ill
a long while.”


[1] It should be borne in mind that Nietzsche recognised two types of
criminals,—the criminal from strength, and the criminal from weakness.
This passage alludes to the latter, Aphorism 45, p. 103, alludes to the
former.—TR.




“REASON” IN PHILOSOPHY


1

You ask me what all idiosyncrasy is in philosophers? ... For instance
their lack of the historical sense, their hatred even of the idea of
Becoming, their Egyptianism. They imagine that they do honour to a
thing by divorcing it from history _sub specie æterni,—_when they
make a mummy of it. All the ideas that philosophers have treated for
thousands of years, have been mummied concepts; nothing real has ever
come out of their hands alive. These idolaters of concepts merely
kill and stuff things when they worship,—they threaten the life of
everything they adore. Death, change, age, as well as procreation and
growth, are in their opinion objections,—even refutations. That which
is cannot evolve; that which evolves _is_ not. Now all of them believe,
and even with desperation, in Being. But, as they cannot lay hold of
it, they try to discover reasons why this privilege is withheld from
them. “Some merely apparent quality, some deception must be the cause
of our not being able to ascertain the nature of Being: where is the
deceiver?” “We have him,” they cry rejoicing, “it is sensuality!” These
senses, _which in other things are so immoral,_ cheat us concerning the
true world. Moral: we must get rid of the deception of the senses, of
Becoming, of history, of falsehood.—History is nothing more than the
belief in the senses, the belief in falsehood. Moral: we must say “no”
to everything in which the senses believe: to all the rest of mankind:
all that belongs to the “people.” Let us be philosophers, mummies,
monotono-theists, grave-diggers!—And above all, away with the _body,_
this wretched _idée fixe_ of the senses, infected with all the faults
of logic that exist, refuted, even impossible, although it be impudent
enough to pose as if it were real!


2

With a feeling of great reverence I except the name of _Heraclitus._
If the rest of the philosophic gang rejected the evidences of the
senses, because the latter revealed a state of multifariousness and
change, he rejected the same evidence because it revealed things as if
they possessed permanence and unity. Even Heraclitus did an injustice
to the senses. The latter lie neither as the Eleatics believed them
to lie, nor as he believed them to lie,—they do not lie at all. The
interpretations we give to their evidence is what first introduces
falsehood into it; for instance the lie of unity, the lie of matter,
of substance and of permanence. Reason is the cause of our falsifying
the evidence of the senses. In so far as the senses show us a state
of Becoming, of transiency, and of change, they do not lie. But in
declaring that Being was an empty illusion, Heraclitus will remain
eternally right. The “apparent” world is the only world: the “true
world” is no more than a false adjunct thereto.


3

And what delicate instruments of observation we have in our senses!
This human nose, for instance, of which no philosopher has yet spoken
with reverence and gratitude, is, for the present, the most finely
adjusted instrument at our disposal: it is able to register even such
slight changes of movement as the spectroscope would be unable to
record. Our scientific triumphs at the present day extend precisely
so far as we have accepted the evidence of our senses,—as we have
sharpened and armed them, and learned to follow them up to the
end. What remains is abortive and not yet science—that is to say,
metaphysics, theology, psychology, epistemology, or formal science, or
a doctrine of symbols, like logic and its applied form mathematics.
In all these things reality does not come into consideration at all,
even as a problem; just as little as does the question concerning the
general value of such a convention of symbols as logic.


4

The other idiosyncrasy of philosophers is no less dangerous; it
consists in confusing the last and the first things. They place that
which makes its appearance last—unfortunately! for it ought not
to appear at all!—the “highest concept,” that is to say, the most
general, the emptiest, the last cloudy streak of evaporating reality,
at the beginning as the beginning. This again is only their manner of
expressing their veneration: the highest thing must not have grown out
of the lowest, it must not have grown at all.... Moral: everything
of the first rank must be _causa sui._ To have been derived from
something else, is as good as an objection, it sets the value of a
thing in question. All superior values are of the first rank, all the
highest concepts—that of Being, of the Absolute, of Goodness, of
Truth, and of Perfection; all these things cannot have been evolved,
they must therefore be _causa sui._ All these things cannot however be
unlike one another, they cannot be opposed to one another. Thus they
attain to their stupendous concept “God.” The last, most attenuated and
emptiest thing is postulated as the first thing, as the absolute cause,
as _ens realissimum._ Fancy humanity having to take the brain diseases
of morbid cobweb-spinners seriously!—And it has paid dearly for having
done so.


5

—Against this let us set the different manner in which we (—you
observe that I am courteous enough to say “we”) conceive the problem of
the error and deceptiveness of things. Formerly people regarded change
and evolution in general as the proof of appearance, as a sign of the
fact that something must be there that leads us astray. To-day, on
the other hand, we realise that precisely as far as the rational bias
forces us to postulate unity, identity, permanence, substance, cause,
materiality and being, we are in a measure involved in error, driven
necessarily to error; however certain we may feel, as the result of a
strict examination of the matter, that the error lies here. It is just
the same here as with the motion of the sun: In its case it was our
eyes that were wrong; in the matter of the concepts above mentioned it
is our language itself that pleads most constantly in their favour.
In its origin language belongs to an age of the most rudimentary
forms of psychology: if we try to conceive of the first conditions of
the metaphysics of language, _i.e._ in plain English, of reason, we
immediately find ourselves in the midst of a system of fetichism. For
here, the doer and his deed are seen in all circumstances, will is
believed in as a cause in general; the ego is taken for granted, the
ego as Being, and as substance, and the faith in the ego as substance
is projected into all things—in this way, alone, the concept “thing”
is created. Being is thought into and insinuated into everything as
cause; from the concept “ego,” alone, can the concept “Being” proceed.
At the beginning stands the tremendously fatal error of supposing the
will to be something that actuates,—a faculty. Now we know that it
is only a word.[1] Very much later, in a world a thousand times more
enlightened, the assurance, the subjective certitude, in the handling
of the categories of reason came into the minds of philosophers as a
surprise. They concluded that these categories could not be derived
from experience,—on the contrary, the whole of experience rather
contradicts them. _Whence do they come therefore?_ In India, as in
Greece, the same mistake was made: “we must already once have lived
in a higher world (—instead of in a much lower one, which would have
been the truth!), we must have been divine, for we possess reason!”
... Nothing indeed has exercised a more simple power of persuasion
hitherto than the error of Being, as it was formulated by the Eleatics
for instance: in its favour are every word and every sentence that we
utter!—Even the opponents of the Eleatics succumbed to the seductive
powers of their concept of Being. Among others there was Democritus in
his discovery of the atom. “Reason” in language!—oh what a deceptive
old witch it has been! I fear we shall never be rid of God, so long as
we still believe in grammar.


6

People will feel grateful to me if I condense a point of view, which
is at once so important and so new, into four theses: by this means
I shall facilitate comprehension, and shall likewise challenge
contradiction.

_Proposition One._ The reasons upon which the apparent nature of “this”
world have been based, rather tend to prove its reality,—any other
kind of reality defies demonstration.

_Proposition Two._ The characteristics with which man has endowed
the “true Being” of things, are the characteristics of non-Being, of
_nonentity._ The “true world” has been erected upon a contradiction of
the real world; and it is indeed an apparent world, seeing that it is
merely a _moralo-optical_ delusion.

_Proposition Three._ There is no sense in spinning yarns about another
world, provided, of course, that we do not possess a mighty instinct
which urges us to slander, belittle, and cast suspicion upon this life:
in this case we should be avenging ourselves on this life with the
phantasmagoria of “another,” of a “better” life.

_Proposition Four._ To divide the world into a “true” and an “apparent”
world, whether after the manner of Christianity or of Kant (after all
a Christian in disguise), is only a sign of decadence,—a symptom of
_degenerating_ life. The fact that the artist esteems the appearance
of a thing higher than reality, is no objection to this statement. For
“appearance” signifies once more reality here, but in a selected,
strengthened and corrected form. The tragic artist is no pessimist,—he
says _Yea_ to everything questionable and terrible, he is Dionysian.


[1] Nietzsche here refers to the concept “free will” of the Christians;
this does not mean that there is no such thing as will—that is to say
a powerful determining force from within.—TR.


HOW THE “TRUE WORLD” ULTIMATELY BECAME A FABLE

THE HISTORY OF AN ERROR

1. The true world, attainable to the sage, the pious man and the man of
virtue,—he lives in it, _he is it._

    (The most ancient form of the idea was relatively clever,
    simple, convincing. It was a paraphrase of the proposition
    “I, Plato, am the truth.”)


2. The true world which is unattainable for the moment, is promised to
the sage, to the pious man and to the man of virtue (“to the sinner who
repents”).

    (Progress of the idea: it becomes more subtle, more
    insidious, more evasive,—It _becomes a woman,_ it becomes
    Christian.)


3. The true world is unattainable, it cannot be proved, it cannot
promise anything; but even as a thought, alone, it is a comfort, an
obligation, a command.

    (At bottom this is still the old sun; but seen through mist
    and scepticism: the idea has become sublime, pale, northern,
    Königsbergian.)[1]


4. The true world—is it unattainable? At all events it is unattained.
And as unattained it is also _unknown._ Consequently it no longer
comforts, nor saves, nor constrains: what could something unknown
constrain us to?

    (The grey of dawn. Reason stretches itself and yawns for the
    first time. The cock-crow of positivism.)


5. The “true world”—an idea that no longer serves any purpose, that
no longer constrains one to anything,—a useless idea that has become
quite superfluous, consequently an exploded idea: let us abolish it!

    (Bright daylight; breakfast; the return of common sense
    and of cheerfulness; Plato blushes for shame and all
    free-spirits kick up a shindy.)


6. We have suppressed the true world: what world survives? the apparent
world perhaps?... Certainly not! _In abolishing the true world we have
also abolished the world of appearance!_

    (Noon; the moment of the shortest shadows; the end of the
    longest error; mankind’s zenith; _Incipit Zarathustra._)


[1] Kant was a native of Königsberg and lived there all his life. Did
Nietzsche know that Kant was simply a Scotch Puritan, whose family had
settled in Germany?




MORALITY AS THE ENEMY OF NATURE


1

There is a time when all passions are simply fatal in their action,
when they wreck their victims with the weight of their folly,—and
there is a later period, a very much later period, when they marry with
the spirit, when they “spiritualise” themselves. Formerly, owing to the
stupidity inherent in passion, men waged war against passion itself:
men pledged themselves to annihilate it,—all ancient moral-mongers
were unanimous on this point, “_il faut tuer les passions._” The
most famous formula for this stands in the New Testament, in that
Sermon on the Mount, where, let it be said incidentally, things are
by no means regarded _from a height._ It is said there, for instance,
with an application to sexuality: “if thy eye offend thee, pluck it
out”: fortunately no Christian acts in obedience to this precept.
To annihilate the passions and desires, simply on account of their
stupidity, and to obviate the unpleasant consequences of their
stupidity, seems to us to-day merely an aggravated form of stupidity.
We no longer admire those dentists who extract teeth simply in order
that they may not ache again. On the other hand, it will be admitted
with some reason, that on the soil from which Christianity grew, the
idea of the “spiritualisation of passion” could not possibly have been
conceived. The early Church, as everyone knows, certainly did wage war
against the “intelligent,” in favour of the “poor in spirit” In these
circumstances how could the passions be combated intelligently? The
Church combats passion by means of excision of all kinds: its practice,
its “remedy,” is _castration._ It never inquires “how can a desire
be spiritualised, beautified, deified?”—In all ages it has laid the
weight of discipline in the process of extirpation (the extirpation
of sensuality, pride, lust of dominion, lust of property, and
revenge).—But to attack the passions at their roots, means attacking
life itself at its source: the method of the Church is hostile to life.


2

The same means, castration and extirpation, are instinctively chosen
for waging war against a passion, by those who are too weak of will,
too degenerate, to impose some sort of moderation upon it; by those
natures who, to speak in metaphor (—and without metaphor), need
_la Trappe,_ or some kind of ultimatum of war, a _gulf_ set between
themselves and a passion. Only degenerates find radical methods
indispensable: weakness of will, or more strictly speaking, the
inability not to react to a stimulus, is in itself simply another form
of degeneracy. Radical and mortal hostility to sensuality, remains a
suspicious symptom: it justifies one in being suspicious of the general
state of one who goes to such extremes. Moreover, that hostility and
hatred reach their height only when such natures no longer possess
enough strength of character to adopt the radical remedy, to renounce
their inner “Satan.” Look at the whole history of the priests, the
philosophers, and the artists as well: the most poisonous diatribes
against the senses have not been said by the impotent, nor by the
ascetics; but by those impossible ascetics, by those who found it
necessary to be ascetics.


3

The spiritualisation of sensuality is called _love:_ it is a great
triumph over Christianity. Another triumph is our spiritualisation of
hostility. It consists in the fact that we are beginning to realise
very profoundly the value of having enemies: in short that with them
we are forced to do and to conclude precisely the reverse of what
we previously did and concluded. In all ages the Church wished to
annihilate its enemies: we, the immoralists and Antichrists, see our
advantage in the survival of the Church. Even in political life,
hostility has now become more spiritual,—much more cautious, much
more thoughtful, and much more moderate. Almost every party sees its
self-preservative interests in preventing the Opposition from going
to pieces; and the same applies to politics on a grand scale. A new
creation, more particularly, like the new Empire, has more need
of enemies than friends: only as a contrast does it begin to feel
necessary, only as a contrast does it _become_ necessary. And we behave
in precisely the same way to the “inner enemy”: in this quarter too we
have spiritualised enmity, in this quarter too we have understood its
value. A man is productive only in so far as he is rich in contrasted
instincts; he can remain young only on condition that his soul does
not begin to take things easy and to yearn for peace. Nothing has
grown more alien to us than that old desire—the “peace of the soul,”
which is the aim of Christianity. Nothing could make us less envious
than the moral cow and the plump happiness of a clean conscience. The
man who has renounced war has renounced a grand life. In many cases,
of course, “peace of the soul” is merely a misunderstanding,—it is
something _very different_ which has failed to find a more honest name
for itself. Without either circumlocution or prejudice I will suggest a
few cases. “Peace of the soul” may for instance be the sweet effulgence
of rich animality in the realm of morality (or religion). Or the first
presage of weariness, the first shadow that evening, every kind of
evening, is wont to cast. Or a sign that the air is moist, and that
winds are blowing up from the south. Or unconscious gratitude for a
good digestion (sometimes called “brotherly love”). Or the serenity
of the convalescent, on whose lips all things have a new taste, and
who bides his time. Or the condition which follows upon a thorough
gratification of our strongest passion, the well-being of unaccustomed
satiety. Or the senility of our will, of our desires, and of our vices.
Or laziness, coaxed by vanity into togging itself out in a moral garb.
Or the ending of a state of long suspense and of agonising uncertainty,
by a state of certainty, of even terrible certainty. Or the expression
of ripeness and mastery in the midst of a task, of a creative work, of
a production, of a thing willed, the calm breathing that denotes that
“freedom of will” has been attained. Who knows?—maybe _The Twilight
of the Idols_ is only a sort of “peace of the soul.”


4

I will formulate a principle. All naturalism in morality—that is to
say, every sound morality is ruled by a life instinct,—any one of
the laws of life is fulfilled by the definite canon “thou shalt,”
“thou shalt not,” and any sort of obstacle or hostile element in the
road of life is thus cleared away. Conversely, the morality which is
antagonistic to nature—that is to say, almost every morality that has
been taught, honoured and preached hitherto, is directed precisely
against the life-instincts,—it is a condemnation, now secret, now
blatant and impudent, of these very instincts. Inasmuch as it says “God
sees into the heart of man,” it says Nay to the profoundest and most
superior desires of life and takes God as the enemy of life. The saint
in whom God is well pleased, is the ideal eunuch. Life terminates where
the “Kingdom of God” begins.


5

Admitting that you have understood the villainy of such a mutiny
against life as that which has become almost sacrosanct in Christian
morality, you have fortunately understood something besides; and that
is the futility, the fictitiousness, the absurdity and the falseness
of such a mutiny. For the condemnation of life by a living creature is
after all but the symptom of a definite kind of life: the question as
to whether the condemnation is justified or the reverse is not even
raised. In order even to approach the problem of the value of life,
a man would need to be placed outside life, and moreover know it as
well as one, as many, as all in fact, who have lived it These are
reasons enough to prove to us that this problem is an inaccessible one
to us. When we speak of values, we speak under the inspiration, and
through the optics of life: life itself urges us to determine values:
life itself values through us when we determine values. From which it
follows that even that morality which is antagonistic to life, and
which conceives God as the opposite and the condemnation of life, is
only a valuation of life—of what life? of what kind of life? But I
have already answered this question: it is the valuation of declining,
of enfeebled, of exhausted and of condemned life. Morality, as it has
been understood hitherto—as it was finally formulated by Schopenhauer
in the words “The Denial of the Will to Life,” is the instinct of
degeneration itself, which converts itself into an imperative: it says:
“Perish!” It is the death sentence of men who are already doomed.


6

Let us at last consider how exceedingly simple it is on our part to
say: “Man should be thus and thus!” Reality shows us a marvellous
wealth of types, and a luxuriant variety of forms and changes: and yet
the first wretch of a moral loafer that comes along cries “No! Man
should be different!” He even knows what man should be like, does this
sanctimonious prig: he draws his own face on the wall and declares:
“_ecce homo!_” But even when the moralist addresses himself only to the
individual and says “thus and thus shouldst thou be!” he still makes
an ass of himself. The individual in his past and future is a piece of
fate, one law the more, one necessity the more for all that is to come
and is to be. To say to him “change thyself,” is tantamount to saying
that everything should change, even backwards as well. Truly these have
been consistent moralists, they wished man to be different, _i.e._,
virtuous; they wished him to be after their own image,—that is to say
sanctimonious humbugs. And to this end they denied the world! No slight
form of insanity! No modest form of immodesty! Morality, in so far it
condemns _per se,_ and _not_ out of any aim, consideration or motive of
life, is a specific error, for which no one should feel any mercy, a
degenerate idiosyncrasy, that has done an unutterable amount of harm.
We others, we immoralists, on the contrary, have opened our hearts
wide to all kinds of comprehension, understanding and approbation.[1]
We do not deny readily, we glory in saying yea to things. Our eyes
have opened ever wider and wider to that economy which still employs
and knows how to use to its own advantage all that which the sacred
craziness of priests and the morbid reason in priests, rejects; to
that economy in the law of life which draws its own advantage even out
of the repulsive race of bigots, the priests and the virtuous,—what
advantage?—But we ourselves, we immoralists, are the reply to this
question.

[1] _Cf._ Spinoza, who says in the _Tractatus politico_ (1677), Chap.
I, § 4: _“Sedulo curavi, humanas actiones non ridere, non tugert,
negue detestari, sed intelligere”_ (“I have carefully endeavoured not
to deride, or deplore, or detest human actions, but to understand
them.”).—TR.




THE FOUR GREAT ERRORS


1

_The error of the confusion of cause and effect.—_There is no more
dangerous error than to confound the effect with the cause: I call
this error the intrinsic perversion of reason. Nevertheless this error
is one of the most ancient and most recent habits of mankind. In one
part of the world it has even been canonised; and it bears the name of
“Religion” and “Morality.” Every postulate formulated by religion and
morality contains it. Priests and the promulgators of moral laws are the
promoters of this perversion of reason.—Let me give you an example.
Everybody knows the book of the famous Cornaro, in which he recommends
his slender diet as the recipe for a long, happy and also virtuous
life. Few books have been so widely read, and to this day many thousand
copies of it are still printed annually in England. I do not doubt that
there is scarcely a single book (the Bible of course excepted) that
has worked more mischief, shortened more lives, than this well-meant
curiosity. The reason of this is the confusion of effect and cause.
This worthy Italian saw the cause of his long life in his diet: whereas
the prerequisites of long life, which are exceptional slowness of
molecular change, and a low rate of expenditure in energy, were the
cause of his meagre diet He was not at liberty to eat a small or a
great amount. His frugality was not the result of free choice, he would
have been ill had he eaten more. He who does not happen to be a carp,
however, is not only wise to eat well, but is also compelled to do so.
A scholar of the present day, with his rapid consumption of nervous
energy, would soon go to the dogs on Cornaro’s diet. _Crede experto._—


2

The most general principle lying at the root of every religion and
morality, is this: “Do this and that and avoid this and that—and
thou wilt be happy. Otherwise——.” Every morality and every
religion is this Imperative—I call it the great original sin of
reason,—_immortal unreason._ In my mouth this principle is converted
into its opposite—first example of my “Transvaluation of all Values”:
a well-constituted man, a man who is one of “Nature’s lucky strokes,”
_must_ perform certain actions and instinctively fear other actions;
he introduces the element of order, of which he is the physiological
manifestation, into his relations with men and things. In a formula:
his virtue is the consequence of his good constitution. Longevity
and plentiful offspring are not the reward of virtue, virtue itself
is on the contrary that retardation of the metabolic process which,
among other things, results in a long life and in plentiful offspring,
in short in _Cornarism._ The Church and morality say: “A race, a
people perish through vice and luxury.” My reinstated reason says:
when a people are going to the dogs, when they are degenerating
physiologically, vice and luxury (that is to say, the need of ever
stronger and more frequent stimuli such as all exhausted natures are
acquainted with) are bound to result. Such and such a young man grows
pale and withered prematurely. His friends say this or that illness
is the cause of it I say: the fact that he became ill, the fact that
he did not resist illness, was in itself already the outcome of
impoverished life, of hereditary exhaustion. The newspaper reader says:
such and such a party by committing such an error will meet its death.
My superior politics say: a party that can make such mistakes, is in
its last agony—it no longer possesses any certainty of instinct. Every
mistake is in every sense the sequel to degeneration of the instincts,
to disintegration of the will. This is almost the definition of evil,
Everything valuable is instinct—and consequently easy, necessary,
free. Exertion is an objection, the god is characteristically different
from the hero (in my language: light feet are the first attribute of
divinity).


3

_The error of false causality._ In all ages men have believed that
they knew what a cause was: but whence did we derive this knowledge,
or more accurately, this faith in the fact that we know? Out of the
realm of the famous “inner facts of consciousness,” not one of which
has yet proved itself to be a fact We believed ourselves to be causes
even in the action of the will; we thought that in this matter at
least we caught causality red-handed. No one doubted that all the
_antecedentia_ of an action were to be sought in consciousness, and
could be discovered there—as “motive”—if only they were sought.
Otherwise we should not be free to perform them, we should not have
been responsible for them. Finally who would have questioned that a
thought is caused? that the ego causes the thought? Of these three
“facts of inner consciousness” by means of which causality seemed to
be guaranteed, the first and most convincing is that of the will as
cause; the conception of consciousness (“spirit”) as a cause, and
subsequently that of the ego (the “subject”) as a cause, were merely
born afterwards, once the causality of the will stood established
as “given,” as a fact of experience. Meanwhile we have come to our
senses. To-day we no longer believe a word of all this. The “inner
world” is full of phantoms and will-o’-the-wisps: the will is one of
these. The will no longer actuates, consequently it no longer explains
anything—all it does is to accompany processes; it may even be absent.
The so-called “motive” is another error. It is merely a ripple on
the surface of consciousness, a side issue of the action, which is
much more likely to conceal than to reveal the _antecedentia_ of the
latter. And as for the ego! It has become legendary, fictional, a
play upon words: it has ceased utterly and completely from thinking,
feeling, and willing! What is the result of it all? There are no such
things as spiritual causes. The whole of popular experience on this
subject went to the devil! That is the result of it all. For we had
blissfully abused that experience, we had built the world upon it as a
world of causes, as a world of will, as a world of spirit. The most
antiquated and most traditional psychology has been at work here, it
has done nothing else: all phenomena were deeds in the light of this
psychology, and all deeds were the result of will; according to it the
world was a complex mechanism of agents, an agent (a “subject”) lay
at the root of all things. Man projected his three “inner facts of
consciousness,” the will, the spirit, and the ego in which he believed
most firmly, outside himself. He first deduced the concept Being out
of the concept Ego, he supposed “things” to exist as he did himself,
according to his notion of the ego as cause. Was it to be wondered at
that later on he always found in things only that which he had laid
in them?—The thing itself, I repeat, the concept thing was merely a
reflex of the belief in the ego as cause. And even your atom, my dear
good Mechanists and Physicists, what an amount of error, of rudimentary
psychology still adheres to it!—Not to speak of the “thing-in-itself,”
of the _horrendum pudendum_ of the metaphysicians! The error of spirit
regarded as a cause, confounded with reality! And made the measure of
reality! And called _God!_


4

_The Error of imaginary Causes._ Starting out from dreamland, we
find that to any definite sensation, like that produced by a distant
cannon shot for instance, we are wont to ascribe a cause after the
fact (very often quite a little romance in which the dreamer himself
is, of course, the hero). Meanwhile the sensation becomes protracted
like a sort of continuous echo, until, as it were, the instinct of
causality allows it to come to the front rank, no longer however as a
chance occurrence, but as a thing which has some meaning. The cannon
shot presents itself in a _causal_ manner, by means of an apparent
reversal in the order of time. That which occurs last, the motivation,
is experienced first, often with a hundred details which flash past
like lightning, and the shot is the _result._ What has happened? The
ideas suggested by a particular state of our senses, are misinterpreted
as the cause of that state. As a matter of fact we proceed in precisely
the same manner when we are awake. The greater number of our general
sensations—every kind of obstacle, pressure, tension, explosion in
the interplay of the organs, and more particularly the condition of
the _nervus sympathies_—stimulate our instinct of causality: we will
have a reason which will account for our feeling thus or thus,—for
feeling ill or well. We are never satisfied by merely ascertaining
the fact that we feel thus or thus: we admit this fact—we become
conscious of it—only when we have attributed it to some kind of
motivation. Memory, which, in such circumstances unconsciously becomes
active, adduces former conditions of a like kind, together with the
causal interpretations with which they are associated,—but not their
real cause. The belief that the ideas, the accompanying processes
of consciousness, have been the causes, is certainly produced by
the agency of memory. And in this way we become _accustomed_ to a
particular interpretation of causes which, truth to tell, actually
hinders and even utterly prevents the investigation of the proper
cause.


5

_The Psychological Explanation of the above Fact._ To trace something
unfamiliar back to something familiar, is at once a relief, a comfort
and a satisfaction, while it also produces a feeling of power. The
unfamiliar involves danger, anxiety and care,—the fundamental instinct
is to get rid of these painful circumstances. First principle: any
explanation is better than none at all. Since, at bottom, it is
only a question of shaking one’s self free from certain oppressive
ideas, the means employed to this end are not selected with overmuch
punctiliousness: the first idea by means of which the unfamiliar is
revealed as familiar, produces a feeling of such comfort that it is
“held to be true.” The proof of happiness (“of power”) as the criterion
of truth. The instinct of causality is therefore conditioned and
stimulated by the feeling of fear. Whenever possible, the question
“why?” should not only educe the cause as cause, but rather a certain
kind of cause—a comforting, liberating and reassuring cause. The first
result of this need is that something known or already experienced, and
recorded in the memory, is posited as the cause. The new factor, that
which has not been experienced and which is unfamiliar, is excluded
from the sphere of causes. Not only do we try to find a certain kind
of explanation as the cause, but those kinds of explanations are
selected and preferred which dissipate most rapidly the sensation of
strangeness, novelty and unfamiliarity,—in fact the most ordinary
explanations. And the result is that a certain manner of postulating
causes tends to predominate ever more and more, becomes concentrated
into a system, and finally reigns supreme, to the complete exclusion
of all other causes and explanations. The banker thinks immediately of
business, the Christian of “sin,” and the girl of her love affair.


6

_The whole Domain of Morality and Religion may be classified under the
Rubric “Imaginary Causes.”_ The “explanation” of general unpleasant
sensations. These sensations are dependent upon certain creatures who
are hostile to us (evil spirits: the most famous example of this—the
mistaking of hysterical women for witches). These sensations are
dependent upon actions which are reprehensible (the feeling of “sin,”
“sinfulness” is a manner of accounting for a certain physiological
disorder—people always find reasons for being dissatisfied with
themselves). These sensations depend upon punishment, upon compensation
for something which we ought not to have done, which we ought not
to have been (this idea was generalised in a more impudent form by
Schopenhauer, into that principle in which morality appears in its real
colours,—that is to say, as a veritable poisoner and slanderer of
life: “all great suffering, whether mental or physical, reveals what
we deserve: for it could not visit us if we did not deserve it,” “The
World as Will and Idea,” vol. 2, p. 666). These sensations are the
outcome of ill-considered actions, having evil consequences, (—the
passions, the senses, postulated as causes, as guilty. By means of
other calamities distressing physiological conditions are interpreted
as “merited”).—The “explanation” of pleasant sensations. These
sensations are dependent upon a trust in God. They may depend upon
our consciousness of having done one or two good actions (a so-called
“good conscience” is a physiological condition, which may be the
outcome of good digestion). They may depend upon the happy issue of
certain undertakings (—an ingenuous mistake: the happy issue of an
undertaking certainly does not give a hypochondriac or a Pascal any
general sensation of pleasure). They may depend upon faith, love and
hope,—the Christian virtues. As a matter of fact all these pretended
explanations are but the results of certain states, and as it were
translations of feelings of pleasure and pain into a false dialect: a
man is in a condition of hopefulness because the dominant physiological
sensation of his being is again one of strength and wealth; he trusts
in God because the feeling of abundance and power gives him a peaceful
state of mind. Morality and religion are completely and utterly parts
of the psychology of error: in every particular case cause and effect
are confounded; as truth is confounded with the effect of that which is
believed to be true; or a certain state of consciousness is confounded
with the chain of causes which brought it about.


7

_The Error of Free-Will._ At present we no longer have any mercy upon
the concept “free-will”: we know only too well what it is—the most
egregious theological trick that has ever existed for the purpose of
making mankind “responsible” in a theological manner,—that is to
say, to make mankind dependent upon theologians. I will now explain
to you only the psychology of the whole process of inculcating the
sense of responsibility. Wherever men try to trace responsibility
home to anyone, it is the instinct of punishment and of the desire
to judge which is active. Becoming is robbed of its innocence when
any particular condition of things is traced to a will, to intentions
and to responsible actions. The doctrine of the will was invented
principally for the purpose of punishment,—that is to say, with
the intention of tracing guilt. The whole of ancient psychology,
or the psychology of the will, is the outcome of the fact that its
originators, who were the priests at the head of ancient communities,
wanted to create for themselves a right to administer punishments—or
the right for God to do so. Men were thought of as “free” in order that
they might be judged and punished—in order that they might be held
guilty: consequently every action had to be regarded as voluntary,
and the origin of every action had to be imagined as lying in
consciousness(—in this way the most fundamentally fraudulent character
of psychology was established as the very principle of psychology
itself). Now that we have entered upon the opposite movement, now that
we immoralists are trying with all our power to eliminate the concepts
of guilt and punishment from the world once more, and to cleanse
psychology, history, nature and all social institutions and customs
of all signs of those two concepts, we recognise no more radical
opponents than the theologians, who with their notion of “a moral order
of things,” still continue to pollute the innocence of Becoming with
punishment and guilt Christianity is the metaphysics of the hangman.


8

What then, alone, can our teaching be?—That no one gives man his
qualities, neither God, society, his parents, his ancestors, nor
himself (—this nonsensical idea which is at last refuted here, was
taught as “intelligible freedom” by Kant, and perhaps even as early
as Plato himself). No one is responsible for the fact that he exists
at all, that he is constituted as he is, and that he happens to be in
certain circumstances and in a particular environment. The fatality of
his being cannot be divorced from the fatality of all that which has
been and will be. This is not the result of an individual intention,
of a will, of an aim, there is no attempt at attaining to any “ideal
man,” or “ideal happiness” or “ideal morality” with him,—it is absurd
to wish him to be careering towards some sort of purpose. _We_ invented
the concept “purpose”; in reality purpose is altogether lacking. One
is necessary, one is a piece of fate, one belongs to the whole, one is
in the whole,—there is nothing that could judge, measure, compare,
and condemn our existence, for that would mean judging, measuring,
comparing and condemning the whole. _But there is nothing outside the
whole!_ The fact that no one shall any longer be made responsible, that
the nature of existence may not be traced to a _causa prima_, that the
world is an entity neither as a sensorium nor as a spirit—_this alone
is the great deliverance_,—thus alone is the innocence of Becoming
restored.... The concept “God” has been the greatest objection to
existence hitherto.... We deny God, we deny responsibility in God: thus
alone do we save the world.—




THE “IMPROVERS” OF MANKIND


1

You are aware of my demand upon philosophers, that they should take
up a stand Beyond Good and Evil,—that they should have the illusion
of the moral judgment beneath them. This demand is the result of a
point of view which I was the first to formulate: _that there are no
such things as moral facts._ Moral judgment has this in common with
the religious one, that it believes in realities which are not real.
Morality is only an interpretation of certain phenomena: or, more
strictly speaking, a misinterpretation of them. Moral judgment, like
the religious one, belongs to a stage of ignorance in which even the
concept of reality, the distinction between real and imagined things,
is still lacking: so that truth, at such a stage, is applied to a host
of things which to-day we call “imaginary.” That is why the moral
judgment must never be taken quite literally: as such it is sheer
nonsense. As a sign code, however, it is invaluable: to him at least
who knows, it reveals the most valuable facts concerning cultures and
inner conditions, which did not know enough to “understand” themselves.
Morality is merely a sign-language, simply symptomatology: one must
already know what it is all about in order to turn it to any use.


2

Let me give you one example, quite provisionally. In all ages there
have been people who wished to “improve” mankind: this above all
is what was called morality. But the most different tendencies
are concealed beneath the same word. Both the taming of the beast
man, and the rearing of a particular type of man, have been called
“improvement”: these zoological _termini,_ alone, represent real
things—real things of which the typical “improver,” the priest,
naturally knows nothing, and will know nothing. To call the taming
of an animal “improving” it, sounds to our ears almost like a joke.
He who knows what goes on in menageries, doubts very much whether an
animal is improved in such places. It is certainly weakened, it is
made less dangerous, and by means of the depressing influence of fear,
pain, wounds, and hunger, it is converted into a sick animal. And the
same holds good of the tamed man whom the priest has “improved.” In
the early years of the Middle Ages, during which the Church was most
distinctly and above all a menagerie, the most beautiful examples of
the “blond beast” were hunted down in all directions,—the noble
Germans, for instance, were “improved.” But what did this “improved”
German, who had been lured to the monastery look like after the
process? He looked like a caricature of man, like an abortion: he had
become a “sinner,” he was caged up, he had been imprisoned behind a
host of apparling notions. He now lay there, sick, wretched, malevolent
even toward himself: full of hate for the instincts of life, full of
suspicion in regard to all that is still strong and happy. In short a
“Christian.” In physiological terms: in a fight with an animal, the
only way of making it weak may be to make it sick. The Church undersood
this: it ruined man, it made him weak,—but it laid claim to having
“improved” him.


3

Now let us consider the other case which is called morality, the
case of the rearing of a particular race and species. The most
magnificent example of this is offered by Indian morality, and is
sanctioned religiously as the “Law of Manu.” In this book the task
is set of rearing no less than four races at once: a priestly race,
a warrior race, a merchant and agricultural race, and finally a race
of servants—the Sudras. It is quite obvious that we are no longer
in a circus watching tamers of wild animals in this book. To have
conceived even the plan of such a breeding scheme, presupposes the
existence of a man who is a hundred times milder and more reasonable
than the mere lion-tamer. One breathes more freely, after stepping out
of the Christian atmosphere of hospitals and prisons, into this more
salubrious, loftier and more spacious world. What a wretched thing the
New Testament is beside Manu, what an evil odour hangs around it!—But
even this organisation found it necessary to be terrible,—not this
time in a struggle with the animal-man, but with his opposite, the
non-caste man, the hotch-potch man, the Chandala. And once again it
had no other means of making him weak and harmless, than by making
him sick,—it was the struggle with the greatest “number.” Nothing
perhaps is more offensive to our feelings than these measures of
security on the part of Indian morality. The third edict, for instance
(Avadana-Sastra I.), which treats “of impure vegetables,” ordains that
the only nourishment that the Chandala should be allowed must consist
of garlic and onions, as the holy scriptures forbid their being given
corn or grain-bearing fruit, water and fire. The same edict declares
that the water which they need must be drawn neither out of rivers,
wells or ponds, but only out of the ditches leading to swamps and out
of the holes left by the footprints of animals. They are likewise
forbidden to wash either their linen or themselves since the water
which is graciously granted to them must only be used for quenching
their thirst. Finally Sudra women are forbidden to assist Chandala
women at their confinements, while Chandala women are also forbidden to
assist each other at such times. The results of sanitary regulations of
this kind could not fail to make themselves felt; deadly epidemics and
the most ghastly venereal diseases soon appeared, and in consequence
of these again “the Law of the Knife,”—that is to say circumcision,
was prescribed for male children and the removal of the small labia
from the females. Manu himself says: “the Chandala are the fruit of
adultery, incest, and crime (—this is the necessary consequence of the
idea of breeding). Their clothes shall consist only of the rags torn
from corpses, their vessels shall be the fragments of broken pottery,
their ornaments shall be made of old iron, and their religion shall be
the worship of evil spirits; without rest they shall wander from place
to place. They are forbidden to write from left to right or to use
their right hand in writing: the use of the right hand and writing from
left to right are reserved to people of virtue, to people of race.”


4

These regulations are instructive enough: we can see in them the
absolutely pure and primeval humanity of the Aryans,—we learn that
the notion “pure blood,” is the reverse of harmless. On the other hand
it becomes clear among which people the hatred, the Chandala hatred
of this humanity has been immortalised, among which people it has
become religion and genius. From this point of view the gospels are
documents of the highest value; and the Book of Enoch is still more
so. Christianity as sprung from Jewish roots and comprehensible only
as grown upon this soil, represents the counter-movement against that
morality of breeding, of race and of privilege:—it is essentially an
anti-Aryan religion: Christianity is the transvaluation of all Aryan
values, the triumph of Chandala values, the proclaimed gospel of the
poor and of the low, the general insurrection of all the down-trodden,
the wretched, the bungled and the botched, against the “race,”—the
immortal revenge of the Chandala as the _religion of love._


5

The morality of breeding and the morality of taming, in the means which
they adopt in order to prevail, are quite worthy of each other: we may
lay down as a leading principle that in order to create morality a
man must have the absolute will to immorality. This is the great and
strange problem with which I have so long been occupied: the psychology
of the “Improvers” of mankind. A small, and at bottom perfectly
insignificant fact, known as the “_pia fraus_,” first gave me access
to this problem: the _pia fraus_, the heirloom of all philosophers and
priests who “improve” mankind. Neither Manu, nor Plato, nor Confucius,
nor the teachers of Judaism and Christianity, have ever doubted their
right to falsehood. They have never doubted their right to quite a
number of other things To express oneself in a formula, one might
say:—all means which have been used heretofore with the object of
making man moral, were through and through immoral.




THINGS THE GERMANS LACK


1

Among Germans at the present day it does not suffice to have intellect;
one is actually forced to appropriate it, to lay claim to it.

Maybe I know the Germans, perhaps I may tell them a few home-truths.
Modern Germany represents such an enormous store of inherited and
acquired capacity, that for some time it might spend this accumulated
treasure even with some prodigality. It is no superior culture that has
ultimately become prevalent with this modern tendency, nor is it by any
means delicate taste, or noble beauty of the instincts; but rather a
number of virtues more manly than any that other European countries can
show. An amount of good spirits and self-respect, plenty of firmness
in human relations and in the reciprocity of duties; much industry and
much perseverance—and a certain inherited soberness which is much more
in need of a spur than of a brake. Let me add that in this country
people still obey without feeling that obedience humiliates. And no one
despises his opponent.

You observe that it is my desire to be fair to the Germans: and in this
respect I should not like to be untrue to myself,—I must therefore
also state my objections to them. It costs a good deal to attain to a
position of power; for power _stultifies._ The Germans—they were once
called a people of thinkers: do they really think at all at present?
Nowadays the Germans are bored by intellect, they mistrust intellect;
politics have swallowed up all earnestness for really intellectual
things—“Germany, Germany above all.”[1] I fear this was the death-blow
to German philosophy. “Are there any German philosophers? Are there any
German poets? Are there any good German books?” people ask me abroad. I
blush; but with that pluck which is peculiar to me, even in moments of
desperation, I reply: “Yes, Bismarck!”—Could I have dared to confess
what books _are_ read to-day? Cursed instinct of mediocrity!—


2

What might not German intellect have been!—who has not thought sadly
upon this question! But this nation has deliberately stultified itself
for almost a thousand years: nowhere else have the two great European
narcotics, alcohol and Christianity, been so viciously abused as in
Germany. Recently a third opiate was added to the list, one which in
itself alone would have sufficed to complete the ruin of all subtle
and daring intellectual animation, I speak of music, our costive and
constipating German music. How much peevish ponderousness, paralysis,
dampness, dressing-gown languor, and beer is there not in German
intelligence!

How is it really possible that young men who consecrate their whole
lives to the pursuit of intellectual ends, should not feel within them
the first instinct of intellectuality, the _self-preservative instinct
of the intellect_—and should drink beer? The alcoholism of learned
youths does not incapacitate them for becoming scholars—a man quite
devoid of intellect may be a great scholar,—but it is a problem in
every other respect. Where can that soft degeneracy not be found, which
is produced in the intellect by beer! I once laid my finger upon a case
of this sort, which became almost famous,—the degeneration of our
leading German free-spirit, the _clever_ David Strauss, into the author
of a suburban gospel and New Faith. Not in vain had he sung the praises
of “the dear old brown liquor” in verse—true unto death.


3

I have spoken of German intellect. I have said that it is becoming
coarser and shallower. Is that enough?—In reality something very
different frightens me, and that is the ever steady decline of
German earnestness, German profundity, and German passion in things
intellectual. Not only intellectuality, but also pathos has altered.
From time to time I come in touch with German universities; what
an extraordinary atmosphere prevails among their scholars! what
barrenness! and what self-satisfied and lukewarm intellectuality! For
any one to point to German science as an argument against me would show
that he grossly misunderstood my meaning, while it would also prove
that he had not read a word of my writings. For seventeen years I
have done little else than expose the de-intellectualising influence
of our modern scientific studies. The severe slavery to which every
individual nowadays is condemned by the enormous range covered by the
sciences, is the chief reason why fuller, richer and profounder natures
can find no education or educators that are fit for them. Nothing
is more deleterious to this age than the superfluity of pretentious
loafers and fragmentary human beings; our universities are really
the involuntary forcing houses for this kind of withering-up of the
instincts of intellectuality. And the whole of Europe is beginning
to know this—politics on a large scale deceive no one. Germany is
becoming ever more and more the Flat-land of Europe. I am still in
search of a German with whom I could be serious after my own fashion.
And how much more am I in search of one with whom I could be cheerful
_—The Twilight of the Idols:_ ah! what man to-day would be capable
of understanding the kind of seriousness from which a philosopher is
recovering in this work! It is our cheerfulness that people understand
least.


4

Let us examine another aspect of the question: it is not only obvious
that German culture is declining, but adequate reasons for this decline
are not lacking. After all, nobody can spend more than he has:—this
is true of individuals, it is also true of nations. If you spend
your strength in acquiring power, or in politics on a large scale,
or in economy, or in universal commerce, or in parliamentarism, or
in military interests—if you dissipate the modicum of reason, of
earnestness, of will, and of self-control that constitutes your nature
in one particular fashion, you cannot dissipate it in another. Culture
and the state—let no one be deceived on this point—are antagonists:
A “culture-state”[2] is merely a modern idea. The one lives upon
the other, the one flourishes at the expense of the other. All great
periods of culture have been periods of political decline; that which
is great from the standpoint of culture, was always unpolitical—even
anti-political. Goethe’s heart opened at the coming of Napoleon—it
closed at the thought of the “Wars of Liberation.” At the very moment
when Germany arose as a great power in the world of politics, France
won new importance as a force in the world of culture. Even at this
moment a large amount of fresh intellectual earnestness and passion
has emigrated to Paris; the question of pessimism, for instance,
and the question of Wagner; in France almost all psychological and
artistic questions are considered with incomparably more subtlety and
thoroughness than they are in Germany,—the Germans are even incapable
of this kind of earnestness. In the history of European culture the
rise of the Empire signifies, above all, a displacement of the centre
of gravity. Everywhere people are already aware of this: in things that
really matter—and these after all constitute culture,—the Germans
are no longer worth considering. I ask you, can you show me one single
man of brains who could be mentioned in the same breath with other
European thinkers, like your Goethe, your Hegel, your Heinrich Heine,
and your Schopenhauer?—The fact that there is no longer a single
German philosopher worth mentioning is an increasing wonder.


5

Everything that matters has been lost sight of by the whole of the
higher educational system of Germany: the end quite as much as the
means to that end. People forget that education, the process of
cultivation itself, is the end—and not “the Empire”—they forget that
the _educator_ is required for this end—and not the public-school
teacher and university scholar. Educators are needed who are themselves
educated, superior and noble intellects, who can prove that they are
thus qualified, that they are ripe and mellow products of culture
at every moment of their lives, in word and in gesture;—not the
learned louts who, like “superior wet-nurses,” are now thrust upon the
youth of the land by public schools and universities. With but rare
exceptions, that which is lacking in Germany is the first prerequisite
of education—that is to say, the educators; hence the decline of
German culture. One of those rarest exceptions is my highly respected
friend Jacob Burckhardt of Bâle: to him above all is Bâle indebted
for its foremost position in human culture What the higher schools
of Germany really do accomplish is this, they brutally train a vast
crowd of young men, in the smallest amount of time possible, to become
useful and exploitable servants of the state. “Higher education”
and a vast crowd—these terms contradict each other from the start.
All superior education can only concern the exception: a man must be
privileged in order to have a right to such a great privilege. All
great and beautiful things cannot be a common possession: _pulchrum
est paucorum hominum._—What is it that brings about the decline of
German culture? The fact that “higher education” is no longer a special
privilege—the democracy of a process of cultivation that has become
“general,” _common._ Nor must it be forgotten that the privileges of
the military profession by urging many too many to attend the higher
schools, involve the downfall of the latter. In modern Germany nobody
is at liberty to give his children a noble education: in regard to
their teachers, their curricula, and their educational aims, our higher
schools are one and all established upon a fundamentally doubtful
mediocre basis. Everywhere, too, a hastiness which is unbecoming rules
supreme; just as if something would be forfeited if the young man were
not “finished” at the age of twenty-three, or did not know how to
reply to the most essential question, “which calling to choose?”—The
superior kind of man, if you please, does not like “callings,”
precisely because he knows himself to be called. He has time, he takes
time, he cannot possibly think of becoming “finished,”—in the matter
of higher culture, a man of thirty years is a beginner, a child. Our
overcrowded public-schools, our accumulation of foolishly manufactured
public-school masters, are a scandal: maybe there are very serious
_motives_ for defending this state of affairs, as was shown quite
recently by the professors of Heidelberg; but there can be no reasons
for doing so.


6

In order to be true to my nature, which is affirmative and which
concerns itself with contradictions and criticism only indirectly
and with reluctance, let me state at once what the three objects
are for which we need educators. People must learn to see; they
must learn to think, and they must learn to speak and to write: the
object of all three of these pursuits is a noble culture. To learn
to see—to accustom the eye to calmness, to patience, and to allow
things to come up to it; to defer judgment, and to acquire the habit
of approaching and grasping an individual case from all sides. This
is the first preparatory schooling of intellectuality. One must not
respond immediately to a stimulus; one must acquire a command of the
obstructing and isolating instincts. To learn to see, as I understand
this matter, amounts almost to that which in popular language is
called “strength of will”: its essential feature is precisely _not_
to _wish_ to see, to be able to postpone one’s decision. All lack of
intellectuality, all vulgarity, arises out of the inability to resist
a stimulus:—one must respond or react, every impulse is indulged. In
many cases such necessary action is already a sign of morbidity, of
decline, and a symptom of exhaustion. Almost everything that coarse
popular language characterises as vicious, is merely that physiological
inability to refrain from reacting.—As an instance of what it means
to have learnt to see, let me state that a man thus trained will as a
learner have become generally slow, suspicious, and refractory. With
hostile calm he will first allow every kind of strange and _new_ thing
to come right up to him,—he will draw back his hand at its approach.
To stand with all the doors of one’s soul wide open, to lie slavishly
in the dust before every trivial fact, at all times of the day to be
strained ready for the leap, in order to deposit one’s self, to plunge
one’s self, into other souls and other things, in short, the famous
“objectivity” of modern times, is bad taste, it is essentially vulgar
and cheap.


7

As to learning how to think—our schools no longer have any notion
of such a thing. Even at the universities, among the actual scholars
in philosophy, logic as a theory, as a practical pursuit, and as a
business, is beginning to die out. Turn to any German book: you will
not find the remotest trace of a realisation that there is such a
thing as a technique, a plan of study, a will to mastery, in the
matter of thinking,—that thinking insists upon being learnt, just
as dancing insists upon being learnt, and that thinking insists upon
being learnt as a form of dancing. What single German can still say he
knows from experience that delicate shudder which _light footfalls_
in matters intellectual cause to pervade his whole body and limbs!
Stiff awkwardness in intellectual attitudes, and the clumsy fist in
grasping—these things are so essentially German, that outside Germany
they are absolutely confounded with the German spirit. The German
has no fingers for delicate _nuances. _ The fact that the people of
Germany have actually tolerated their philosophers, more particularly
that most deformed cripple of ideas that has ever existed—the great
Kant, gives one no inadequate notion of their native elegance. For,
truth to tell, dancing in all its forms cannot be excluded from the
curriculum of all noble education: dancing with the feet, with ideas,
with words, and, need I add that one must also be able to dance with
the pen—that one must learn how to write?—But at this stage I should
become utterly enigmatical to German readers.


[1] The German national hymn: “_Deutschland, Deutschland über
alles.—_” TR.

[2] The word _Kultur-Staat_ “culture-state” has become a standard
expression in the German language, and is applied to the leading
European States.—TR.




SKIRMISHES IN A WAR WITH THE AGE


1

_My Impossible People._—Seneca, or the toreador of virtue—-Rousseau,
or the return to nature, _in impuris naturalibus._—Schiller, or the
Moral-Trumpeter of Sackingen.—Dante, or the hyæna that writes poetry
in tombs.—Kant, or _cant_ as an intelligible character.—Victor
Hugo, or the lighthouse on the sea of nonsense.—Liszt, or the
school of racing—after women.—George Sand, or _lactea ubertas,_
in plain English: the cow with plenty of beautiful milk.—Michelet,
or enthusiasm in its shirt sleeves.—Carlyle, or Pessimism after
undigested meals.—John Stuart Mill, or offensive lucidity.—The
brothers Goncourt, or the two Ajaxes fighting with Homer. Music by
Offenbach.—Zola, or the love of stinking.


2

_Renan._—Theology, or the corruption of reason by original sin
(Christianity). Proof of this,—Renan who, even in those rare cases
where he ventures to say either Yes or No on a general question,
invariably misses the point with painful regularity. For instance,
he would fain associate science and nobility: but surely it must be
obvious that science is democratic. He seems to be actuated by a
strong desire to represent an aristocracy of intellect: but, at the
same time he grovels on his knees, and not only on his knees, before
the opposite doctrine, the gospel of the humble. What is the good of
all free-spiritedness, modernity, mockery and acrobatic suppleness,
if in one’s belly one is still a Christian, a Catholic, and even a
priest! Renan’s forte, precisely like that of a Jesuit and Father
Confessor, lies in his seductiveness. His intellectuality is not
devoid of that unctuous complacency of a parson,—like all priests, he
becomes dangerous only when he loves. He is second to none in the art
of skilfully worshipping a dangerous thing. This intellect of Renan’s,
which in its action is enervating, is one calamity the more, for poor,
sick France with her will-power all going to pieces.


3

_Sainte-Beuve._—There is naught of man in him; he is full of petty
spite towards all virile spirits. He wanders erratically; he is subtle,
inquisitive, a little bored, for ever with his ear to key-holes,—at
bottom a woman, with all woman’s revengefulness and sensuality. As a
psychologist he is a genius of slander; inexhaustively rich in means
to this end; no one understands better than he how to introduce a
little poison into praise. In his fundamental instincts he is plebeian
and next of kin to Rousseau’s resentful spirit: consequently he is
a Romanticist—for beneath all romanticism Rousseau’s instinct for
revenge grunts and frets. He is a revolutionary, but kept within
bounds by “funk.” He is embarrassed in the face of everything that is
strong (public opinion, the Academy, the court, even Port Royal). He
is embittered against everything great in men and things, against
everything that believes in itself. Enough of a poet and of a female to
be able to feel greatness as power; he is always turning and twisting,
because, like the proverbial worm, he constantly feels that he is
being trodden upon. As a critic he has no standard of judgment, no
guiding principle, no backbone. Although he possesses the tongue of
the Cosmopolitan libertine which can chatter about a thousand things,
he has not the courage even to acknowledge his _libertinage._ As a
historian he has no philosophy, and lacks the power of philosophical
vision,—hence his refusal to act the part of a judge, and his adoption
of the mask of “objectivity” in all important matters. His attitude
is better in regard to all those things in which subtle and effete
taste is the highest tribunal: in these things he really does have
the courage of his own personality—he really does enjoy his own
nature—he actually is a _master,_—In some respects he is a prototype
of Baudelaire.


4

“_The Imitation of Christ_” is one of those books which I cannot even
take hold of without physical loathing: it exhales a perfume of the
eternally feminine, which to appreciate fully one must be a Frenchman
or a Wagnerite. This saint has a way of speaking about love which
makes even Parisiennes feel a little curious.—I am told that that
_most intelligent_ of Jesuits, Auguste Comte, who wished to lead his
compatriots back to Rome by the circuitous route of science, drew his
inspiration from this book. And I believe it: “The religion of the
heart.”


5

_G. Eliot._—They are rid of the Christian God and therefore
think it all the more incumbent upon them to hold tight to Christian
morality: this is an English way of reasoning; but let us not take it
ill in moral females _à la_ Eliot. In England, every man who indulges
in any trifling emancipation from theology, must retrieve his honour
in the most terrifying manner by becoming a moral fanatic. That is how
they do penance in that country.—As for us, we act differently. When
we renounce the Christian faith, we abandon all right to Christian
morality. This is not by any means self-evident and in defiance of
English shallow-pates the point must be made ever more and more plain.
Christianity is a system, a complete outlook upon the world, conceived
as a whole. If its leading concept, the belief in God, is wrenched
from it, the whole is destroyed; nothing vital remains in our grasp.
Christianity presupposes that man does not and cannot know what is
good or bad for him: the Christian believes in God who, alone, can
know these things. Christian morality is a command, its origin is
transcendental. It is beyond all criticism, all right to criticism;
it is true only on condition that God is truth,—it stands or falls
with the belief in God. If the English really believe that they know
intuitively, and of their own accord, what is good and evil; if,
therefore, they assert that they no longer need Christianity as a
guarantee of morality, this in itself is simply the outcome of the
dominion of Christian valuations, and a proof of the strength and
profundity of this dominion. It only shows that the origin of English
morality has been forgotten, and that its exceedingly relative right to
exist is no longer felt. For Englishmen morality is not yet a problem.


6

_George Sand._—I have been reading the first “_Lettres d’un
Voyageur_:” like everything that springs from Rousseau’s influence
it is false, made-up, blown out, and exaggerated! I cannot endure
this bright wall-paper style, any more than I can bear the vulgar
striving after generous feelings. The worst feature about it is
certainly the coquettish adoption of male attributes by this female,
after the manner of ill-bred schoolboys. And how cold she must have
been inwardly all the while, this insufferable artist! She wound
herself up like a clock—and wrote. As cold as Hugo and Balzac, as
cold as all Romanticists are as soon as they begin to write! And how
self-complacently she must have lain there, this prolific ink-yielding
cow. For she had something German in her (German in the bad sense),
just as Rousseau, her master, had;—something which could only have
been possible when French taste was declining!—and Renan adores her!...


7

_A Moral for Psychologists._ Do not go in for any note-book psychology!
Never observe for the sake of observing! Such things lead to a false
point of view, to a squint, to something forced and exaggerated.
To experience things on purpose—this is not a bit of good. In the
midst of an experience a man should not turn his eyes upon himself;
in such cases any eye becomes the “evil eye.” A born psychologist
instinctively avoids seeing for the sake of seeing. And the same holds
good of the born painter. Such a man never works “from nature,”—he
leaves it to his instinct, to his _camera obscura_ to sift and to
define the “fact,” “nature,” the “experience.” The general idea,
the conclusion, the result, is the only thing that reaches his
consciousness. He knows nothing of that wilful process of deducing
from particular cases. What is the result when a man sets about this
matter differently?—when, for instance, after the manner of Parisian
novelists, he goes in for note-book psychology on a large and small
scale? Such a man is constantly spying on reality, and every evening
he bears home a handful of fresh curios.... But look at the result!—a
mass of daubs, at best a piece of mosaic, in any case something heaped
together, restless and garish. The Goncourts are the greatest sinners
in this respect: they cannot put three sentences together which are not
absolutely painful to the eye—the eye of the psychologist. From an
artistic standpoint, nature is no model. It exaggerates, distorts, and
leaves gaps. Nature is the _accident._ To study “from nature” seems to
me a bad sign: it betrays submission, weakness, fatalism—this lying
in the dust before trivial facts is unworthy of a thorough artist. To
see _what is_—is the function of another order of intellects, the
_anti-artistic,_ the matter-of-fact. One must know _who_ one is.


8

_Concerning the psychology of the artist_ For art to be possible at
all—that is to say, in order that an æsthetic mode of action and of
observation may exist, a certain preliminary physiological state is
indispensable _ecstasy._[1] This state of ecstasy must first have
intensified the susceptibility of the whole machine: otherwise, no art
is possible. All kinds of ecstasy, however differently produced, have
this power to create art, and above all the state dependent upon sexual
excitement—this most venerable and primitive form of ecstasy. The same
applies to that ecstasy which is the outcome of all great desires,
all strong passions; the ecstasy of the feast, of the arena, of the
act of bravery, of victory, of all extreme action; the ecstasy of
cruelty; the ecstasy of destruction; the ecstasy following upon certain
meteorological influences, as for instance that of spring-time, or upon
the use of narcotics; and finally the ecstasy of will, that ecstasy
which results from accumulated and surging will-power.—The essential
feature of ecstasy is the feeling of increased strength and abundance.
Actuated by this feeling a man gives of himself to things, _he
forces_ them to partake of his riches, he does violence to them—this
proceeding is called _idealising._ Let us rid ourselves of a prejudice
here: idealising does not consist, as is generally believed, in a
suppression or an elimination of detail or of unessential features.
A stupendous _accentuation_ of the principal characteristics is by
far the most decisive factor at work, and in consequence the minor
characteristics vanish.


9

In this state a man enriches everything from out his own abundance:
what he sees, what he wills, he sees distended, compressed, strong,
overladen with power. He transfigures things until they reflect his
power,—until they are stamped with his perfection. This compulsion
to transfigure into the beautiful is—Art. Everything—even that which
he is not,—is nevertheless to such a man a means of rejoicing over
himself; in Art man rejoices over himself as perfection.—It is
possible to imagine a contrary state, a specifically anti-artistic
state of the instincts,—a state in which a man impoverishes,
attenuates, and draws the blood from everything. And, truth to tell,
history is full of such anti-artists, of such creatures of low
vitality who have no choice but to appropriate everything they see
and to suck its blood and make it thinner. This is the case with the
genuine Christian, Pascal for instance. There is no such thing as a
Christian who is also an artist ... Let no one be so childish as to
suggest Raphael or any homeopathic Christian of the nineteenth century
as an objection to this statement: Raphael said Yea, Raphael _did_
Yea,—consequently Raphael was no Christian.


10

What is the meaning of the antithetical concepts _Apollonian_ and
_Dionysian_ which I have introduced into the vocabulary of Æsthetic, as
representing two distinct modes of ecstasy?—Apollonian ecstasy acts
above all as a force stimulating the eye, so that it acquires the power
of vision. The painter, the sculptor, the epic poet are essentially
visionaries. In the Dionysian state, on the other hand, the whole
system of passions is stimulated and intensified, so that it discharges
itself by all the means of expression at once, and vents all its power
of representation, of imitation, of transfiguration, of transformation,
together with every kind of mimicry and histrionic display at the same
time. The essential feature remains the facility in transforming,
the inability to refrain from reaction (—a similar state to that of
certain hysterical patients, who at the slightest hint assume any
rôle). It is impossible for the Dionysian artist not to understand any
suggestion; no outward sign of emotion escapes him, he possesses the
instinct of comprehension and of divination in the highest degree,
just as he is capable of the most perfect art of communication. He
enters into every skin, into every passion: he is continually changing
himself. Music as we understand it to-day is likewise a general
excitation and discharge of the emotions; but, notwithstanding this, it
is only the remnant of a much richer world of emotional expression, a
mere residuum of Dionysian histrionism. For music to be made possible
as a special art, quite a number of senses, and particularly the
muscular sense, had to be paralysed (at least relatively: for all
rhythm still appeals to our muscles to a certain extent): and thus man
no longer imitates and represents physically everything he feels, as
soon as he feels it. Nevertheless that is the normal Dionysian state,
and in any case its primitive state. Music is the slowly attained
specialisation of this state at the cost of kindred capacities.


11

The actor, the mime, the dancer, the musician, and the lyricist, are
in their instincts fundamentally related; but they have gradually
specialised in their particular branch, and become separated—even
to the point of contradiction. The lyricist remained united with the
musician for the longest period of time; and the actor with the dancer.
The architect manifests neither a Dionysian nor an Apollonian state: In
his case it is the great act of will, the will that moveth mountains,
the ecstasy of the great will which aspires to art. The most powerful
men have always inspired architects; the architect has always been
under the suggestion of power. In the architectural structure, man’s
pride, man’s triumph over gravitation, man’s will to power, assume
a visible form. Architecture is a sort of oratory of power by means
of forms. Now it is persuasive, even flattering, and at other times
merely commanding. The highest sensation of power and security finds
expression in grandeur of style. That power which no longer requires to
be proved, which scorns to please; which responds only with difficulty;
which feels no witnesses around it; which is oblivious of the fact
that it is being opposed; which relies on itself fatalistically, and
is a law among laws:—such power expresses itself quite naturally in
grandeur of style.


12

I have been reading the life of Thomas Carlyle, that unconscious and
involuntary farce, that heroico-moral interpretation of dyspeptic
moods.—Carlyle, a man of strong words and attitudes, a rhetorician by
necessity, who seems ever to be tormented by the desire of finding some
kind of strong faith, and by his inability to do so (—in this respect
a typical Romanticist!). To yearn for a strong faith is not the proof
of a strong faith, but rather the reverse. If a man have a strong faith
he can indulge in the luxury of scepticism; he is strong enough, firm
enough, well-knit enough for such a luxury. Carlyle stupefies something
in himself by means of the _fortissimo_ of his reverence for men of a
strong faith, and his rage over those who are less foolish: he is in
sore need of noise. An attitude of constant and passionate dishonesty
towards himself—this is his _proprium;_ by virtue of this he is and
remains interesting.—Of course, in England he is admired precisely
on account of his honesty. Well, that is English; and in view of the
fact that the English are the nation of consummate cant, it is not only
comprehensible but also very natural. At bottom, Carlyle is an English
atheist who makes it a point of honour not to be one.


13

_Emerson._—He is much more enlightened, much broader, more versatile,
and more subtle than Carlyle; but above all, he is happier. He is one
who instinctively lives on ambrosia and who leaves the indigestible
parts of things on his plate. Compared with Carlyle he is a man of
taste.—Carlyle, who was very fond of him, nevertheless declared that
“he does not give us enough to chew.” This is perfectly true but
it is not unfavourable to Emerson.—Emerson possesses that kindly
intellectual cheerfulness which deprecates overmuch seriousness; he
has absolutely no idea of how old he is already, and how young he will
yet be,—he could have said of himself, in Lope de Vega’s words: “_yo
me sucedo a mi mismo._” His mind is always finding reasons for being
contented and even thankful; and at times he gets preciously near to
that serene superiority of the worthy bourgeois who returning from an
amorous rendezvous _tamquam re bene gesta,_ said gratefully “_Ut desint
vires, tamen est laudanda voluptas._”—


14

_Anti-Darwin._—As to the famous “struggle for existence,” it seems to
me, for the present, to be more of an assumption than a fact. It does
occur, but as an exception. The general condition of life is not one
of want or famine, but rather of riches, of lavish luxuriance, and even
of absurd prodigality,—where there is a struggle, it is a struggle
for power. We should not confound Malthus with nature.—Supposing,
however, that this struggle exists,—and it does indeed occur,—its
result is unfortunately the very reverse of that which the Darwinian
school seems to desire, and of that which in agreement with them we
also might desire: that is to say, it is always to the disadvantage
of the strong, the privileged, and the happy exceptions. Species
do not evolve towards perfection: the weak always prevail over the
strong—simply because they are the majority, and because they are also
the more crafty. Darwin forgot the intellect (—that is English!), the
weak have more intellect. In order to acquire intellect, one must be in
need of it. One loses it when one no longer needs it. He who possesses
strength flings intellect to the deuce (—“let it go hence!”[2]
say the Germans of the present day, “the _Empire_ will remain”).
As you perceive, intellect to me means caution, patience, craft,
dissimulation, great self-control, and everything related to mimicry
(what is praised nowadays as virtue is very closely related the latter).


15

_Casuistry of a Psychologist._—This man knows mankind: to what purpose
does he study his fellows? He wants to derive some small or even
great advantages from them,—he is a politician!... That man yonder
is also well versed in human nature: and ye tell me that he wishes to
draw no personal profit from his knowledge, that he is a thoroughly
disinterested person? Examine him a little more closely! Maybe he
wishes to derive a more wicked advantage from his possession; namely,
to feel superior to men, to be able to look down upon them, no longer
to feel one of them. This “disinterested person” is a despiser of
mankind; and the former is of a more humane type, whatever appearances
may seem to say to the contrary. At least he considers himself the
equal of those about him, at least he classifies himself with them.


16

_The psychological tact_ of Germans seems to me to have been set in
doubt by a whole series of cases which my modesty forbids me to
enumerate. In one case at least I shall not let the occasion slip
for substantiating my contention: I bear the Germans a grudge for
having made a mistake about Kant and his “backstairs philosophy,” as
I call it. Such a man was not the type of intellectual uprightness.
Another thing I hate to hear is a certain infamous “and”: the Germans
say, “Goethe _and_ Schiller,”—I even fear that they say, “Schiller
and Goethe.” ... Has nobody found Schiller out yet?—But there are
other “ands” which are even more egregious. With my own ears I have
heard—only among University professors, it is true!—men speak of
“Schopenhauer _and_ Hartmann.” ...[3]


17

The most intellectual men, provided they are also the most courageous,
experience the most excruciating tragedies: but on that very account
they honour life, because it confronts them with its most formidable
antagonism.


18

Concerning “_the Conscience of the Intellect_” Nothing seems to me
more uncommon to-day than genuine hypocrisy. I strongly suspect that
this growth is unable to flourish in the mild climate of our culture.
Hypocrisy belongs to an age of strong faith,—one in which one does
not lose one’s own faith in spite of the fact that one has to make
an outward show of holding another faith. Nowadays a man gives it
up; or, what is still more common, he acquires a second faith,—in
any case, however, he remains honest. Without a doubt it is possible
to have a much larger number of convictions at present, than it was
formerly: _possible_—that is to say, allowable,—that is to say,
_harmless._ From this there arises an attitude of toleration towards
one’s self. Toleration towards one’s self allows of a greater number
of convictions: the latter live comfortably side by side, and they
take jolly good care, as all the world does to-day, not to compromise
themselves. How does a man compromise himself to-day? When he is
consistent; when he pursues a straight course; when he has anything
less than five faces; when he is genuine.... I very greatly fear that
modern man is much too fond of comfort for certain vices; and the
consequence is that the latter are dying out. Everything evil which
is the outcome of strength of will—and maybe there is nothing evil
without the strengh of will,—degenerates, in our muggy atmosphere,
into virtue. The few hypocrites I have known only imitated hypocrisy:
like almost every tenth man to-day, they were actors.—


19

_Beautiful and Ugly:_—Nothing is more relative, let us say, more
restricted, than our sense of the beautiful. He who would try to
divorce it from the delight man finds in his fellows, would immediately
lose his footing. “Beauty in itself,” is simply a word, it is not even
a concept. In the beautiful, man postulates himself as the standard of
perfection; in exceptional cases he worships himself as that standard.
A species has no other alternative than to say “yea” to itself alone,
in this way. Its lowest instinct, the instinct of self-preservation and
self-expansion, still radiates in such sublimities. Man imagines the
world itself to be overflowing with beauty,—he forgets that he is the
cause of it all. He alone has endowed it with beauty. Alas! and only
with human all-too-human beauty! Truth to tell man reflects himself in
things, he thinks everything beautiful that throws his own image back
at him. The judgment “beautiful” is the “vanity of his species.” ...
A little demon of suspicion may well whisper into the sceptic’s ear:
is the world really beautified simply because man thinks it beautiful?
He has only humanised it—that is all. But nothing, absolutely nothing
proves to us that it is precisely man who is the proper model of
beauty. Who knows what sort of figure he would cut in the eyes of a
higher judge of taste? He might seem a little _outré_? perhaps even
somewhat amusing? perhaps a trifle arbitrary? “O Dionysus, thou divine
one, why dost thou pull mine ears?” Ariadne asks on one occasion of
her philosophic lover, during one of those famous conversations on the
island of Naxos. “I find a sort of humour in thine ears, Ariadne: why
are they not a little longer?”


20

Nothing is beautiful; man alone is beautiful: all æsthetic rests on
this piece of ingenuousness, it is the first axiom of this science.
And now let us straightway add the second to it: nothing is ugly save
the degenerate man,—within these two first principles the realm of
æsthetic judgments is confined. From the physiological standpoint,
everything ugly weakens and depresses man. It reminds him of decay,
danger, impotence; he literally loses strength in its presence. The
effect of ugliness may be gauged by the dynamometer. Whenever man’s
spirits are downcast, it is a sign that he scents the proximity of
something “ugly.” His feeling of power, his will to power, his courage
and his pride—these things collapse at the sight of what is ugly, and
rise at the sight of what is beautiful. In both cases an inference is
drawn; the premises to which are stored with extra ordinary abundance
in the instincts. Ugliness is understood to signify a hint and a
symptom of degeneration: that which reminds us however remotely of
degeneracy, impels us to the judgment “ugly.” Every sign of exhaustion,
of gravity, of age, of fatigue; every kind of constraint, such as
cramp, or paralysis; and above all the smells, colours and forms
associated with decomposition and putrefaction, however much they may
have been attenuated into symbols,—all these things provoke the same
reaction which is the judgment “ugly.” A certain hatred expresses
itself here: what is it that man hates? Without a doubt it is the
_decline of his type._ In this regard his hatred springs from the
deepest instincts of the race: there is horror, caution, profundity and
far-reaching vision in this hatred,—it is the most profound hatred
that exists. On its account alone Art is profound.


21

_Schopenhauer._—Schopenhauer, the last German who is to be reckoned
with (—who is a European event like Goethe, Hegel, or Heinrich Heine,
and who is not merely local, national), is for a psychologist a case
of the first rank: I mean as a malicious though masterly attempt to
enlist on the side of a general nihilistic depreciation of life, the
very forces which are opposed to such a movement,—that is to say, the
great self-affirming powers of the “will to live,” the exuberant forms
of life itself. He interpreted Art, heroism, genius, beauty, great
sympathy, knowledge, the will to truth, and tragedy, one after the
other, as the results of the denial, or of the need of the denial, of
the “will”—the greatest forgery, Christianity always excepted, which
history has to show. Examined more carefully, he is in this respect
simply the heir of the Christian interpretation; except that he knew
how to approve in a Christian fashion (_i.e._, nihilistically) even
of the great facts of human culture, which Christianity completely
repudiates. (He approved of them as paths to “salvation,” as
preliminary stages to “salvation,” as _appetisers_ calculated to arouse
the desire for “salvation.”)


22

Let me point to one single instance. Schopenhauer speaks of beauty with
melancholy ardour,—why in sooth does he do this? Because in beauty
he sees a bridge on which one can travel further, or which stimulates
one’s desire to travel further. According to him it constitutes a
momentary emancipation from the “will”—it lures to eternal salvation.
He values it more particularly as a deliverance from the “burning core
of the will” which is sexuality,—in beauty he recognises the negation
of the procreative instinct. Singular Saint! Some one contradicts thee;
I fear it is Nature. Why is there beauty of tone, colour, aroma, and
of rhythmic movement in Nature at all? What is it forces beauty to the
fore? Fortunately, too, a certain philosopher contradicts him. No less
an authority than the divine Plato himself (thus does Schopenhauer
call him), upholds another proposition: that all beauty lures to
procreation,—that this precisely is the chief characteristic of its
effect, from the lowest sensuality to the highest spirituality.


23

Plato goes further. With an innocence for which a man must be Greek
and not “Christian,” he says that there would be no such thing as
Platonic philosophy if there were not such beautiful boys in Athens:
it was the sight of them alone that set the soul of the philosopher
reeling with erotic passion, and allowed it no rest until it had
planted the seeds of all lofty things in a soil so beautiful. He
was also a singular saint!—One scarcely believes one’s ears, even
supposing one believes Plato. At least one realises that philosophy was
pursued differently in Athens; above all, publicly. Nothing is less
Greek than the cobweb-spinning with concepts by an anchorite, _amor
intellectualis dei_ after the fashion of Spinoza. Philosophy according
to Plato’s style might be defined rather as an erotic competition, as a
continuation and a spiritualisation of the old agonal gymnastics and
the conditions on which they depend.... What was the ultimate outcome
of this philosophic eroticism of Plato’s? A new art-form of the Greek
_Agon,_ dialectics.—In opposition to Schopenhauer and to the honour of
Plato, I would remind you that all the higher culture and literature of
classical France, as well, grew up on the soil of sexual interests. In
all its manifestations you may look for gallantry, the senses, sexual
competition, and “woman,” and you will not look in vain.


24

_L’Art pour l’Art._—The struggle against a purpose in art is always a
struggle against the moral tendency in art, against its subordination
to morality. _L’art pour l’art_ means, “let morality go to the devil!”
—But even this hostility betrays the preponderating power of the moral
prejudice. If art is deprived of the purpose of preaching morality
and of improving mankind, it does not by any means follow that art is
absolutely pointless, purposeless, senseless, in short _l’art pour
l’art_—a snake which bites its own tail. “No purpose at all is better
than a moral purpose!”—thus does pure passion speak. A psychologist,
on the other hand, puts the question: what does all art do? does it
not praise? does it not glorify? does it not select? does it not
bring things into prominence? In all this it strengthens or weakens
certain valuations. Is this only a secondary matter? an accident?
something in which the artist’s instinct has no share? Or is it not
rather the very prerequisite which enables the artist to accomplish
something?... Is his most fundamental instinct concerned with art?
Is it not rather concerned with the purpose of art, with life? with
a certain desirable kind of life? Art is the great stimulus to life;
how can it be regarded as purpose less, as pointless, as _l’art pour
l’art?_—There still remains one question to be answered: Art also
reveals much that is ugly, hard and questionable in life,—does it
not thus seem to make life intolerable?—And, as a matter of fact,
there have been philosophers who have ascribed this function to art.
According to Schopenhauer’s doctrine, the general object of art was to
“free one from the Will”; and what he honoured as the great utility
of tragedy, was that it “made people more resigned.”—But this, as
I have already shown, is a pessimistic standpoint; it is the “evil
eye”: the artist himself must be appealed to. What is it that the soul
of the tragic artist communicates to others? Is it not precisely his
fearless attitude towards that which is terrible and questionable?
This attitude is in itself a highly desirable one; he who has once,
experienced it honours it above everything else. He communicates it. He
must communicate, provided he is an artist and a genius in the art of
communication. A courageous and free spirit, in the presence of a mighty
foe, in the presence of a sublime misfortune, and face to face with a
problem that inspires horror—this is the triumphant attitude which
the tragic artist selects and which he glorifies. The martial elements
in our soul celebrate their Saturnalia in tragedy; he who is used to
suffering, he who looks out for suffering, the heroic man, extols his
existence by means of tragedy,—to him alone does the tragic artist
offer this cup of sweetest cruelty.—


25

To associate in an amiable fashion with anybody; to keep the house of
one’s heart open to all, is certainly liberal: but it is nothing else.
One can recognise the hearts that are capable of noble hospitality, by
their wealth of screened windows and closed shutters: they keep their
best rooms empty. Whatever for?—Because they are expecting guests who
are somebodies.


26

We no longer value ourselves sufficiently highly when we communicate
our soul’s content. Our real experiences are not at all garrulous. They
could not communicate themselves even if they wished to. They are at a
loss to find words for such confidences. Those things for which we find
words, are things wehave already overcome. In all speech there lies
an element of contempt. Speech, it would seem, was only invented for
average, mediocre and communicable things.—Every spoken word proclaims
the speaker vulgarised—(Extract from a moral code for deaf-and-dumb
people and other philosophers.)


27

“This picture is perfectly beautiful!”[4] The dissatisfied and
exasperated literary woman with a desert in her heart and in her belly,
listening with agonised curiosity every instant to the imperative
which whispers to her from the very depths of her being: _aut liberi,
aut libri:_ the literary woman, sufficiently educated to understand the
voice of nature, even when nature speaks Latin, and moreover enough
of a peacock and a goose to speak even French with herself in secret
“_Je me verrai, je me lirai, je m’extasierai et je dirai: Possible, que
j’aie eu tant d’esprit?_” ...


28

The objective ones speak.—“Nothing comes more easily to us, than to
be wise, patient, superior. We are soaked in the oil of indulgence and
of sympathy, we are absurdly just, we forgive everything. Precisely on
that account we should be severe with ourselves; for that very reason
we ought from time to time to go in for a little emotion, a little
emotional vice. It may seem bitter to us; and between ourselves we may
even laugh at the figure which it makes us cut But what does it matter?
We have no other kind of self-control left. This is our asceticism, our
manner of performing penance.” _To become personal_—the virtues of the
“impersonal and objective one.”


29

_Extract from a doctor’s examination paper._—“What is the task of all
higher schooling?”—To make man into a machine. “What are the means
employed?”—He must learn how to be bored. “How is this achieved?”—By
means of the concept duty. “What example of duty has he before his
eyes?”—The philologist: it is he who teaches people how to swat.
“Who is the perfect man?”—The Government official. “Which philosophy
furnishes the highest formula for the Government official?”—Kant’s
philosophy: the Government official as thing-in-itself made judge over
the Government official as appearance.


30

_The right to Stupidity._—The worn-out worker, whose breath is
slow, whose look is good-natured, and who lets things slide just as
they please: this typical figure which in this age of labour (and
of “Empire!”) is to be met with in all classes of society, has now
begun to appropriate even Art, including the book, above all the
newspaper,—and how much more so beautiful nature, Italy! This man
of the evening, with his “savage instincts lulled,” as Faust has it;
needs his summer holiday, his sea-baths, his glacier, his Bayreuth.
In such ages Art has the right to be _purely foolish,_—as a sort of
vacation for spirit, wit and sentiment. Wagner understood this. Pure
foolishness[5] is a pick-me-up....


31

_Yet another problem of diet._—The means with which Julius Cæsar
preserved himself against sickness and headaches: heavy marches,
the simplest mode of living, uninterrupted sojourns in the open
air, continual hardships,—generally speaking these are the
self-preservative and self-defensive measures against the extreme
vulnerability of those subtle machines working at the highest
pressure, which are called geniuses.


32

_The Immoralist speaks._—Nothing is more distasteful to true
philosophers than man when he begins to wish.... If they see man only
at his deeds; if they see this bravest, craftiest and most enduring
of animals even inextricably entangled in disaster, how admirable he
then appears to them! They even encourage him.... But true philosophers
despise the man who wishes, as also the “desirable” man—and all the
desiderata and _ideals_ of man in general. If a philosopher could be a
nihilist, he would be one; for he finds only nonentity behind all human
ideals. Or, not even nonentity, but vileness, absurdity, sickness,
cowardice, fatigue and all sorts of dregs from out the quaffed goblets
of his life.... How is it that man, who as a reality is so estimable,
ceases from deserving respect the moment he begins to desire? Must he
pay for being so perfect as a reality? Must he make up for his deeds,
for the tension of spirit and will which underlies all his deeds, by an
eclipse of his powers in matters of the imagination and in absurdity?
Hitherto the history of his desires has been the _partie honteuse_ of
mankind: one should take care not to read too deeply in this history.
That which justifies man is his reality,—it will justify him to all
eternity. How much more valuable is a real man than any other man
who is merely the phantom of desires, of dreams of stinks and of
lies?—than any kind of ideal man? ... And the ideal man, alone, is
what the philosopher cannot abide.


33

_The Natural Value of Egoism._—Selfishness has as much value as the
physiological value of him who practises it: its worth may be great,
or it may be worthless and contemptible. Every individual may be
classified according to whether he represents the ascending or the
descending line of life. When this is decided, a canon is obtained
by means of which the value of his selfishness may be determined.
If he represent the ascending line of life, his value is of course
extraordinary—and for the sake of the collective life which in him
makes one step _forward,_ the concern about his maintenance, about
procuring his _optimum_ of conditions may even be extreme. The human
unit, the “individual,” as the people and the philosopher have always
understood him, is certainly an error: he is nothing in himself, no
atom, no “link in the chain,” no mere heritage from the past,—he
represents the whole direct line of mankind up to his own life....
If he represent declining development, decay, chronic degeneration,
sickness (—illnesses are on the whole already the outcome of decline,
and not the cause thereof), he is of little worth, and the purest
equity would have him _take away_ as little as possible from those who
are lucky strokes of nature. He is then only a parasite upon them....


34

_The Christian and the Anarchist._—When the anarchist, as the
mouthpiece of the decaying strata of society, raises his voice in
splendid indignation for “right,” “justice,” “equal rights,” he
is only groaning under the burden of his ignorance, which cannot
understand _why_ he actually suffers,—what his poverty consists
of—the poverty of life. An instinct of causality is active in
him: someone must be responsible for his being so ill at ease. His
“splendid indignation” alone relieves him somewhat, it is a pleasure
for all poor devils to grumble—it gives them a little intoxicating
sensation of power. The very act of complaining, the mere fact that one
bewails one’s lot, may lend such a charm to life that on that account
alone, one is ready to endure it. There is a small dose of revenge in
every lamentation. One casts one’s afflictions, and, under certain
circumstances, even one’s baseness, in the teeth of those who are
different, as if their condition were an injustice, an _iniquitous_
privilege. “Since I am _a blackguard_ you ought to be one too.” It is
upon such reasoning that revolutions are based.—To bewail one’s lot
is always despicable: it is always the outcome of weakness. Whether
one ascribes one’s afflictions to others or to _one’s self,_ it is all
the same. The socialist does the former, the Christian, for instance,
does the latter. That which is common to both attitudes, or rather
that which is equally ignoble in them both, is the fact that somebody
must be to _blame_ if one suffers—in short that the sufferer drugs
himself with the honey of revenge to allay his anguish. The objects
towards which this lust of vengeance, like a lust of pleasure, are
directed, are purely accidental causes. In all directions the sufferer
finds reasons for cooling his petty passion for revenge. If he is a
Christian, I repeat, he finds these reasons in himself. The Christian
and the Anarchist—both are decadents. But even when the Christian
condemns, slanders, and sullies the world, he is actuated by precisely
the same instinct as that which leads the socialistic workman to curse,
calumniate and cast dirt at society. The last “Judgment” itself is
still the sweetest solace to revenge—revolution, as the socialistic
workman expects it, only thought of as a little more remote.... The
notion of a “Beyond,” as well—why a Beyond, if it be not a means of
splashing mud over a “Here,” over this world? ...


35

_A Criticism of the Morality of Decadence._—An “altruistic”
morality, a morality under which selfishness withers, is in all
circumstances a bad sign. This is true of individuals and above
all of nations. The best are lacking when selfishness begins to be
lacking. Instinctively to select that which is harmful to one, to be
_lured_ by “disinterested” motives,—these things almost provide the
formula for decadence. “Not to have one’s own interests at heart”
—this is simply a moral fig-leaf concealing a very different fact, a
physiological one, to wit:—“I no longer know how to find what is to my
interest.”... Disintegration of the instincts!—All is up with man when
he becomes altruistic.—Instead of saying ingenuously “I am no longer
any good,” the lie of morality in the decadent’s mouth says: “Nothing
is any good,—life is no good.”—A judgment of this kind ultimately
becomes a great danger; for it is infectious, and it soon flourishes
on the polluted soil of society with tropical luxuriance, now as a
religion (Christianity), anon as a philosophy (Schopenhauerism). In
certain circumstances the mere effluvia of such a venomous vegetation,
springing as it does out of the very heart of putrefaction, can poison
life for thousands and thousands of years.


36

_A moral for doctors._—The sick man is a parasite of society. In
certain cases it is indecent to go on living. To continue to vegetate
in a state of cowardly dependence upon doctors and special treatments,
once the meaning of life, the right to life, has been lost, ought to
be regarded with the greatest contempt by society. The doctors, for
their part, should be the agents for imparting this contempt,—they
should no longer prepare prescriptions, but should every day administer
a fresh dose of _disgust_ to their patients. A new responsibility
should be created, that of the doctor—the responsibility of ruthlessly
suppressing and eliminating _degenerate_ life, in all cases in which
the highest interests of life itself, of ascending life, demand such
a course—for instance in favour of the right of procreation, in
favour of the right of being born, in favour of the right to live.
One should die proudly when it is no longer possible to live proudly.
Death should be chosen freely,—death at the right time, faced clearly
and joyfully and embraced while one is surrounded by one’s children
and other witnesses. It should be affected in such a way that a proper
farewell is still possible, that he who is about to take leave of us
is still _himself,_ and really capable not only of valuing what he
has achieved and willed in life, but also of _summing-up_ the value
of life itself. Everything precisely the opposite of the ghastly
comedy which Christianity has made of the hour of death. We should
never forgive Christianity for having so abused the weakness of the
dying man as to do violence to his conscience, or for having used
his manner of dying as a means of valuing both man and his past—In
spite of all cowardly prejudices, it is our duty, in this respect,
above all to reinstate the proper—that is to say, the physiological,
aspect of so-called _natural_ death, which after all is perfectly
“unnatural” and nothing else than suicide. One never perishes through
anybody’s fault but one’s own. The only thing is that the death which
takes place in the most contemptible circumstances, the death that
is not free, the death which occurs at the wrong time, is the death
of a coward. Out of the very love one bears to life, one should wish
death to be different from this—that is to say, free, deliberate, and
neither a matter of chance nor of surprise. Finally let me whisper a
word of advice to our friends the pessimists and all other decadents.
We have not the power to prevent ourselves from being born: but this
error—for sometimes it is an error—can be rectified if we choose. The
man who does away with himself, performs the most estimable of deeds:
he almost deserves to live for having done so. Society—nay, life
itself, derives more profit from such a deed than from any sort of life
spent in renunciation, anæmia and other virtues,—at least the suicide
frees others from the sight of him, at least he removes one objection
against life. Pessimism _pur et vert,_ can _be proved only_ by the
self-refutation of the pessimists themselves: one should go a step
further in one’s consistency; one should not merely deny life with
“The World as Will and Idea,” as Schopenhauer did; one should in the
first place _deny Schopenhauer._ ... Incidentally, Pessimism, however
infectious it may be, does not increase the morbidness of an age or of
a whole species; it is rather the expression of that morbidness. One
falls a victim to it in the same way as one falls a victim to cholera;
one must already be predisposed to the disease. Pessimism in itself
does not increase the number of the world’s _decadents_ by a single
unit. Let me remind you of the statistical fact that in those years in
which cholera rages, the total number of deaths does not exceed that of
other years.


37

_Have we become more moral?_—As might have been expected, the whole
_ferocity_ of moral stultification, which, as is well known, passes
for morality itself in Germany, hurled itself against my concept
“Beyond Good and Evil.” I could tell you some nice tales about this.
Above all, people tried to make me see the “incontestable superiority”
of our age in regard to moral sentiment, and the _progress_ we had
made in these matters. Compared with us, a Cæsar Borgia was by no
means to be represented as “higher man,” the sort of _Superman,_
which I declared him to be. The editor of the Swiss paper the _Bund_
went so far as not only to express his admiration for the courage
displayed by my enterprise, but also to pretend to “understand” that
the intended purpose of my work was to abolish all decent feeling.
Much obliged!—In reply, I venture to raise the following question:
_have we really become more moral?_ The fact that everybody believes
that we have is already an objection to the belief. We modern men,
so extremely delicate and susceptible, full of consideration one for
the other, actually dare to suppose that the pampering fellow-feeling
which we all display, this unanimity which we have at last acquired
in sparing and helping and trusting one another marks a definite step
forward, and shows us to be far ahead of the man of the Renaissance.
But every age thinks the same, it is _bound_ to think the same. This
at least, is certain, that we should not dare to stand amid the
conditions which prevailed at the Renaissance, we should not even dare
to imagine ourselves in those conditions: our nerves could not endure
that reality, not to speak of our muscles. The inability to do this
however does not denote any progress; but simply the different and
more senile quality of our particular nature, its greater weakness,
delicateness, and susceptibility, out of which a morality _more rich
in consideration_ was bound to arise. If we imagine our delicateness
and senility, our physiological decrepitude as non-existent, our
morality of “humanisation” would immediately lose all value—no
morality has any value _per se_—it would even fill us with scorn. On
the other hand, do not let us doubt that we moderns, wrapped as we are
in the thick cotton wool of our humanitarianism which would shrink
even from grazing a stone, would present a comedy to Cæsar Borgia’s
contemporaries which would literally make them die of laughter. We are
indeed, without knowing it, exceedingly ridiculous with our modern
“virtues.” ... The decline of the instincts of hostility and of
those instincts that arouse suspicion,—for this if anything is what
constitutes our progress—is only one of the results manifested by
the general decline in _vitality_: it requires a hundred times more
trouble and caution to live such a dependent and senile existence.
In such circumstances everybody gives everybody else a helping hand,
and, to a certain extent, everybody is either an invalid or an
invalid’s attendant. This is then called “virtue”: among those men
who knew a different life—that is to say, a fuller, more prodigal,
more superabundant sort of life, it might have been called by another
name,—possibly “cowardice,” or “vileness,” or “old woman’s morality.”
... Our mollification of morals—this is my cry; this it you will is
my _innovation_—is the outcome of our decline; conversely hardness
and terribleness in morals may be the result of a surplus of life.
When the latter state prevails, much is dared, much is challenged,
and much is also _squandered_. That which formerly was simply the
salt of life, would now be our _poison_. To be indifferent—even this
is a form of strength—for that, likewise, we are too senile, too
decrepit: our morality of fellow-feeling, against which I was the
first to raise a finger of warning, that which might be called _moral
impressionism_, is one symptom the more of the excessive physiological
irritability which is peculiar to everything decadent. That movement
which attempted to introduce itself in a scientific manner on the
shoulders of Schopenhauer’s morality of pity—a very sad attempt!—is
in its essence the movement of decadence in morality, and as such
it is intimately related to Christian morality. Strong ages and
noble cultures see something contemptible in pity, in the “love of
one’s neighbour,” and in a lack of egoism and of self-esteem.—Ages
should be measured according to their _positive forces_;—valued
by this standard that prodigal and fateful age of the Renaissance,
appears as the last _great_ age, while we moderns with our anxious
care of ourselves and love of our neighbours, with all our unassuming
virtues of industry, equity, and scientific method—with our lust of
collection, of economy and of mechanism—represent a _weak_ age....
Our virtues are necessarily determined, and are even stimulated, by our
weakness. “Equality,” a certain definite process of making everybody
uniform, which only finds its expression in the theory of equal rights,
is essentially bound up with a declining culture: the chasm between
man and man, class and class, the multiplicity of types, the will to
be one’s self, and to distinguish one’s self—that, in fact, which I
call the _pathos of distance_ is proper to all _strong_ ages. The force
of tension,—nay, the tension itself, between extremes grows slighter
every day,—the extremes themselves are tending to become obliterated
to the point of becoming identical. All our political theories and
state constitutions, not by any means excepting “The German Empire,”
are the logical consequences, the necessary consequences of decline;
the unconscious effect of _decadence_ has begun to dominate even the
ideals of the various sciences. My objection to the whole of English
and French sociology still continues to be this, that it knows only
the _decadent form_ of society from experience, and with perfectly
childlike innocence takes the instincts of decline as the norm, the
standard, of sociological valuations. _Descending_ life, the decay
of all organising power—that is to say, of all that power which
separates, cleaves gulfs, and establishes rank above and below,
formulated itself in modern sociology as _the_ ideal. Our socialists
are decadents: but Herbert Spencer was also a _decadent,_—he saw
something to be desired in the triumph of altruism!...


38

_My Concept of Freedom._—Sometimes the value of a thing does not lie
in that which it helps us to achieve, but in the amount we have to
pay for it,—what it _costs_ us. For instance, liberal institutions
straightway cease from being liberal, the moment they are soundly
established: once this is attained no more grievous and more thorough
enemies of freedom exist than liberal institutions! One knows, of
course, what they bring about: they undermine the Will to Power,
they are the levelling of mountain and valley exalted to a morality,
they make people small, cowardly and pleasure-loving,—by means of
them the gregarious animal invariably triumphs. Liberalism, or, in
plain English, the _transformation of mankind into cattle._ The
same institutions, so long as they are fought for, produce quite
other results; then indeed they promote the cause of freedom quite
powerfully. Regarded more closely, it is war which produces these
results, war in favour of liberal institutions, which, as war, allows
the illiberal instincts to subsist. For war trains men to be free.
What in sooth is freedom? Freedom is the will to be responsible
for ourselves. It is to preserve the distance which separates us
from other men. To grow more indifferent to hardship, to severity,
to privation, and even to life itself. To be ready to sacrifice
men for one’s cause, one’s self included. Freedom denotes that the
virile instincts which rejoice in war and in victory, prevail over
other instincts; for instance, over the instincts of “happiness.”
The man who has won his freedom, and how much more so, therefore,
the spirit that has won its freedom, tramples ruthlessly upon that
contemptible kind of comfort which tea-grocers, Christians, cows,
women, Englishmen and other democrats worship in their dreams. The
free man is a _warrior._—How is freedom measured in individuals
as well as in nations? According to the resistance which has to be
overcome, according to the pains which it costs to remain _uppermost._
The highest type of free man would have to be sought where the
greatest resistance has continually to be overcome: five paces away
from tyranny, on the very threshold of the danger of thraldom. This
is psychologically true if, by the word “Tyrants” we mean inexorable
and terrible instincts which challenge the _maximum_ amount of
authority and discipline to oppose them—the finest example of this
is Julius Cæsar; it is also true politically: just examine the course
of history. The nations which were worth anything, which _got to
be_ worth anything, never attained to that condition under liberal
institutions: _great danger_ made out of them something which deserves
reverence, that danger which alone can make us aware of our resources,
our virtues, our means of defence, our weapons, our _genius,_—which
_compels_ us to be strong. _First_ principle: a man must need to be
strong, otherwise he will never attain it.—Those great forcing-houses
of the strong, of the strongest kind of men that have ever existed on
earth, the aristocratic communities like those of Rome and Venice,
understood freedom precisely as I understand the word: as something
that one has and that one has _not,_ as something that one _will_ have
and that one _seizes by force._


39

_A Criticism of Modernity._—Our institutions are no longer any good;
on this point we are all agreed. But the fault does not lie with
them; but with _us._ Now that we have lost all the instincts out
of which institutions grow, the latter on their part are beginning
to disappear from our midst because we are no longer fit for them.
Democracy has always been the death agony of the power of organisation:
already in “Human All-too-Human,” Part I., Aph. 472, I pointed out
that modern democracy, together with its half-measures, of which the
“German Empire” is an example, was a decaying form of the State. For
institutions to be possible there must exist a sort of will, instinct,
imperative, which cannot be otherwise than antiliberal to the point of
wickedness: the will to tradition, to authority, to responsibility
for centuries to come, to _solidarity_ in long family lines forwards
and backwards _in infinitum._ If this will is present, something is
founded which resembles the _imperium Romanum;_ or Russia, the _only_
great nation to-day that has some lasting power and grit in her, that
can bide her time, that can still promise something.—Russia the
opposite of all wretched European petty-statism and neurasthenia,
which the foundation of the German Empire has brought to a crisis. The
whole of the Occident no longer possesses those instincts from which
institutions spring, out of which a _future_ grows: maybe nothing is
more opposed to its “modern spirit” than these things. People live
for the present, the live at top speed,—they certainly live without
any sense of responsibility; and this is precisely what they call
“freedom.” Everything in institutions which makes them institutions,
is scorned, loathed and repudiated: everybody is in mortal fear of a
new slavery, wherever the word “authority” is so much as whispered.
The decadence of the valuing instinct, both in our politicians and in
our political parties, goes so far, that they instinctively prefer
that which acts as a solvent, that which precipitates the final
catastrophe.... As an example of this behold _modern_ marriage. All
reason has obviously been divorced from modern marriage: but this is
no objection to matrimony itself but to modernity. The rational basis
of marriage—it lay in the exclusive legal responsibility of the man:
by this means some ballast was laid in the ship of matrimony, whereas
nowadays it has a list, now on this side, now on that. The rational
basis of marriage—it lay in its absolute indissolubleness: in this way
it was given a gravity which knew how to make its influence felt, in
the face of the accident of sentiment, passion and momentary impulse:
it lay also in the fact that the responsibility of choosing the parties
to the contract, lay with the families. By showing ever more and more
favour to love-marriages, the very foundation of matrimony, that which
alone makes it an institution, has been undermined. No institution
ever has been nor ever will be built upon an idiosyncrasy; as I say,
marriage cannot be based upon “love.” It can be based upon sexual
desire; upon the instinct of property (wife and child as possessions);
upon the instinct of dominion, which constantly organises for itself
the smallest form of dominion,—the family which _requires_ children
and heirs in order to hold fast, also in the physiological sense, to
a certain quantum of acquired power, influence and wealth, so as to
prepare for lasting tasks, and for solidarity in the instincts from
one century to another. Marriage as an institution presupposes the
affirmation of the greatest and most permanent form of organisation; if
society cannot as a whole _stand security_ for itself into the remotest
generations, marriage has no meaning whatsoever.—Modern marriage _has
lost_ its meaning; consequently it is being abolished.


40

_The question of the Working-man._—The mere fact that there is such
a thing as the question of the working-man is due to stupidity, or at
bottom to degenerate instincts which are the cause of all the stupidity
of modern times. Concerning certain things _no questions ought to be
put:_ the first imperative principle of instinct. For the life of me
I cannot see what people want to do with the working-man of Europe,
now that they have made a question of him. He is far too comfortable
to cease from questioning ever more and more, and with ever less
modesty. After all, he has the majority on his side. There is now
not the slightest hope that an unassuming and contented sort of man,
after the style of the Chinaman, will come into being in this quarter:
and this would have been the reasonable course, it was even a dire
necessity. What has been done? Everything has been done with the view
of nipping the very pre-requisite of this accomplishment in the bud,
—with the most frivolous thoughtlessness those selfsame instincts by
means of which a working-class becomes possible, and _tolerable even_
to its members themselves, have been destroyed root and branch. The
working-man has been declared fit for military service; he has been
granted the right of combination, and of voting: can it be wondered at
that he already regards his condition as one of distress (expressed
morally, as an injustice)? But, again I ask, what do people want? If
they desire a certain end, then they should desire the means thereto.
If they will have slaves, then it is madness to educate them to be
masters.


41

“The kind of freedom I do _not_ mean....”[6]—In an age like the
present, it simply adds to one’s perils to be left to one’s instincts.
The instincts contradict, disturb, and destroy each other; I have
already defined modernism as physiological self-contradiction. A
reasonable system of education would insist upon at least one of
these instinct-systems being _paralysed_ beneath an iron pressure, in
order to allow others to assert their power, to grow strong, and to
dominate. At present, the only conceivable way of making the individual
possible would be to _prune_ him:—of making him possible—that is to
say, _whole._ The very reverse occurs. Independence, free development,
and _laisser aller_ are clamoured for most violently precisely by
those for whom no restraint _could be too severe_—this is true _in
politics,_ it is true in Art. But this is a symptom of decadence: our
modern notion of “freedom” is one proof the more of the degeneration of
instinct.


42

_Where faith is necessary._—Nothing is more rare among moralists and
saints than uprightness; maybe they say the reverse is true, maybe
they even believe it. For, when faith is more useful, more effective,
more convincing than _conscious_ hypocrisy, by instinct that hypocrisy
forthwith becomes _innocent:_ first principle towards the understanding
of great saints. The same holds good of philosophers, that other order
of saints; their whole business compels them to concede only certain
truths—that is to say, those by means of which their particular trade
receives the _public_ sanction,—to speak “Kantingly”: the truths of
_practical_ reason. They know what they _must_ prove; in this respect
they are practical,—they recognise each other by the fact that
they agree upon “certain truths.”—“Thou shalt not lie”—in plain
English:—_Beware,_ Mr Philosopher, of speaking the truth....


43

_A quiet hint to Conservatives._—That which we did not know
formerly, and know now, or might know if we chose,—is the fact that
a _retrograde formation,_ a reversion in any sense or degree, is
absolutely impossible. We physiologists, at least, are aware of this.
But all priests and moralists have believed in it,—they wished to
drag and screw man back to a former standard of virtue. Morality has
always been a Procrustean bed. Even the politicians have imitated
the preachers of virtue in this matter. There are parties at the
present day whose one aim and dream is to make all things adopt the
_crab-march._ But not everyone can be a crab. It cannot be helped: we
must go forward,—that is to say step by step further and further into
decadence (—this is my definition of modern “progress”). We can hinder
this development, and by so doing dam up and accumulate degeneration
itself and render it more convulsive, more _volcanic:_ we cannot do
more.


44

_My concept of Genius._—Great men, like great ages, are explosive
material, in which a stupendous amount of power is accumulated;
the first conditions of their existence are always historical and
physiological; they are the outcome of the fact that for long ages
energy has been collected, hoarded up, saved up and preserved for their
use, and that no explosion has taken place. When, the tension in the
bulk has become sufficiently excessive, the most fortuitous stimulus
suffices in order to call “genius,” “great deeds,” and momentous
fate into the world. What then is the good of all environment,
historical periods, “_Zeitgeist_” (Spirit of the age) and “public
opinion”?—Take the case of Napoleon. France of the Revolution,
and still more of the period preceding the Revolution, would have
brought forward a type which was the very reverse of Napoleon: it
actually _did_ produce such a type. And because Napoleon was something
different, the heir of a stronger, more lasting and older civilisation
than that which in France was being smashed to atoms he became master
there, he was the only master there. Great men are necessary, the age
in which they appear is a matter of chance; the fact that they almost
invariably master their age is accounted for simply by the fact that
they are stronger, that they are older, and that power has been stored
longer for them. The relation of a genius to his age is that which
exists between strength and weakness and between maturity and youth:
the age is relatively always very much younger, thinner, less mature,
less resolute and more childish. The fact that the general opinion in
France at the present day, is utterly different on this very point (in
Germany too, but that is of no consequence); the fact that in that
country the theory of environment—a regular neuropathic notion—has
become sacrosanct and almost scientific, and finds acceptance even
among the physiologists, is a very bad, and exceedingly depressing
sign. In England too the same belief prevails: but nobody will be
surprised at that. The Englishman knows only two ways of understanding
the genius and the “great man”: either _democratically_ in the style
of Buckle, or religiously after the manner of Carlyle.—The danger
which great men and great ages represent, is simply extraordinary;
every kind of exhaustion and of sterility follows in their wake. The
great man is an end; the great age—the Renaissance for instance,—is
an end. The genius—in work and in deed,—is necessarily a squanderer:
the fact that he spends himself constitutes his greatness. The instinct
of self-preservation is as it were suspended in him; the overpowering
pressure of out-flowing energy in him forbids any such protection and
prudence. People call this “self-sacrifice,” they praise his “heroism,”
his indifference to his own well-being, his utter devotion to an idea,
a great cause, a father-land: All misunderstandings.... He flows out,
he flows over, he consumes himself, he does not spare himself,—and
does all this with fateful necessity, irrevocably, involuntarily, just
as a river involuntarily bursts its dams. But, owing to the fact that
humanity has been much indebted to such explosives, it has endowed them
with many things, for instance, with a kind of _higher morality_....
This is indeed the sort of gratitude that humanity is capable of: it
_misunderstands_ its benefactors.


45

_The criminal and his like._—The criminal type is the type of the
strong man amid unfavourable conditions, a strong man made sick. He
lacks the wild and savage state, a form of nature and existence which
is freer and more dangerous, in which everything that constitutes
the shield and the sword in the instinct of the strong man, takes
a place by right. Society puts a ban upon his virtues; the most
spirited instincts inherent in him immediately become involved with
the depressing passions, with suspicion, fear and dishonour. But this
is almost the recipe for physiological degeneration. When a man has
to do that which he is best suited to do, which he is most fond of
doing, not only clandestinely, but also with long suspense, caution and
ruse, he becomes anæmic; and inasmuch as he is always having to pay
for his instincts in the form of danger, persecution and fatalities,
even his feelings begin to turn against these instincts—he begins to
regard them as fatal. It is society, our tame, mediocre, castrated
society, in which an untutored son of nature who comes to us from his
mountains or from his adventures at sea, must necessarily degenerate
into a criminal. Or almost necessarily: for there are cases in which
such a man shows himself to be stronger than society: the Corsican
Napoleon is the most celebrated case of this. Concerning the problem
before us, Dostoiewsky’s testimony is of importance—Dostoiewsky who,
incidentally, was the only psychologist from whom I had anything
to learn: he belongs to the happiest windfalls of my life, happier
even than the discovery of Stendhal. This profound man, who was
right ten times over in esteeming the superficial Germans low, found
the Siberian convicts among whom he lived for many years,—those
thoroughly hopeless criminals for whom no road back to society stood
open—very different from what even he had expected,—that is to say
carved from about the best, hardest and most valuable material that
grows on Russian soil.[7] Let us generalise the case of the criminal;
let us imagine creatures who for some reason or other fail to meet
with public approval, who know that they are regarded neither as
beneficent nor useful,—the feeling of the Chandala, who are aware
that they are not looked upon as equal, but as proscribed, unworthy,
polluted. The thoughts and actions of all such natures are tainted
with a subterranean mouldiness; everything in them is of a paler hue
than in those on whose existence the sun shines. But almost all those
creatures whom, nowadays, we honour and respect, formerly lived in this
semi-sepulchral atmosphere: the man of science, the artist, the genius,
the free spirit, the actor, the business man, and the great explorer.
As long as the _priest_ represented the highest type of man, every
valuable kind of man was depreciated.... The time is coming—this I
guarantee—when he will pass as the _lowest_ type, as our Chandala, as
the falsest and most disreputable kind of man.... I call your attention
to the fact that even now, under the sway of the mildest customs and
usages which have ever ruled on earth or at least in Europe, every
form of standing aside, every kind of prolonged, excessively prolonged
concealment, every unaccustomed and obscure form of existence tends to
approximate to that type which the criminal exemplifies to perfection.
All pioneers of the spirit have, for a while, the grey and fatalistic
mark of the Chandala on their brows: _not_ because they are regarded as
Chandala, but because they themselves feel the terrible chasm which
separates them from all that is traditional and honourable. Almost
every genius knows the “Catilinarian life” as one of the stages in his
development, a feeling of hate, revenge and revolt against everything
that exists, that has ceased to evolve.... Catiline—the early stage of
every Cæsar.


46

_Here the outlook is free._—When a philosopher holds his tongue it may
be the sign of the loftiness of his soul: when he contradicts himself
it may be love; and the very courtesy of a knight of knowledge may
force him to lie. It has been said, and not without subtlety:—_il
est indigne des grands cœurs de répandre le trouble qu’ils
ressentent[8]:_ but it is necessary to add that there may also be
_grandeur de cœur_ in not shrinking _from the most undignified
proceeding._ A woman who loves sacrifices her honour; a knight of
knowledge who “loves,” sacrifices perhaps his humanity; a God who
loved, became a Jew....


47

_Beauty no accident_—Even the beauty of a race or of a family,
the charm and perfection of all its movements, is attained with
pains: like genius it is the final result of the accumulated work
of generations. Great sacrifices must have been made on the altar
ol good taste, for its sake many things must have been done, and
much must have been left undone—the seventeenth century in France
is admirable for both of these things,—in this century there must
have been a principle of selection in respect to company, locality,
clothing, the gratification of the instinct of sex; beauty must have
been preferred to profit, to habit, to opinion and to indolence. The
first rule of all:—nobody must “let himself go,” not even when he is
alone.—Good things are exceedingly costly:; and in all cases the law
obtains that he who possesses them is a different person from him who
is _acquiring_ them. Everything good is an inheritance: that which is
not inherited is imperfect, it is simply a beginning. In Athens at
the time of Cicero—who expresses his surprise at the fact—the men
and youths were by far superior in beauty to the women: but what hard
work and exertions the male sex had for centuries imposed upon itself
in the service of beauty! We must not be mistaken in regard to the
method employed here: the mere discipline of feelings and thoughts
is little better than nil (—it is in this that the great error of
German culture, which is quite illusory, lies): the _body_ must be
persuaded first. The strict maintenance of a distinguished and tasteful
demeanour, the obligation of frequenting only those who do not “let
themselves go,” is amply sufficient to render one distinguished and
tasteful: in two or three generations everything has already _taken
deep root._ The fate of a people and of humanity is decided according
to whether they begin culture at the _right place—not_ at the “soul”
(as the fatal superstition of the priests and half-priests would have
it): the right place is the body, demeanour, diet, physiology—the rest
follows as the night the day.... That is why the Greeks remain the
_first event in culture_—they knew and they _did_ what was needful.
Christianity with its contempt of the body is the greatest mishap that
has ever befallen mankind.


48

_Progress in my sense._—I also speak of a “return to nature,” although
it is not a process of going back but of going up—up into lofty, free
and even terrible nature and naturalness; such a nature as can play
with great tasks and _may_ play with them.... To speak in a _parable._
Napoleon was an example of a “return to nature,” as I understand it
(for instance _in rebus tacticis,_ and still more, as military experts
know, in strategy). But Rousseau—whither did he want to return?
Rousseau this first modern man, idealist and _canaille_ in one person;
who was in need of moral “dignity,” in order even to endure the sight
of his own person,—ill with unbridled vanity and wanton self-contempt;
this abortion, who planted his tent on the threshold of modernity,
also wanted a “return to nature”; but, I ask once more, whither did
he wish to return? I hate Rousseau, even _in_ the Revolution itself:
the latter was the historical expression of this hybrid of idealist
and _canaille._ The bloody farce which this Revolution ultimately
became, its “immorality,” concerns me but slightly; what I loathe
however is its Rousseauesque _morality_—the so-called “truths” of the
Revolution, by means of which it still exercises power and draws all
flat and mediocre things over to its side. The doctrine of equality!
... But there is no more deadly poison than this; for it _seems_ to
proceed from the very lips of justice, whereas in reality it draws
the curtain down on all justice.... “To equals equality, to unequals
inequality”—that would be the real speech of justice and that which
follows from it “Never make unequal things equal.” The fact that so
much horror and blood are associated with this doctrine of equality,
has lent this “modern idea” _par excellence_ such a halo of fire and
glory, that the Revolution as a drama has misled even the most noble
minds.—That after all is no reason for honouring it the more.—I can
see only one who regarded it as it should be regarded—that is to say,
with _loathing;_ I speak of Goethe.


49

_Goethe_.—No mere German, but a European event: a magnificent attempt
to overcome the eighteenth century by means of a return to nature, by
means of an ascent to the naturalness of the Renaissance, a kind of
self-overcoming on the part of the century in question.—He bore the
strongest instincts of this century in his breast: its sentimentality,
and idolatry of nature, its anti-historic, idealistic, unreal, and
revolutionary spirit (—the latter is only a form of the unreal). He
enlisted history, natural science, antiquity, as well as Spinoza, and
above all practical activity, in his service. He drew a host of very
definite horizons around him; far from liberating himself from life, he
plunged right into it; he did not give in; he took as much as he could
on his own shoulders, and into his heart. That to which he aspired was
_totality_; he was opposed to the sundering of reason, sensuality,
feeling and will (as preached with most repulsive scholasticism
by Kant, the antipodes of Goethe); he disciplined himself into a
harmonious whole, he _created_ himself. Goethe in the midst of an age
of unreal sentiment, was a convinced realist: he said yea to everything
that was like him in this regard,—there was no greater event in his
life than that _ens realissimum_, surnamed Napoleon. Goethe conceived
a strong, highly-cultured man, skilful in all bodily accomplishments,
able to keep himself in check, having a feeling of reverence for
himself, and so constituted as to be able to risk the full enjoyment
of naturalness in all its rich profusion and be strong enough for this
freedom; a man of tolerance, not out of weakness but out of strength,
because he knows how to turn to his own profit that which would ruin
the mediocre nature; a man unto whom nothing is any longer forbidden,
unless it be weakness either as a vice or as a virtue. Such a spirit,
_become free_, appears in the middle of the universe with a feeling
of cheerful and confident fatalism; he believes that only individual
things are bad, and that as a whole the universe justifies and, affirms
itself—_He no longer denies_.... But such a faith is the highest Of
all faiths: I christened it with the name of Dionysus.


50

It might be said that, in a certain sense, the nineteenth century
also strove after all that Goethe himself aspired to: catholicity in
understanding, in approving; a certain reserve towards everything,
daring realism, and a reverence for every fact. How is it that
the total result of this is not a Goethe, but a state of chaos, a
nihilistic groan, an inability to discover where one is, an instinct
of fatigue which _in praxi_ is persistently driving Europe _to hark
back to the eighteenth century_? (—For instance in the form of maudlin
romanticism, altruism, hyper-sentimentality, pessimism in taste,
and socialism in politics). Is not the nineteenth century, at least
in its closing years, merely an accentuated, brutalised eighteenth
century,—that is to say a century of decadence? And has not Goethe
been—not alone for Germany, but also for the whole of Europe,—merely
an episode, a beautiful “in vain”? But great men are misunderstood when
they are regarded from the wretched standpoint of public utility. The
fact that no advantage can be derived from them—_this in itself may
perhaps be peculiar to greatness._


51

Goethe is the last German whom I respect: he had understood three
things as I understand them. We also agree as to the “cross.”[9] People
often ask me why on earth I write in _German:_ nowhere am I less read
than in the Fatherland. But who knows whether I even _desire_ to be
read at present?—To create things on which time may try its teeth in
vain; to be concerned both in the form and the substance of my writing,
about a certain degree of immortality—never have I been modest enough
to demand less of myself. The aphorism, the sentence, in both of
which I, as the first among Germans, am a master, are the forms of
“eternity”; it is my ambition to say in ten sentences what everyone
else says in a whole book,—what everyone else does _not_ say in a
whole book.

I have given mankind the deepest book it possesses, my _Zarathustra;_
before long I shall give it the most independent one.


[1] The German word _Rausch_ as used by Nietzsche here, suggests a
blend of our two English words “intoxication” and “elation.”—TR.

[2] An allusion to a verse in Luther’s hymn: “_Lass fahren dahin_ ...
_das Reich muss uns doch bleiben,_” which Nietzsche applies to the
German Empire.—TR.

[3] A disciple of Schopenhauer who blunted the sharpness of his
master’s Pessimism and who watered it down for modern requirements.—TR.

[4] Quotation from the Libretto of Mozart’s “Magic Flute” Act I, Sc.
3.—TR.

[5] This alludes to Parsifal. See my note on p. 96, vol. i., “The Will
to Power.”—TR.

[6] This is a playful adaptation of Max von Schenkendorfs poem
“_Freiheit_” The proper line reads: “_Freiheit die ich meine_” (The
freedom that I do mean).—TR.

[7] See “Memoirs of a House of the Dead,” by Dostoiewsky (translation
by Marie von Thilo: “Buried Alive”).—TR.

[8] Clothilde de Veaux.—TR.

[9] See my note on p. 147 of Vol. I. of the _Will to Power._—TR.




THINGS I OWE TO THE ANCIENTS


1

In conclusion I will just say a word concerning that world to which I
have sought new means of access, to which I may perhaps have found a
new passage—the ancient world. My taste, which is perhaps the reverse
of tolerant, is very far from saying yea through and through even to
this world: on the whole it is not over eager to say _Yea,_ it would
prefer to say _Nay,_ and better still nothing whatever.... This is true
of whole cultures; it is true of books,—it is also true of places
and of landscapes. Truth to tell, the number of ancient books that
count for something in my life is but small; and the most famous are
not of that number. My sense of style, for the epigram as style, was
awakened almost spontaneously upon my acquaintance with Sallust. I have
not forgotten the astonishment of my respected teacher Corssen, when
he was forced to give his worst Latin pupil the highest marks,—at one
stroke I had learned all there was to learn. Condensed, severe, with as
much substance as possible in the background, and with cold but roguish
hostility towards all “beautiful words” and “beautiful feelings”—in
these things I found my own particular bent. In my writings up to my
“Zarathustra,” there will be found a very earnest ambition to attain
to the _Roman_ style, to the “_ære perennius_” in style.—The same
thing happened on my first acquaintance with Horace. Up to the present
no poet has given me the same artistic raptures as those which from
the first I received from an Horatian ode. In certain languages it
would be absurd even to aspire to what is accomplished by this poet.
This mosaic of words, in which every unit spreads its power to the
left and to the right over the whole, by its sound, by its place in
the sentence, and by its meaning, this _minimum_ in the compass and
number of the signs, and the _maximum_ of energy in the signs which is
thereby achieved—all this is Roman, and, if you will believe me, noble
_par excellence._ By the side of this all the rest of poetry becomes
something popular,—nothing more than senseless sentimental twaddle.


2

I am not indebted to the Greeks for anything like such strong
impressions; and, to speak frankly, they cannot be to us what the
Romans are. One cannot _learn_ from the Greeks—their style is too
strange, it is also too fluid, to be imperative or to have the effect
of a classic. Who would ever have learnt writing from a Greek! Who
would ever have learned it without the Romans!... Do not let anyone
suggest Plato to me. In regard to Plato I am a thorough sceptic, and
have never been able to agree to the admiration of Plato the _artist,_
which is traditional among scholars. And after all, in this matter,
the most refined judges of taste in antiquity are on my side. In my
opinion Plato bundles all the forms of style pell-mell together,
in this respect he is one of the first decadents of style: he has
something similar on his conscience to that which the Cynics had
who invented the _satura Menippea._ For the Platonic dialogue—this
revoltingly self-complacent and childish kind of dialectics—to
exercise any charm over you, you must never have read any good French
authors,—Fontenelle for instance. Plato is boring. In reality my
distrust of Plato is fundamental. I find him so very much astray
from all the deepest instincts of the Hellenes, so steeped in moral
prejudices, so pre-existently Christian—the concept “good” is already
the highest value with him,—that rather than use any other expression
I would prefer to designate the whole phenomenon Plato with the hard
word “superior bunkum,” or, if you would like it better, “idealism.”
Humanity has had to pay dearly for this Athenian having gone to school
among the Egyptians (—or among the Jews in Egypt?...) In the great
fatality of Christianity, Plato is that double-faced fascination
called the “ideal,” which made it possible for the more noble natures
of antiquity to misunderstand themselves and to tread the _bridge_
which led to the “cross.” And what an amount of Plato is still to be
found in the concept “church,” and in the construction, the system
and the practice of the church!—My recreation, my predilection, my
cure, after all Platonism, has always been Thucydides. Thucydides and
perhaps Machiavelli’s _principe_ are most closely related to me owing
to the absolute determination which they show of refusing to deceive
themselves and of seeing reason in _reality,_—not in “rationality,”
and still less in “morality.” There is no more radical cure than
Thucydides for the lamentably rose-coloured idealisation of the
Greeks which the “classically-cultured” stripling bears with him into
life, as a reward for his public school training. His writings must be
carefully studied line by line, and his unuttered thoughts must be read
as distinctly as what he actually says. There are few thinkers so rich
in unuttered thoughts. In him the culture “of the Sophists”—that is to
say, the culture of realism, receives its most perfect expression: this
inestimable movement in the midst of the moral and idealistic knavery
of the Socratic Schools which was then breaking out in all directions.
Greek philosophy is the decadence of the Greek instinct: Thucydides is
the great summing up, the final manifestation of that strong, severe
positivism which lay in the instincts of the ancient Hellene. After
all, it is courage in the face of reality that distinguishes such
natures as Thucydides from Plato: Plato is a coward in the face of
reality—consequently he takes refuge in the ideal: Thucydides is
master of himself,—consequently he is able to master life.


3

To rout up cases of “beautiful souls,” “golden means” and other
perfections among the Greeks, to admire, say, their calm grandeur,
their ideal attitude of mind, their exalted simplicity—from this
“exalted simplicity,” which after all is a piece of _niaiserie
allemande,_ I was preserved by the psychologist within me. I saw their
strongest instinct, the Will to Power, I saw them quivering with the
fierce violence of this instinct,—I saw all their institutions grow
out of measures of security calculated to preserve each member of
their society from the inner _explosive material_ that lay in his
neighbour’s breast This enormous internal tension thus discharged
itself in terrible and reckless hostility outside the state: the
various states mutually tore each other to bits, in order that each
individual state could remain at peace with itself. It was then
necessary to be strong; for danger lay close at hand,—it lurked in
ambush everywhere. The superb suppleness of their bodies, the daring
realism and immorality which is peculiar to the Hellenes, was a
necessity not an inherent quality. It was a result, it had not been
there from the beginning. Even their festivals and their arts were but
means in producing a feeling of superiority, and of showing it: they
are measures of self-glorification; and in certain circumstances of
making one’s self terrible.... Fancy judging the Greeks in the German
style, from their philosophers; fancy using the suburban respectability
of the Socratic schools as a key to what is fundamentally Hellenic!...
The philosophers are of course the decadents of Hellas, the
counter-movement directed against the old and noble taste—(against the
agonal instinct, against the _Polls,_ against the value of the race,
against the authority of tradition), Socratic virtues were preached to
the Greeks, _because_ the Greeks had lost virtue: irritable, cowardly,
unsteady, and all turned to play-actors, they had more than sufficient
reason to submit to having morality preached to them. Not that it
helped them in any way; but great words and attitudes are so becoming
to decadents.


4

I was the first who, in order to understand the ancient, still rich and
even superabundant Hellenic instinct, took that marvellous phenomenon,
which bears the name of Dionysus, seriously: it can be explained only
as a manifestation of excessive energy. Whoever had studied the Greeks,
as that most profound of modern connoisseurs of their culture, Jakob
Burckhardt of Bâle, had done, knew at once that something had been
achieved by means of this interpretation. And in his “_Cultur der
Griechen_” Burckhardt inserted a special chapter on the phenomenon
in question. If you would like a glimpse of the other side, you have
only to refer to the almost laughable poverty of instinct among German
philologists when they approach the Dionysian question. The celebrated
Lobeck, especially, who with the venerable assurance of a worm dried up
between books, crawled into this world of mysterious states, succeeded
inconvincing himself that he was scientific, whereas he was simply
revoltingly superficial and childish,—Lobeck, with all the pomp of
profound erudition, gave us to understand that, as a matter of fact,
there was nothing at all in all these curiosities. Truth to tell, the
priests may well have communicated not a few things of value to the
participators in such orgies; for instance, the fact that wine provokes
desire, that man in certain circumstances lives on fruit, that plants
bloom in the spring and fade in the autumn. As regards the astounding
wealth of rites, symbols and myths which take their origin in the orgy,
and with which the world of antiquity is literally smothered, Lobeck
finds that it prompts him to a feat of even greater ingenuity than
the foregoing phenomenon did. “The Greeks,” he says, (_Aglaophamus,_
I. p. 672), “when they had nothing better to do, laughed, sprang and
romped about, or, inasmuch as men also like a change at times, they
would sit down, weep and bewail their lot Others then came up who tried
to discover some reason for this strange behaviour; and thus, as an
explanation of these habits, there arose an incalculable number of
festivals, legends, and myths. On the other hand it was believed that
the _farcical performances_ which then perchance began to take place
on festival days, necessarily formed part of the celebrations, and
they were retained as an indispensable part of the ritual.”—This is
contemptible nonsense, and no one will take a man like Lobeck seriously
for a moment We are very differently affected when we examine the
notion “Hellenic,” as Winckelmann and Goethe conceived it, and find it
incompatible with that element out of which Dionysian art springs—I
speak of orgiasm. In reality I do not doubt that Goethe would have
completely excluded any such thing from the potentialities of the Greek
soul. _Consequently Goethe did not understand the Greeks._ For it is
only in the Dionysian mysteries, in the psychology of the Dionysian
state, that the _fundamental fact_ of the Hellenic instinct—its “will
to life”—is expressed. What did the Hellene secure himself with these
mysteries? _Eternal_ life, the eternal recurrence of life; the future
promised and hallowed in the past; the triumphant Yea to life despite
death and change; real life conceived as the collective prolongation
of life through procreation, through the mysteries of sexuality.
To the Greeks, the symbol of sex was the most venerated of symbols,
the really deep significance of all the piety of antiquity. All the
details of the act of procreation, pregnancy and birth gave rise to
the loftiest and most solemn feelings. In the doctrine of mysteries,
_pain_ was pronounced holy: the “pains of childbirth” sanctify pain in
general,—all becoming and all growth, everything that guarantees the
future _involves_ pain.... In order that there may be eternal joy in
creating, in order that the will to life may say Yea to itself in all
eternity, the “pains of childbirth” must also be eternal. All this is
what the word Dionysus signifies: I know of no higher symbolism than
this Greek symbolism, this symbolism of the Dionysian phenomenon. In
it the profoundest instinct of life, the instinct that guarantees the
future of life and life eternal, is understood religiously,—the road
to life itself, procreation, is pronounced _holy,_ ... It was only
Christianity which, with its fundamental resentment against life, made
something impure out of sexuality: it flung _filth_ at the very basis,
the very first condition of our life.


5

The psychology of orgiasm conceived as the feeling of a superabundance
of vitality and strength, within the scope of which even pain _acts
as a stimulus,_ gave me the key to the concept _tragic_ feeling,
which has been misunderstood not only by Aristotle, but also even
more by our pessimists. Tragedy is so far from proving anything in
regard to the pessimism of the Greeks, as Schopenhauer maintains,
that it ought rather to be considered as the categorical repudiation
and _condemnation_ thereof. The saying of Yea to life, including
even its most strange and most terrible problems, the will to life
rejoicing over its own inexhaustibleness in the _sacrifice_ of its
highest types—this is what I called Dionysian, this is what I
divined as the bridge leading to the psychology of the _tragic_ poet.
Not in order to escape from terror and pity, not to purify one’s self
of a dangerous passion by discharging it with vehemence—this is how
Aristotle understood it—but to be far beyond terror and pity and to
be the eternal lust of Becoming itself—that lust which also involves
the _lust of destruction._ And with this I once more come into touch
with the spot from which I once set out—-the “Birth of Tragedy” was
my first transvaluation of all values: with this I again take my stand
upon the soil from out of which my will and my capacity spring—I, the
last disciple of the philosopher Dionysus,—I, the prophet of eternal
recurrence.


THE END.




THE HAMMER SPEAKETH


“Why so hard!”—said the diamond once unto the charcoal; “are we then
not next of kin?”

“Why so soft? O my brethren; this is my question to you. For are ye
not—my brothers?

“Why so soft, so servile and yielding? Why are your hearts so fond of
denial and self-denial? How is it that so little fate looketh out from
your eyes?

“And if ye will not be men of fate and inexorable, how can ye hope one
day to conquer with me?

“And if your hardness will not sparkle, cut and divide, how can ye hope
one day to create with me?

“For all creators are hard. And it must seem to you blessed to stamp
your hand upon millenniums as upon wax,—

—Blessed to write upon the will of millenniums as upon brass,—harder
than brass, nobler than brass.—Hard through and through is only the
noblest.

This new table of values, O my brethren, I set over your heads: Become
hard.”

—“Thus Spake Zarathustra,”

III., 29.




THE ANTICHRIST

An Attempted Criticism of Christianity




PREFACE


This book belongs to the very few. Maybe not one of them is yet alive;
unless he be of those who understand my Zarathustra. How _can_ I
confound myself with those who to-day already find a hearing?—Only the
day after to-morrow belongs to me. Some are born posthumously.

I am only too well aware of the conditions under which a man
understands me, and then _necessarily_ understands. He must be
intellectually upright to the point of hardness, in order even to
endure my seriousness and my passion. He must be used to living on
mountain-tops,—and to feeling the wretched gabble of politics and
national egotism _beneath_ him. He must have become indifferent; he
must never inquire whether truth is profitable or whether it may
prove fatal.... Possessing from strength a predilection for questions
for which no one has enough courage nowadays; the courage for the
_forbidden;_ his predestination must be the labyrinth. The experience
of seven solitudes. New ears for new music. New eyes for the most
remote things. A new conscience for truths which hitherto have
remained dumb. And the will to economy on a large scale: to husband
his strength and his enthusiasm.... He must honour himself, he must
love himself; he must be absolutely free with regard to himself....
Very well then! Such men alone are my readers, my proper readers,
my preordained readers: of what account are the rest?—the rest are
simply—humanity.—One must be superior to humanity in power, in
loftiness of soul,—in contempt.

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.


1

Let us look each other in the face. We are hyperboreans,—we know
well enough how far outside the crowd we stand. “Thou wilt find the
way to the Hyperboreans neither by land nor by water”: Pindar already
knew this much about us. Beyond the north, the ice, and death—_our
life, our happiness...._ We discovered happiness; we know the way; we
found the way out of thousands of years of labyrinth. Who _else_ would
have found it?—Not the modern man, surely?—“I do not know where I
am or what I am to do; I am everything that knows not where it is or
what to do,”—sighs the modern man. We were made quite ill by _this_
modernity,—with its indolent peace, its cowardly compromise, and the
whole of the virtuous filth of its Yea and Nay. This tolerance and
_largeur de cœur_ which “forgives” everything because it “understands”
everything, is a Sirocco for us. We prefer to live amid ice than to
be breathed upon by modern virtues and other southerly winds!... We
were brave enough; we spared neither ourselves nor others: but we
were very far from knowing whither to direct our bravery. We were
becoming gloomy; people called us fatalists. _Our_ fate—it was the
abundance, the tension and the storing up of power. We thirsted for
thunderbolts and great deeds; we kept at the most respectful distance
from the joy of the weakling, from “resignation.” ... Thunder was in
our air, that part of nature which we are, became overcast—_for we had
no direction._ The formula of our happiness: a Yea, a Nay, a straight
line, a goal.


2

What is good? All that enhances the feeling of power, the Will to
Power, and power itself in man. What is bad?—All that proceeds
from weakness. What is happiness?—The feeling that power is
_increasing,_—that resistance has been overcome.

Not contentment, but more power; not peace at any price, but war; not
virtue, but efficiency[1] (virtue in the Renaissance sense, _virtu,_
free from all moralic acid). The weak and the botched shall perish:
first principle of our humanity. And they ought even to be helped to
perish.

What is more harmful than any vice?—Practical sympathy with all the
botched and the weak—Christianity.


3

The problem I set in this work is not what will replace mankind in the
order of living being! (—Man is an _end_—); but, what type of man
must be _reared,_ must be _willed,_ as having the higher value, as
being the most worthy of life and the surest guarantee of the future.

This more valuable type has appeared often enough already: but as a
happy accident, as an exception, never as _willed._ He has rather been
precisely the most feared; hitherto he has been almost the terrible in
itself;—and from out the very fear he provoked there arose the will
to rear the type which has how been reared, _attained:_ the domestic
animal, the gregarious animal, the sick animal man,—the Christian.


4

Mankind does _not_ represent a development towards a better, stronger
or higher type, in the sense in which this is supposed to occur to-day.
“Progress” is merely a modern idea—that is to say, a false idea.[2]
The modern European is still far below the European of the Renaissance
in value. The process of evolution does not by any means imply
elevation, enhancement and increasing strength.

On the other hand isolated and individual cases are continually
succeeding in different places on earth, as the outcome of the most
different cultures, and in these a _higher type_ certainly manifests
itself: something which by the side of mankind in general, represents a
kind of superman. Such lucky strokes of great success have always been
possible and will perhaps always be possible. And even whole races,
tribes and nations may in certain circumstances represent such _lucky
strokes._


5

We must not deck out and adorn Christianity: it has waged a deadly
war upon this _higher_ type of man, it has set a ban upon all the
fundamental instincts of this type, and has distilled evil and the
devil himself out of these instincts:—the strong man as the typical
pariah, the villain. Christianity has sided with everything weak, low,
and botched; it has made an ideal out of _antagonism_ towards all the
self-preservative instincts of strong life: it has corrupted even the
reason of the strongest intellects, by teaching that the highest values
of intellectuality are sinful, misleading and full of temptations.
The most lamentable example of this was the corruption of Pascal, who
believed in the perversion of his reason through original sin, whereas
it had only been perverted by his Christianity.


6

A painful and ghastly spectacle has just risen before my eyes. I tore
down the curtain which concealed mankind’s _corruption._ This word in
my mouth is at least secure from the suspicion that it contains a moral
charge against mankind. It is—I would fain emphasise this again—free
from moralic acid: to such an extent is this so, that I am most
thoroughly conscious of the corruption in question precisely in those
quarters in which hitherto people have aspired with most determination
to “virtue” and to “godliness.” As you have already surmised, I
understand corruption in the sense of _decadence._ What I maintain is
this, that all the values upon which mankind builds its highest hopes
and desires are _decadent_ values.

I call an animal, a species, an individual corrupt, when it loses its
instincts, when it selects and _prefers_ that which is detrimental to
it. A history of the “higher feelings,” of “human ideals”—and it is
not impossible that I shall have to write it—would almost explain why
man is so corrupt. Life itself, to my mind, is nothing more nor less
than the instinct of growth, of permanence, of accumulating forces,
of power: where the will to power is lacking, degeneration sets in.
My contention is that all the highest values of mankind _lack_ this
will,—that the values of decline and of _nihilism_ are exercising the
sovereign power under the cover of the holiest names.


7

Christianity is called the religion of _pity._—Pity is opposed to
the tonic passions which enhance the energy of the feeling of life:
its action is depressing. A man loses power when he pities. By
means of pity the drain on strength which suffering itself already
introduces into the world is multiplied a thousandfold. Through pity,
suffering itself becomes infectious; in certain circumstances it may
lead to a total loss of life and vital energy, which is absurdly
put of proportion to the magnitude of the cause (—the case of the
death of the Nazarene). This is the first standpoint; but there is a
still more important one. Supposing one measures pity according to
the value of the reactions it usually stimulates, its danger to life
appears in a much more telling light On the whole, pity thwarts the
law of development which is the law of selection. It preserves that
which is ripe for death, it fights in favour of the disinherited and
the condemned of life; thanks to the multitude of abortions of all
kinds which it maintains in life, it lends life itself a sombre and
questionable aspect. People have dared to call pity a virtue (—in
every _noble_ culture it is considered as a weakness—); people went
still further, they exalted it to _the_ virtue, the root and origin
of all virtues,—but, of course, what must never be forgotten is the
fact that this was done from the standpoint of a philosophy which
was nihilistic, and on whose shield the device _The Denial of Life_
was inscribed. Schopenhauer was right in this respect: by means of
pity, life is denied and made _more worthy of denial,_—pity is
the _praxis_ of Nihilism. I repeat, this depressing and infectious
instinct thwarts those instincts which aim at the preservation and
enhancement of the value life: by _multiplying_ misery quite as much
as by preserving all that is miserable, it is the principal agent in
promoting decadence,—pity exhorts people to nothing, to _nonentity!_
But they do not say “_nonentity_” they say “Beyond,” or “God,” or “the
true life”; or Nirvana, or Salvation, or Blessedness, instead. This
innocent rhetoric, which belongs to the realm of the religio-moral
idiosyncrasy, immediately appears to be _very much less innocent_ if
one realises what the tendency is which here tries to drape itself in
the mantle of sublime expressions—the tendency of hostility to life.
Schopenhauer was hostile to life: that is why he elevated pity to a
virtue.... Aristotle, as you know, recognised in pity a morbid and
dangerous state, of which it was wise to rid one’s self from time to
time by a purgative: he regarded tragedy as a purgative. For the sake
of the instinct of life, it would certainly seem necessary to find some
means of lancing any such morbid and dangerous accumulation of pity, as
that which possessed Schopenhauer (and unfortunately the whole of our
literary and artistic decadence as well, from St Petersburg to Paris,
from Tolstoi to Wagner), if only to make it _burst...._ Nothing is
more unhealthy in the midst of our unhealthy modernity, than Christian
pity. To be doctors _here,_ to be inexorable _here,_ to wield the knife
effectively _here,—_ all this is our business, all this is _our_
kind of love to our fellows, this is what makes _us_ philosophers, us
hyperboreans!—


8

It is necessary to state whom we regard as our antithesis:—the
theologians, and all those who have the blood of theologians in their
veins—the whole of our philosophy.... A man must have had his very
nose upon this fatality, or better still he must have experienced it
in his own soul; he must almost have perished through it, in order
to be unable to treat this matter lightly (—the free-spiritedness
of our friends the naturalists and physiologists is, in my opinion,
a _joke,_—what they lack in these questions is passion, what they
lack is having suffered from these questions—). This poisoning
extends much further than people think: I unearthed the “arrogant”
instinct of the theologian, wherever nowadays people feel themselves
idealists,—wherever, thanks to superior antecedents, they claim the
right to rise above reality and to regard it with suspicion.... Like
the priest the idealist has every grandiloquent concept in his hand
(—and not only in his hand!), he wields them all with kindly contempt
against the “understanding,” the “senses,” “honours,” “decent living,”
“science”; he regards such things as _beneath_ him, as detrimental and
seductive forces, upon the face of which, “the Spirit” moves in pure
absoluteness:—as if humility, chastity, poverty, in a word _holiness,_
had not done incalculably more harm to life hitherto, than any sort of
horror and vice.... Pure spirit is pure falsehood.... As long as the
priest, the _professional_ denier, calumniator and poisoner of life, is
considered as the _highest_ kind of man, there can be no answer to the
question, what _is_ truth? Truth has already been turned topsy-turvy,
when the conscious advocate of nonentity and of denial passes as the
representative of “truth.”


9

It is upon this theological instinct that I wage war. I find traces
of it everywhere. Whoever has the blood of theologians in his veins,
stands from the start in a false and dishonest position to all things.
The pathos which grows out of this state, is called _Faith:_ that is
to say, to shut one’s eyes once and for all, in order not to suffer
at the sight of incurable falsity. People convert this faulty view of
all things into a moral, a virtue, a thing of holiness. They endow
their distorted vision with a good conscience,—they claim that no
_other_ point of view is any longer of value, once theirs has been
made sacrosanct with the names “God,” “Salvation,” “Eternity.” I
unearthed the instinct of the theologian everywhere: it is the most
universal, and actually the most subterranean form of falsity on earth.
That which a theologian considers true, _must_ of necessity be false:
this furnishes almost the criterion of truth. It is his most profound
self-preservative instinct which forbids reality ever to attain to
honour in any way, or even to raise its voice. Whithersoever the
influence of the theologian extends, _valuations_ are topsy-turvy,
and the concepts “true” and “false” have necessarily changed places:
that which is most deleterious to life, is here called “true,” that
which enhances it, elevates it, says Yea to it, justifies it and
renders it triumphant, is called “false.” ... If it should happen that
theologians, _via_ the “conscience” either of princes or of the people,
stretch out their hand for power, let us not be in any doubt as to
what results therefrom each time, namely:—the will to the end, the
_nihilistic_ will to power....


10

Among Germans I am immediately understood when I say, that philosophy
is ruined by the blood of theologians. The Protestant minister is
the grand-father of German philosophy, Protestantism itself is the
latter’s _peccatum originale._ Definition of Protestantism: the
partial paralysis of Christianity—and of reason.... One needs only to
pronounce the words “Tübingen Seminary,” in order to understand what
German philosophy really is at bottom, theology _in disguise_.... The
Swabians are the best liars in Germany, they lie innocently.... Whence
came all the rejoicing with which the appearance of Kant was greeted
by the scholastic world of Germany, three-quarters of which consist of
clergymen’s and schoolmasters’ sons? Whence came the German conviction,
which finds an echo even now, that Kant inaugurated a change for the
_better?_ The theologian’s instinct in the German scholar divined what
had once again been made possible.... A back-staircase leading into
the old ideal was discovered, the concept “true world,” the concept
morality as the _essence_ of the world (—those two most vicious errors
that have ever existed!), were, thanks to a subtle and wily scepticism,
once again, if not demonstrable, at least no longer _refutable...._
Reason, the _prerogative_ of reason, does not extend so far.... Out of
reality they had made “appearance”; and an absolutely false world—that
of being—had been declared to be reality. Kant’s success is merely a
theologian’s success. Like Luther, and like Leibniz, Kant was one brake
the more upon the already squeaky wheel of German uprightness.


11

One word more against Kant as a _moralist._ A virtue _must_ be _our_
invention, our most personal defence and need: in every other sense it
is merely a danger. That which does not constitute a condition of our
life, is merely harmful to it: to possess a virtue merely because one
happens to respect the concept “virtue,” as Kant would have us do, is
pernicious. “Virtue,” “Duty,” “Goodness in itself,” goodness stamped
with the character of impersonality and universal validity—these
things are mere mental hallucinations, in which decline the final
devitalisation of life and Königsbergian Chinadom find expression. The
most fundamental laws of preservation and growth, demand precisely the
reverse, namely:—that each should discover _his_ own virtue, his own
Categorical Imperative. A nation goes to the dogs when it confounds
its concept of duty with the general concept of duty. Nothing is more
profoundly, more thoroughly pernicious, than every impersonal feeling
of duty, than every sacrifice to the Moloch of abstraction.—Fancy no
one’s having thought Kant’s Categorical Imperative _dangerous to life!_
... The instinct of the theologist alone took it under its wing!—An
action stimulated by the instinct of life, is proved to be a proper
action by the happiness that accompanies it: and that nihilist with the
bowels of a Christian dogmatist regarded happiness as an _objection
..._. What is there that destroys a man more speedily than to work,
think, feel, as an automaton of “duty,” without internal promptings,
without a profound personal predilection, without joy? This is the
recipe _par excellence_ of decadence and even of idiocy.... Kant became
an idiot—And he was the contemporary of Goethe! This fatal spider was
regarded as _the_ German philosopher,—is still regarded as such!... I
refrain from saying what I think of the Germans.... Did Kant not see in
the French Revolution the transition of the State from the inorganic to
the _organic_ form? Did he not ask himself whether there was a single
event on record which could be explained otherwise than as a moral
faculty of mankind; so that by means of it, “mankind’s tendency towards
good,” might be _proved_ once and for all? Kant’s reply: “that is the
Revolution.” Instinct at fault in anything and everything, hostility to
nature as an instinct, German decadence made into philosophy_—that is
Kant!_


12

Except for a few sceptics, the respectable type in the history of
philosophy, the rest do not know the very first pre-requisite of
intellectual uprightness. They all behave like females, do these great
enthusiasts and animal prodigies,—they regard “beautiful feelings”
themselves as arguments, the “heaving breast” as the bellows of
divinity, and conviction as the _criterion_ of truth. In the end,
even Kant, with “Teutonic” innocence, tried to dress this lack of
intellectual conscience up in a scientific garb by means of the concept
“practical reason.” He deliberately invented a kind of reason which
at times would allow one to dispense with reason, that is to say when
“morality,” when the sublime command “thou shalt,” makes itself heard.
When one remembers that in almost all nations the philosopher is only a
further development of the priestly type, this heirloom of priesthood,
this _fraud towards one’s self,_ no longer surprises one. When a man
has a holy life-task, as for instance to improve, save, or deliver
mankind, when a man bears God in his breast, and is the mouthpiece of
imperatives from another world,—with such a mission he stands beyond
the pale of all merely reasonable valuations. He is even sanctified by
such a taste, and is already the type of a higher order! What does a
priest care about science! He stands too high for that!—And until now
the priest has _ruled!_—He it was who determined the concept “true
and false.”


13

Do not let us undervalue the fact that we _ourselves,_ we free spirits,
are already a “transvaluation of all values,” an incarnate declaration
of war against all the old concepts “true” and “untrue” and of a
triumph over them. The most valuable standpoints are always the last
to be found: but the most valuable standpoints are the methods. AH the
methods and the first principles of our modern scientific procedure,
had for years to encounter the profoundest contempt: association
with them meant exclusion from the society of decent people—one was
regarded as an “enemy of God,” as a scoffer at truth and as “one
possessed.” With one’s scientific nature, one belonged to the Chandala.
We have had the whole feeling of mankind against us; hitherto their
notion of that which ought to be truth, of that which ought to serve
the purpose of truth: every “thou shalt,” has been directed against
us.... Our objects, our practices, our calm, cautious distrustful
manner—everything about us seemed to them absolutely despicable and
beneath contempt After all, it might be asked with some justice,
whether the thing which kept mankind blindfold so long, were not an
æsthetic taste: what they demanded of truth was a _picturesque_ effect,
and from the man of science what they expected was that he should make
a forcible appeal to their senses. It was our _modesty_ which ran
counter to their taste so long ... And oh! how well they guessed this,
did these divine turkey-cocks!—


14

We have altered our standpoint. In every respect we have become
more modest We no longer derive man from the “spirit,” and from the
“godhead”; we have thrust him back among the beasts. We regard him as
the strongest animal, because he is the craftiest: one of the results
thereof is his intellectuality. On the other hand we guard against the
vain pretension, which even here would fain assert itself: that man is
the great _arrière pensée_ of organic evolution! He is by no means the
crown of creation, beside him, every other creature stands at the same
stage of perfection.... And even in asserting this we go a little too
far; for, relatively speaking, man is the most botched and diseased
of animals, and he has wandered furthest from his instincts. Be all
this as it may, he is certainly the most _interesting!_ As regards
animals, Descartes was the first, with really admirable daring, to
venture the thought that the beast was _machina,_ and the whole of
our physiology is endeavouring to prove this proposition. Moreover,
logically we do not set man apart, as Descartes did: the extent
to which man is understood to-day goes only so far as he has been
understood mechanistically. Formerly man was given “free will,” as his
dowry from a higher sphere; nowadays we have robbed him even of will,
in view of the fact that no such faculty is any longer known. The only
purpose served by the old word “will,” is to designate a result, a
sort of individual reaction which necessarily follows upon a host of
partly discordant and partly harmonious stimuli:—the will no longer
“effects” or “moves” anything.... Formerly people thought that man’s
consciousness, his “spirit,” was a proof of his lofty origin, of his
divinity. With the idea of perfecting man, he was conjured to draw his
senses inside himself, after the manner of the tortoise, to cut off all
relations with terrestrial things, and to divest himself of his mortal
shell. Then the most important thing about him, the “pure spirit,”
would remain over. Even concerning these things we have improved our
standpoint Consciousness, “spirit,” now seems to us rather a symptom of
relative imperfection in the organism, as an experiment, a groping, a
misapprehension, an affliction which absorbs an unnecessary quantity of
nervous energy. We deny that anything can be done perfectly so long as
it is done consciously. “Pure spirit” is a piece of “pure stupidity”:
if we discount the nervous system, the senses and the “mortal shell,”
we have miscalculated—that it is all!...


15

In Christianity neither morality nor religion comes in touch at all
with reality. Nothing but imaginary _causes_ (God, the soul, the ego,
spirit, free will—or even non-free will); nothing but imaginary
_effects_ (sin, salvation, grace, punishment, forgiveness of sins).
Imaginary beings are supposed to have intercourse (God, spirits,
souls); imaginary Natural History (anthropocentric: total lack of
the notion “natural causes”); an imaginary _psychology_ (nothing
but misunderstandings of self, interpretations of pleasant or
unpleasant general feelings; for instance of the states of the _nervus
sympathicus,_ with the help of the sign language of a religio-moral
idiosyncrasy,—repentance, pangs of conscience, the temptation of
the devil, the presence of God); an imaginary teleology (the Kingdom
of God, the Last Judgment, Everlasting Life).—This purely fictitious
world distinguishes itself very unfavourably from the world of
dreams: the latter _reflects_ reality, whereas the former falsifies,
depreciates and denies it Once the concept “nature” was taken to mean
the opposite of the concept God, the word “natural” had to acquire the
meaning of abominable,—the whole of that fictitious world takes its
root in the hatred of nature (—reality!—), it is the expression of
profound discomfiture in the presence of reality.... _But this explains
everything._ What is the only kind of man who has reasons for wriggling
out of reality by lies? The man who suffers from reality. But in
order to suffer from reality one must be a bungled portion of it. The
preponderance of pain over pleasure is the _cause_ of that fictitious
morality and religion: but any such preponderance furnishes the formula
for decadence.


16

A criticism of the Christian concept of God inevitably leads to the
same conclusion.—A nation that still believes in itself, also has
its own God. In him it honours the conditions which enable it to
remain uppermost,—that is to say, its virtues. It projects its joy
over itself, its feeling of power, into a being, to whom it can be
thankful for such things. He who is rich, will give of his riches: a
proud people requires a God, unto whom it can _sacrifice_ things....
Religion, when restricted to these principles, is a form of gratitude.
A man is grateful for his own existence; for this he must have a
God.—Such a God must be able to benefit and to injure him, he must be
able to act the friend and the foe. He must be esteemed for his good
as well as for his evil qualities. The monstrous castration of a God
by making him a God only of goodness, would lie beyond the pale of the
desires of such a community. The evil God is just as urgently needed
as the good God: for a people in such a form of society certainly does
not owe its existence to toleration and humaneness.... What would be
the good of a God who knew nothing of anger, revenge, envy, scorn,
craft, and violence?—who had perhaps never experienced the rapturous
_ardeurs_ of victory and of annihilation? No one would understand such
a God: why should one possess him?—Of course, when a people is on
the road to ruin; when it feels its belief in a future, its hope of
freedom vanishing for ever; when it becomes conscious of submission
as the most useful quality, and of the virtues of the submissive as
self-preservative measures, then its God must also modify himself.
He then becomes a tremulous and unassuming sneak; he counsels “peace
of the soul,” the cessation of all hatred, leniency and “love” even
towards friend and foe. He is for ever moralising, he crawls into
the heart of every private virtue, becomes a God for everybody, he
retires from active service and becomes a Cosmopolitan.... Formerly
he represented a people, the strength of a people, everything
aggressive and desirous of power lying concealed in the heart of a
nation: now he is merely the good God.... In very truth Gods have no
other alternative, they are _either_ the Will to Power—in which case
they are always the Gods of whole nations,—or, on the other hand, the
incapacity for power—in which case they necessarily become good.


17

Wherever the Will to Power, no matter in what form, begins to decline,
a physiological retrogression, decadence, always supervenes. The
godhead of _decadence,_ shorn of its masculine virtues and passions
is perforce converted into the God of the physiologically degraded,
of the weak. Of course they do not call themselves the weak, they
call themselves “the good.” ... No hint will be necessary to help you
to understand at what moment in history the dualistic fiction of a
good and an evil God first became possible. With the same instinct by
which the subjugated reduce their God to “Goodness in itself,” they
also cancel the good qualities from their conqueror’s God; they avenge
themselves on their masters by diabolising the latter’s God.—The _good
God_ and the devil as well:—both the abortions of decadence.—How
is it possible that we are still so indulgent towards the simplicity
of Christian theologians to-day, as to declare with them that the
evolution of the concept God, from the “God of Israel,” the God of
a people, to the Christian God, the quintessence of all goodness,
marks a _step forward?_—But even Renan does this. As if Renan had
a right to simplicity! Why the very contrary stares one in the face.
When the pre-requisites of _ascending_ life, when everything strong,
plucky, masterful and proud has been eliminated from the concept
of God, and step by step he has sunk down to the symbol of a staff
for the weary, of a last straw for all those who are drowning; when
he becomes the pauper’s God, the sinner’s God, the sick man’s God
_par excellence,_ and the attribute “Saviour,” “Redeemer,” remains
_over_ as the one essential attribute of divinity: what does such a
metamorphosis, such an abasement of the godhead imply?—Undoubtedly,
“the kingdom of God” has thus become larger. Formerly all he had was
his people, his “chosen” people. Since then he has gone travelling
over foreign lands, just as his people have done; since then he has
never rested anywhere: until one day he felt at home everywhere, the
Great Cosmopolitan,—until he got the “greatest number,” and half the
world on his side. But the God of the “greatest number,” the democrat
among gods, did not become a proud heathen god notwithstanding: he
remained a Jew, he remained the God of the back streets, the God of
all dark corners and hovels, of all the unwholesome quarters of the
world!... His universal empire is now as ever a netherworld empire,
an infirmary, a subterranean empire, a ghetto-empire.... And he
himself is so pale, so weak, so decadent ... Even the palest of the
pale were able to master him—our friends the metaphysicians, those
albinos of thought. They spun their webs around him so long that
ultimately he was hypnotised by their movements and himself became a
spider, a metaphysician. Thenceforward he once more began spinning the
world out of his inner being—_sub specie Spinozæ,_—thenceforward
he transfigured himself into something ever thinner and ever more
anæmic, became “ideal,” became “pure spirit,” became _“absotutum”_ and
“thing-in-itself.” ... _The decline and fall of a god:_ God became the
“thing-in-itself.”


18

The Christian concept of God—God as the deity of the sick, God as a
spider, God as spirit—is one of the most corrupt concepts of God that
has ever been attained on earth. Maybe it represents the low-water
mark in the evolutionary ebb of the godlike type God degenerated into
the _contradiction of life,_ instead of being its transfiguration and
eternal Yea! With God war is declared on life, nature, and the will to
life! God is the formula for every calumny of this world and for every
lie concerning a beyond! In God, nonentity is deified, and the will to
nonentity is declared holy!


19

The fact that the strong races of Northern Europe did not repudiate
the Christian God, certainly does not do any credit to their religious
power, not to speak of their taste They ought to have been able
successfully to cope with such a morbid and decrepit offshoot of
decadence. And a curse lies on their heads; because they were unable to
cope with him: they made illness, decrepitude and contradiction a part
of all their instincts,—since then they have not _created_ any other
God! Two thousand years have passed and not a single new God! But still
there exists, and as if by right,—like an _ultimum_ and _maximum_ of
god-creating power,—the _creator spiritus_ in man, this miserable God
of Christian monotono-theism! This hybrid creature of decay, nonentity,
concept and contradiction, in which all the instincts of decadence, all
the cowardices and languors of the soul find their sanction!——


20

With my condemnation of Christianity I should not like to have done
an injustice to a religion which is related to it and the number of
whose followers is even greater; I refer to Buddhism. As nihilistic
religions, they are akin,—they are religions of decadence,—while
each is separated from the other in the most extraordinary fashion.
For being able to compare them at all, the critic of Christianity is
profoundly grateful to Indian scholars.—Buddhism is a hundred times
more realistic than Christianity,—it is part of its constitutional
heritage to be able to face problems objectively and coolly, it is
the outcome of centuries of lasting philosophical activity. The
concept “God” was already exploded when it appeared. Buddhism is
the only really _positive_ religion to be found in history, even
in its epistemology (which is strict phenomenalism)—it no longer
speaks of the “struggle with _sin_” but fully recognising the true
nature of reality it speaks of the “struggle with _pain._” It already
has—and this distinguishes it fundamentally from Christianity,—the
self-deception of moral concepts beneath it,—to use my own
phraseology, it stands _Beyond Good and Evil._ The two physiological
facts upon which it rests and upon which it bestows its attention
are: in the first place excessive irritability of feeling, which
manifests itself as a refined susceptibility to pain, _and also_ as
super-spiritualisation, an all-too-lengthy sojourn amid concepts and
logical procedures, under the influence of which the personal instinct
has suffered in favour of the “impersonal.” (—Both of these states
will be known to a few of my readers, the objective ones, who, like
myself, will know them from experience.) Thanks to these physiological
conditions, a state of depression set in, which Buddha sought to combat
by means of hygiene. Against it, he prescribes life in the open, a life
of travel; moderation and careful choice in food; caution in regard to
all intoxicating liquor, as also in regard to all the passions which
tend to create bile and to heat the blood; and he deprecates care
either on one’s own or on other people’s account He recommends ideas
that bring one either peace or good cheer,—he invents means whereby
the habit of contrary ideas may be lost He understands goodness—being
good—as promoting health. _Prayer_ is out of the question, as is
also _asceticism;_ there is neither a Categorical Imperative nor any
discipline whatsoever, even within the walls of a monastery (—it is
always possible to leave it if one wants to). All these things would
have been only a means of accentuating the excessive irritability
already referred to. Precisely on this account he does not exhort his
followers to wage war upon those who do not share their views; nothing
is more abhorred in his doctrine than the feeling of revenge, of
aversion, and of resentment (—“not through hostility doth hostility
end”: the touching refrain of the whole of Buddhism....) And in this
he was right; for it is precisely these passions which are thoroughly
unhealthy in view of the principal dietetic object The mental fatigue
which he finds already existent and which expresses itself in
excessive “objectivity” (_i.e._, the enfeeblement of the individual’s
interest—loss of ballast and of “egoism”), he combats by leading
the spiritual interests as well imperatively back to the individual
In Buddha’s doctrine egoism is a duty: the thing which is above all
necessary, _i.e.,_ “how canst thou be rid of suffering” regulates
and defines the whole of the spiritual diet (—let anyone but think
of that Athenian who also declared war upon pure “scientificality,”
Socrates, who made a morality out of personal egoism even in the realm
of problems).


21

The pre-requisites for Buddhism are a very mild climate, great
gentleness and liberality in the customs of a people and _no_
militarism. The movement must also originate among the higher and
even learned classes. Cheerfulness, peace and absence of desire, are
the highest of inspirations, and they are _realised._ Buddhism is not
a religion in which perfection is merely aspired to: perfection is
the normal case. In Christianity all the instincts of the subjugated
and oppressed come to the fore: it is the lowest classes who seek
their salvation in this religion. Here the pastime, the manner of
killing time is to practise the casuistry of sin, self-criticism, and
conscience inquisition. Here the ecstasy in the presence of a _powerful
being,_ called “god,” is constantly maintained by means of prayer;
while the highest thing is regarded as unattainable, as a gift, as an
act of “grace” Here plain dealing is also entirely lacking: concealment
and the darkened room are Christian. Here the body is despised, hygiene
is repudiated as sensual; the church repudiates even cleanliness (—the
first Christian measure after the banishment of the Moors was the
closing of the public baths, of which Cordova alone possessed 270).
A certain spirit of cruelty towards one’s self and others is also
Christian: hatred of all those who do not share one’s views; the will
to persecute Sombre and exciting ideas are in the foreground; the most
coveted states and those which are endowed with the finest names, are
really epileptic in their nature; diet is selected in such a way as
to favour morbid symptoms and to over-excite the nerves. Christian,
too, is the mortal hatred of the earth’s rulers,—the “noble,”—and
at the same time a sort of concealed and secret competition with them
(the subjugated leave the “body” to their master—all they want is
the “soul”). Christian is the hatred of the intellect, of pride, of
courage, freedom, intellectual _libertinage;_ Christian is the hatred
of the _senses,_ of the joys of the senses, of joy in general.


22

When Christianity departed from its native soil, which consisted of the
lowest classes, the _submerged masses_ of the ancient world, and set
forth in quest of power among barbaric nations, it no longer met with
exhausted men but inwardly savage and self-lacerating men—the strong
but bungled men. Here, dissatisfaction with one’s self, suffering
through one’s self, is not as in the case of Buddhism, excessive
irritability and susceptibility to pain, but rather, conversely, it
is an inordinate desire for inflicting pain, for a discharge of the
inner tension in hostile deeds and ideas. Christianity was in need of
_barbaric_ ideas and values, in order to be able to master barbarians:
such are for instance, the sacrifice of the first-born, the drinking
of blood at communion, the contempt of the intellect and of culture;
torture in all its forms, sensual and non-sensual; the great pomp of
the cult Buddhism is a religion for _senile_ men, for races which
have become kind, gentle, and over-spiritual, and which feel pain too
easily (—Europe is not nearly ripe for it yet—); it calls them back
to peace and cheerfulness, to a regimen for the intellect, to a certain
hardening of the body. Christianity aims at mastering _beasts of prey_;
its expedient is to make them _ill,_—to render feeble is the Christian
recipe for taming, for “civilisation.” Buddhism is a religion for the
close and exhaustion of civilisation; Christianity does not even find
civilisation at hand when it appears, in certain circumstances it lays
the foundation of civilisation.


23

Buddhism, I repeat, is a hundred times colder, more truthful,
more objective. It no longer requires to justify pain and its
susceptibility to suffering by the interpretation of sin,—it simply
says what it thinks, “I suffer.” To the barbarian, on the other hand,
suffering in itself is not a respectable thing: in order to acknowledge
to himself that he suffers, what he requires, in the first place, is
an explanation (his instinct directs him more readily to deny his
suffering, or to endure it in silence). In his case, the word “devil”
was a blessing: man had an almighty and terrible enemy,—he had no
reason to be ashamed of suffering at the hands of such an enemy.—

At bottom there are in Christianity one or two subtleties which belong
to the Orient In the first place it knows that it is a matter of
indifference whether a thing be true or not; but that it is of the
highest importance that it should be believed to be true. Truth and
the belief that something is true: two totally separate worlds of
interest, almost _opposite worlds,_ the road to the one and the road to
the other lie absolutely apart To be initiated into this fact almost
constitutes one a sage in the Orient: the Brahmins understood it thus,
so did Plato, and so does every disciple of esoteric wisdom. If for
example it give anyone pleasure to believe himself delivered from sin,
it is _not_ a necessary prerequisite thereto that he should be sinful,
but only that he should _feel_ sinful. If, however, _faith_ is above
all necessary, then reason, knowledge, and scientific research must be
brought into evil repute: the road to truth becomes the _forbidden_
road.—Strong _hope_ is a much greater stimulant of life than any
single realised joy could be. Sufferers must be sustained by a hope
which no actuality can contradict,—and which cannot ever be realised:
the hope of another world. (Precisely on account of this power that
hope has of making the unhappy linger on, the Greeks regarded it as
the evil of evils, as the most _mischievous_ evil: it remained behind
in Pandora’s box.) In order that _love_ may be possible, God must be a
person. In order that the lowest instincts may also make their voices
heard God must be young. For the ardour of the women a beautiful saint,
and for the ardour of the men a Virgin Mary has to be pressed into the
foreground. All this on condition that Christianity wishes to rule
over a certain soil, on which Aphrodisiac or Adonis cults had already
determined the _notion_ of a cult. To insist upon _chastity_ only
intensifies the vehemence and profundity of the religious instinct—it
makes the cult warmer, more enthusiastic, more soulful.—Love is the
state in which man sees things most widely different from what they
are. The force of illusion reaches its zenith here, as likewise the
sweetening and transfiguring power. When a man is in love he endures
more than at other times; he submits to everything. The thing was to
discover a religion in which it was possible to love: by this means
the worst in life is overcome—it is no longer even seen.—So much
for three Christian virtues Faith, Hope, and Charity: I call them the
three Christian _precautionary measures._—Buddhism is too full of aged
wisdom, too positivistic to be shrewd in this way.


24

Here I only touch upon the problem of the origin of Christianity.
The first principle of its solution reads: Christianity can be
understood only in relation to the soil out of which it grew,—it is
not a counter-movement against the Jewish instinct, it is the rational
outcome of the latter, one step further in its appalling logic. In
the formula of the Saviour: “for Salvation is of the Jews.”—The
second principle is: the psychological type of the Galilean is still
recognisable, but it was only in a state of utter degeneration (which
is at once a distortion and an overloading with foreign features) that
he was able to serve the purpose for which he has been used,—namely,
as the type of a Redeemer of mankind.

The Jews are the most remarkable people in the history of the world,
because when they were confronted with the question of Being or
non-Being, with simply uncanny deliberateness, they preferred Being
_at any price:_ this price was the fundamental _falsification_ of all
Nature, all the naturalness and all the reality, of the inner quite
as much as of the outer world. They hedged themselves in behind all
those conditions under which hitherto a people has been able to live,
has been allowed to live; of themselves they created an idea which was
the reverse of _natural_ conditions,—each in turn, they twisted first
religion, then the cult, then morality, history and psychology, about
in a manner so perfectly hopeless that they were made _to contradict
their natural value._ We meet with the same phenomena again, and
exaggerated to an incalculable degree, although only as a copy:—the
Christian Church as compared with the “chosen people,” lacks all
claim to originality. Precisely on this account the Jews are the most
_fatal_ people in the history of the world: their ultimate influence
has falsified mankind to such an extent, that even to this day the
Christian can be anti-Semitic in spirit, without comprehending that he
himself is the _final consequence of Judaism._

It was in my “Genealogy of Morals” that I first gave a
psychological exposition of the idea of the antithesis noble and
_resentment-morality,_ the latter having arisen out of an attitude
of negation to the former: but this is Judæo-Christian morality
heart and soul. In order to be able to say Nay to everything that
represents the ascending movement of life, prosperity, power,
beauty, and self-affirmation on earth, the instinct of resentment,
become genius, bad to invent _another_ world, from the standpoint
of which that _Yea-saying_ to life appeared as _the_ most evil and
most abominable thing. From the psychological standpoint the Jewish
people are possessed of the toughest vitality. Transplanted amid
impossible conditions, with profound self-preservative intelligence,
it voluntarily took the side of all the instincts of decadence,—_not_
as though dominated by them, but because it detected a power in them
by means of which it could assert itself _against_ “the world.” The
Jews are the opposite of all _decadents_: they have been forced to
represent them to the point of illusion, and with a _non plus ultra_ of
histrionic genius, they have known how to set themselves at the head
of all decadent movements (St Paul and Christianity for instance), in
order to create something from them which is stronger than every party
_saying Yea to life._ For the category of men which aspires to power in
Judaism and Christianity,—that is to say, for the sacerdotal class,
decadence is but a _means;_ this category of men has a vital interest
in making men sick, and in turning the notions “good” and “bad,” “true”
and “false,” upside down in a manner which is not only dangerous to
life, but also slanders it.


25

The history of Israel is invaluable as the typical history of every
_denaturalization_ of natural values: let me point to five facts
which relate thereto. Originally, and above all in the period of
the kings, even Israel’s attitude to all things was the _right_ one
—that is to say, the natural one. Its Jehovah was the expression of
its consciousness of power, of its joy over itself, of its hope for
itself: victory and salvation were expected from him, through him it
was confident that Nature would give what a people requires—above
all rain. Jehovah is the God of Israel, and _consequently_ the God
of justice: this is the reasoning of every people which is in the
position of power, and which has a good conscience in that position. In
the solemn cult both sides of this self-affirmation of a people find
expression: it is grateful for the great strokes of fate by means of
which it became uppermost; it is grateful for the regularity in the
succession of the seasons and for all good fortune in the rearing of
cattle and in the tilling of the soil.—This state of affairs remained
the ideal for some considerable time, even after it had been swept away
in a deplorable manner by anarchy from within and the Assyrians from
without But the people still retained, as their highest desideratum,
that vision of a king who was a good soldier and a severe judge;
and he who retained it most of all was that typical prophet (—that
is to say, critic and satirist of the age), Isaiah.—But all hopes
remained unrealised. The old God was no longer able to do what he had
done formerly. He ought to have been dropped. What happened? The idea
of him was changed,—the idea of him was denaturalised: this was the
price they paid for retaining him.—Jehovah, the God of “Justice,”—is
no longer one with Israel, no longer the expression of a people’s
sense of dignity: he is only a god on certain conditions.... The
idea of him becomes a weapon in the hands of priestly agitators who
henceforth interpret all happiness as a reward, all unhappiness as a
punishment for disobedience to God, for “sin”: that most fraudulent
method of interpretation which arrives at a so-called “moral order
of the Universe,” by means of which the concept “cause” and “effect”
is turned upside down. Once natural causation has been swept out of
the world by reward and punishment, a causation _hostile to nature_
becomes necessary; whereupon all the forms of unnaturalness follow.
A God who _demands,_—in the place of a God who helps, who advises,
who is at bottom only a name for every happy inspiration of courage
and of self-reliance.... Morality is no longer the expression of the
conditions of life and growth, no longer the most fundamental instinct
of life, but it has become abstract, it has become the opposite of
life,—Morality as the fundamental perversion of the imagination,
as the “evil eye” for all things. What is Jewish morality, what is
Christian morality? Chance robbed of its innocence; unhappiness
polluted with the idea of “sin”; well-being interpreted as a danger, as
a “temptation”; physiological indisposition poisoned by means of the
canker-worm of conscience....


26

The concept of God falsified; the concept of morality falsified: but
the Jewish priesthood did not stop at this. No use could be made of
the whole _history_ of Israel, therefore it must go! These priests
accomplished that miracle of falsification, of which the greater part
of the Bible is the document: with unparalleled contempt and in the
teeth of all tradition and historical facts, they interpreted their own
people’s past in a religious manner,—that is to say, they converted
it into a ridiculous mechanical process of salvation, on the principle
that all sin against Jehovah led to punishment, and that all pious
worship of Jehovah led to reward. We would feel this shameful act of
historical falsification far more poignantly if the ecclesiastical
interpretation of history through millenniums had not blunted almost
all our sense for the demands of uprightness _in historicis._ And
the church is seconded by the philosophers: _the_ of “a moral order
of the universe” permeates the whole development even of more modern
philosophy. What does a “moral order of the universe” mean? That once
and for all there is such a thing as a will of God which determines
what man has to do and what he has to leave undone; that the value
of a people or of an individual is measured according to how much or
how little the one or the other obeys the will of God; that in the
destinies of a people or of an individual, the will of God shows
itself dominant, that is to say it punishes or rewards according to
the degree of obedience. In the place of this miserable falsehood,
_reality_ says: a parasitical type of man, who can flourish only at the
cost of all the healthy elements of life, the priest abuses the name
of God: he calls that state of affairs in which the priest determines
the value of things “the Kingdom of God”; he calls the means whereby
such a state of affairs is attained or maintained, “the Will of God”;
with cold-blooded cynicism he measures peoples, ages and individuals
according to whether they favour or oppose the ascendancy of the
priesthood. Watch him at work: in the hands of the Jewish priesthood
the Augustan Age in the history of Israel became an age of decline;
the exile, the protracted misfortune transformed itself into eternal
_punishment_ for the Augustan Age—that age in which the priest did not
yet exist Out of the mighty and thoroughly free-born figures of the
history of Israel, they made, according to their requirements, either
wretched bigots and hypocrites, or “godless ones”: they simplified
the psychology of every great event to the idiotic formula “obedient
or disobedient to God.”—A step further: the “Will of God,” that is
to say the self-preservative measures of the priesthood, must be
known—to this end a “revelation” is necessary. In plain English: a
stupendous literary fraud becomes necessary, “holy scriptures” are
discovered,—and they are published abroad with all hieratic pomp,
with days of penance and lamentations over the long state Of “sin.”
The “Will of God” has long stood firm: the whole of the trouble
lies in the fact that the “Holy Scriptures” have been discarded....
Moses was already the “Will of God” revealed.... What had happened?
With severity and pedantry, the priest had formulated once and for
all—even to the largest and smallest contributions that were to be
paid to him (—not forgetting the daintiest portions of meat; for the
priest is a consumer of beef-steaks)—_what he wanted,_ “what the Will
of God was.” ... Hence-forward everything became so arranged that the
priests were _indispensable everywhere._ At all the natural events of
life, at birth, at marriage, at the sick-bed, at death,—not to speak
of the sacrifice (“the meal”),—the holy parasite appears in order
to denaturalise, or in his language, to “sanctify,” everything....
For this should be understood: every natural custom, every natural
institution (the State, the administration of justice, marriage, the
care of the sick and the poor), every demand inspired by the instinct
of life, in short everything that has a value in itself, is rendered
absolutely worthless and even dangerous through the parasitism of the
priest (or of the “moral order of the universe”): a sanction after
the fact is required,—a _power which imparts value_ is necessary,
which in so doing says, Nay to nature, and which by this means alone
_creates_ a valuation.... The priest depreciates and desecrates nature:
it is only at this price that he exists at all.—Disobedience to God,
that is to say, to the priest, to the “law,” now receives the name of
“sin”; the means of “reconciling one’s self with God” are of course
of a nature which render subordination to the priesthood all the
more fundamental: the priest alone is able to “save.” ... From the
psychological standpoint, in every society organised upon a hieratic
basis, “sins” are indispensable: they are the actual weapons of power,
the priest _lives_ upon sins, it is necessary for him that people
should “sin.” ... Supreme axiom: “God forgiveth him that repenteth”—in
plain English: _him that submitteth himself to the priest._


27

Christianity grew out of an utterly _false_ soil, in which all nature,
every natural value, every _reality_ had the deepest instincts of the
ruling class against it; it was a form of deadly hostility to reality
which has never been surpassed. The “holy people” which had retained
only priestly values and priestly names for all things, and which, with
a logical consistency that is terrifying, had divorced itself from
everything still powerful on earth as if it were “unholy,” “worldly,”
“sinful,”—this people created a final formula for its instinct which
was consistent to the point of self-suppression; as _Christianity_ it
denied even the last form of reality, the “holy people,” the “chosen
people,” _Jewish_ reality itself. The case is of supreme interest:
the small insurrectionary movement christened with the name of Jesus
of Nazareth, is the Jewish instinct _over again,_—in other words,
it is the sacerdotal instinct which can no longer endure the priest
as a fact; it is the discovery of a kind of life even more fantastic
than the one previously conceived, a vision of life which is even
more unreal than that which the organisation of a church stipulates.
Christianity denies the church.[3]

I fail to see against whom was directed the insurrection of which
rightly or _wrongly_ Jesus is understood to have been the promoter,
if it were not directed against the Jewish church,—the word “church”
being used here in precisely the same sense in which it is used to-day.
It was an insurrection against the “good and the just,” against
the “prophets of Israel,” against the hierarchy of society—not
against the latter’s corruption, but against caste, privilege, order,
formality. It was the lack of faith in “higher men,” it was a “Nay”
uttered against everything that was tinctured with the blood of priests
and theologians. But the hierarchy which was set in question if only
temporarily by this movement, formed the construction of piles upon
which, alone, the Jewish people was able to subsist in the midst of the
“waters”; it was that people’s _last_ chance of survival wrested from
the world at enormous pains, the _residuum_ of its political autonomy:
to attack this construction was tantamount to attacking the most
profound popular instinct, the most tenacious national will to live
that has ever existed on earth. This saintly anarchist who called the
lowest of the low, the outcasts and “sinners,” the Chandala of Judaism,
to revolt against the established order of things (and in language
which, if the gospels are to be trusted, would get one sent to Siberia
even to-day)—this man was a political criminal in so far as political
criminals were possible in a community so absurdly non-political. This
brought him to the cross: the proof of this is the inscription found
thereon. He died for _his_ sins—and no matter how often the contrary
has been asserted there is absolutely nothing to show that he died for
the sins of others.


28

As to whether he was conscious of this contrast, or whether he was
merely _regarded_ as such, is quite another question. And here, alone,
do I touch upon the problem of the psychology of the Saviour.—I
confess there are few books which I have as much difficulty in reading
as the gospels. These difficulties are quite different from those which
allowed the learned curiosity of the German, mind to celebrate one
of its most memorable triumphs. Many years have now elapsed since I,
like every young scholar, with the sage conscientiousness of a refined
philologist, relished the work of the incomparable Strauss. I was then
twenty years of age; now I am too serious for that sort of thing. What
do I care about the contradictions of “tradition”? How can saintly
legends be called “tradition” at all! The stories of saints constitute
the most ambiguous literature on earth: to apply the scientific method
to them, _when there are no other documents to hand,_ seems to me to be
a fatal procedure from the start—simply learned fooling.


29

The point that concerns me is the psychological type of the Saviour.
This type might be contained in the gospels, in spite of the gospels,
and however much it may have been mutilated, or overladen with
foreign features: just as that of Francis of Assisi is contained
in his legends in spite of his legends. It is _not_ a question of
the truth concerning what he has done, what he has said, and how he
actually died; but whether his type may still be conceived in any way,
whether it has been handed down to us at all?—The attempts which
to my knowledge have been made to read the _history_ of a “soul” out
of the gospels, seem to me to point only to disreputable levity in
psychological matters. M. Renan, that buffoon _in psychologies,_ has
contributed the two most monstrous ideas imaginable to the explanation
of the type of Jesus: the idea of the _genius_ and the idea of the
_hero_ (“_héros_”). But if there is anything thoroughly unevangelical
surely it is the idea of the hero. It is precisely the reverse of all
struggle, of all consciousness of taking part in the fight, that has
become instinctive here: the inability to resist is here converted into
a morality (“resist not evil,” the profoundest sentence in the whole of
the gospels, their key in a certain sense), the blessedness of peace,
of gentleness, of not _being able_ to be an enemy. What is the meaning
of “glad tidings”?—True life, eternal life has been found—it is not
promised, it is actually here, it is in _you;_ it is life in love, in
love free from all selection or exclusion, free from all distance.
Everybody is the child of God—Jesus does not by any means claim
anything for himself alone,—as the child of God everybody is equal to
everybody else.... Fancy making Jesus a _hero!_—And what a tremendous
misunderstanding the word “genius” is! Our whole idea of “spirit,”
which is a civilised idea, could have had no meaning whatever in the
world in which Jesus lived. In the strict terms of the physiologist, a
very different word ought to be used here.... We know of a condition of
morbid irritability of the sense of _touch,_ which recoils shuddering
from every kind of contact, and from every attempt at grasping a solid
object. Any such physiological _habitus_ reduced to its ultimate
logical conclusion, becomes an instinctive hatred of all reality, a
flight into the “intangible,” into the “incomprehensible”; a repugnance
to all formulæ, to every notion of time and space, to everything that
is established such as customs, institutions, the church; a feeling
at one’s ease in a world in which no sign of reality is any longer
visible, a merely “inner” world, a “true” world, an “eternal” world....
“The Kingdom of God is within you”...


30

_The instinctive hatred of reality_ is the outcome of an extreme
susceptibility to pain and to irritation, which can no longer endure to
be “touched” at all, because every sensation strikes too deep.

_The instinctive exclusion of all aversion, of all hostility, of all
boundaries and distances in feeling,_ is the outcome of an extreme
susceptibility to pain and to irritation, which regards all resistance,
all compulsory resistance as insufferable _anguish_(—that is to say,
as harmful, as _deprecated_ by the self-preservative instinct), and
which knows blessedness (happiness) only when it is no longer obliged
to offer resistance to anybody, either evil or detrimental,—love as
the Only ultimate possibility of life....

These are the two _physiological realities_ upon which and out of which
the doctrine of salvation has grown. I call them a sublime further
development of hedonism, upon a thoroughly morbid soil. Epicureanism,
the pagan theory of salvation, even though it possessed a large
proportion of Greek vitality and nervous energy, remains the most
closely related to the above. Epicurus was a _typical_ decadent: and I
was the first to recognise him as such.—The terror of pain, even of
infinitely slight pain—such a state cannot possibly help culminating
in a _religion_ of love....


31

I have given my reply to the problem in advance. The prerequisite
thereto was the admission of the fact that the type of the Saviour has
reached us only in a very distorted form. This distortion in itself
is extremely feasible: for many reasons a type of that kind could not
be pure, whole, and free from additions. The environment in which
this strange figure moved, must have left its mark upon him, and the
history, the _destiny_ of the first Christian communities must have
done so to a still greater degree. Thanks to that destiny, the type
must have been enriched retrospectively with features which can be
interpreted only as serving the purposes of war and of propaganda
That strange and morbid world into which the gospels lead us—a
world which seems to have been drawn from a Russian novel, where
the scum and dross of society, diseases of the nerves and “childish”
imbecility seem to have given each other rendezvous—must in any case
have _coarsened_ the type: the first disciples especially must have
translated an existence conceived entirely in symbols and abstractions
into their own crudities, in order at least to be able to understand
something about it,—for them the type existed only after it had
been cast in a more familiar mould.... The prophet, the Messiah, the
future judge, the teacher of morals, the thaumaturgist, John the
Baptist—all these were but so many opportunities of misunderstanding
the type.... Finally, let us not under-rate the _proprium_ of all great
and especially sectarian veneration: very often it effaces from the
venerated object, all the original and frequently painfully un-familiar
traits and idiosyncrasies—_it does not even see them._ It is greatly
to be deplored that no Dostoiewsky lived in the neighbourhood of this
most interesting decadent,—I mean someone who would have known how to
feel the poignant charm of such a mixture of the sublime, the morbid,
and the childlike. Finally, the type, as an example of decadence, may
actually have been extraordinarily multifarious and contradictory:
this, as a possible alternative, is not to be altogether ignored.
Albeit, everything seems to point away from it; for, precisely in this
case, tradition would necessarily have been particularly true and
objective: whereas we have reasons for assuming the reverse. Meanwhile
a yawning chasm of contradiction separates the mountain, lake, and
pastoral preacher, who strikes us as a Buddha on a soil only very
slightly Hindu, from that combative fanatic, the mortal enemy of
theologians and priests, whom Renan’s malice has glorified as “_le
grand maître en ironie._” For my part, I do not doubt but what the
greater part of this venom (and even of _esprit_) was inoculated into
the type of the Master only as the outcome of the agitated condition
of Christian propaganda. For we have ample reasons for knowing the
unscrupulousness of all sectarians when they wish to contrive their own
_apology_ out of the person of their master. When the first Christian
community required a discerning, wrangling, quarrelsome, malicious and
hair-splitting theologian, to oppose other theologians, it created its
“God” according to its needs; just as it did not hesitate to put upon
his lips those utterly unevangelical ideas of “his second coming,” the
“last judgment,”—ideas with which it could not then dispense,—and
every kind of expectation and promise which happened to be current.


32

I can only repeat that I am opposed to the importation of the fanatic
into the type of the Saviour: the word “_impérieux,_” which Renan
uses, in itself annuls the type. The “glad tidings” are simply that
there are no longer any contradictions, that the Kingdom of Heaven is
for the _children;_ the faith which raises its voice here is not a
faith that has been won by a struggle,—it is to hand, it was there
from the beginning, it is a sort of spiritual return to childishness.
The case of delayed and undeveloped puberty in the organism, as the
result of degeneration is at least familiar to physiologists. A faith
of this sort does not show anger, it does not blame, neither does it
defend itself: it does not bring “the sword,”—it has no inkling of
how it will one day establish feuds between man and man. It does not
demonstrate itself, either by miracles, or by reward and promises, or
yet “through the scriptures”: it is in itself at every moment its own
miracle, its own reward, its own proof, its own “Kingdom of God.” This
faith cannot be formulated—it lives, it guards against formulas. The
accident of environment, of speech, of preparatory culture, certainly
determines a particular series of conceptions: early Christianity deals
only in Judæo-Semitic conceptions (—the eating and drinking at the
last supper form part of these,—this idea which like everything Jewish
has been abused so maliciously by the church). But one should guard
against seeing anything more than a language of signs, semiotics, an
opportunity for parables in all this. The very fact that no word is to
be taken literally, is the only condition on which this Anti-realist
is able to speak at all. Among Indians he would have made use of the
ideas of Sankhyara, among Chinese, those of Lao-tze—and would not
have been aware of any difference. With a little terminological laxity
Jesus might be called a “free spirit”—he cares not a jot for anything
that is established: the word _killeth,_ everything fixed _killtth._
The idea, _experience,_ “life” as he alone knows it, is, according to
him, opposed to every kind of word, formula, law, faith and dogma. He
speaks only of the innermost things: “life” or “truth,” or “light,” is
his expression for the innermost thing,—everything else, the whole of
reality, the whole of nature, language even, has only the value of a
sign, of a simile for him.—It is of paramount importance not to make
any mistake at this point, however great may be the temptation thereto
that lies in Christian—I mean to say, ecclesiastical prejudice. Any
such essential symbolism stands beyond the pale of all religion, all
notions of cult, all history, all natural science, all experience of
the world, all knowledge, all politics, all psychology, all books and
all Art—for his “wisdom” is precisely the complete ignorance[4] of the
existence of such things. He has not even heard speak of _culture,_ he
does not require to oppose it,—he does not deny it.... The same holds
good of the state, of the whole of civil and social order, of work
and of war—he never had any reason to deny the world, he had not the
vaguest notion of the ecclesiastical concept “the world.” ... Denying
is precisely what was quite impossible to him.—Dialectic is also
quite absent, as likewise the idea that any faith, any “truth” can be
proved by argument (—his proofs are inner “lights,” inward feelings of
happiness and self-affirmation, a host of “proofs of power”—). Neither
can such a doctrine contradict, it does not even realise the fact that
there are or can be other doctrines, it is absolutely incapable of
imagining a contrary judgment.... Wherever it encounters such things,
from a feeling of profound sympathy it bemoans such “blindness,”—for
it sees the “light,”—but it raises no objections.


33

The whole psychology of the “gospels” lacks the concept of guilt and
punishment, as also that of reward. “Sin,” any sort of aloofness
between God and man, is done away with,—_this is precisely what
constitutes the “glad tidings”._ Eternal bliss is not promised, it is
not bound up with certain conditions; it is the only reality—the rest
consists only of signs wherewith to speak about it....

The results of such a state project themselves into a new practice
of life, the actual evangelical practice. It is not a “faith” which
distinguishes the Christians: the Christian acts, he distinguishes
himself by means of a _different_ mode of action. He does not resist
his enemy either by words or in his heart He draws no distinction
between foreigners and natives, between Jews and Gentiles (“the
neighbour” really means the co-religionist, the Jew). He is angry with
no one, he despises no one. He neither shows himself at the tribunals
nor does he acknowledge any of their claims (“Swear not at all”).
He never under any circumstances divorces his wife, even when her
infidelity has been proved.—All this is at bottom one principle, it is
all the outcome of one instinct—

The life of the Saviour was naught else than this practice,—neither
was his death. He no longer required any formulæ, any rites for his
relations with God—not even prayer. He has done with all the Jewish
teaching of repentance and of atonement; he alone knows the _mode_
of life which makes one feel “divine,” “saved,” “evangelical,” and
at all times a “child of God.” _Not_ “repentance,” _not_ “prayer and
forgiveness” are the roads to God: the _evangelical mode of life
alone_ leads to God, it _is_ “God.”—That which the gospels abolished
was the Judaism of the concepts “sin,” “forgiveness of sin,” “faith,”
“salvation through faith,”—the whole doctrine of the Jewish church was
denied by the “glad tidings.”

The profound instinct of how one must live in order to feel “in
Heaven,” in order to feel “eternal,” while in every other respect
one feels by _no_ means “in Heaven”: this alone is the psychological
reality of “Salvation.”—A new life and _not_ a new faith....


34

If I understand anything at all about this great symbolist, it is
this that he regarded only _inner_ facts as facts, as “truths,”—that
he understood the rest, everything natural, temporal, material
and historical, only as signs, as opportunities for parables. The
concept “the Son of Man,” is not a concrete personality belonging to
history, anything individual and isolated, but an “eternal” fact,
a psychological symbol divorced from the concept of time. The same
is true, and in the highest degree, of the _God_ of this typical
symbolist, of the “Kingdom of God,” of the “Kingdom of Heaven,” and
of the “Sonship of God.” Nothing is more un-Christlike than the
_ecclesiastical crudity_ of a personal God, of a Kingdom of God that
is coming, of a “Kingdom of Heaven” beyond, of a “Son of God” as the
second person of the Trinity. All this, if I may be forgiven the
expression, is as fitting as a square peg in a round hole—and oh!
what a hole!—the gospels: a _world-historic_ cynicism in the scorn
of symbols.... But what is meant by the signs “Father” and “Son,” is
of course obvious—not to everybody, I admit: with the word “Son,”
_entrance_ into the feeling of the general transfiguration of all
things (beatitude) is expressed, with the word “Father,” _this feeling
itself_ the feeling of eternity and of perfection.—I blush to have to
remind you of what the Church has done with this symbolism: has it not
set an Amphitryon story at the threshold of the Christian “faith”? And
a dogma of immaculate conception into the bargain?... _But by so doing
it defiled conception._——

The “Kingdom of Heaven” is a state of the heart—not something
which exists “beyond this earth” or comes to you “after death.” The
whole idea of natural death is lacking in the gospels. Death is not
a bridge, not a means of access: it is absent because it belongs to
quite a different and merely apparent world the only use of which is
to furnish signs, similes. The “hour of death” is not a Christian
idea—the “hour,” time in general, physical life and its crises do not
exist for the messenger of “glad tidings.” ... The “Kingdom of God” is
not some thing that is expected; it has no yesterday nor any day after
to-morrow, it is not going to come in a “thousand years”—it is an
experience of a human heart; it is everywhere, it is nowhere....


35

This “messenger of glad tidings” died as he lived and as he
taught—_not_ in order “to save mankind,” but in order to show how one
ought to live. It was a mode of life that he bequeathed to mankind: his
behaviour before his judges, his attitude towards his executioners,
his accusers, and all kinds of calumny and scorn,—his demeanour on
the _cross._ He offers no resistance; he does not defend his rights;
he takes no step to ward off the most extreme consequences, he does
more,—he provokes them. And he prays, suffers and loves with those, in
those, who treat him ill.... _Not_ to defend one’s self, _not_ to show
anger, not to hold anyone responsible.... But to refrain from resisting
even the evil one,—to _love_ him....


36

—Only we spirits that have _become free,_ possess the necessary
condition for understanding something which nineteen centuries have
misunderstood,—that honesty which has become an instinct and a passion
in us, and which wages war upon the “holy lie” with even more vigour
than upon every other lie.... Mankind was unspeakably far from our
beneficent and cautious neutrality, from that discipline of the mind,
which, alone, renders the solution of such strange and subtle things
possible: at all times, with shameless egoism, all that people sought
was their _own_ advantage in these matters, the Church was built up out
of contradiction to the gospel....

Whoever might seek for signs pointing to the guiding fingers of an
ironical deity behind the great comedy of existence, would find no
small argument in the _huge note of interrogation_ that is called
Christianity. The fact that mankind is on its knees before the reverse
of that which formed the origin, the meaning and the _rights_ of
the gospel; the fact that, in the idea “Church,” precisely that is
pronounced holy which the “messenger of glad tidings” regarded as
_beneath_ him, as _behind_ him—one might seek in vain for a more
egregious example _of world-historic_ irony—-


37

—Our age is proud of its historical sense: how could it allow
itself to be convinced of the nonsensical idea that at the beginning
Christianity consisted only of the _clumsy fable of the thaumaturgist
and of the Saviour,_ and that all its spiritual and symbolic
side was only developed later? On the contrary: the history of
Christianity—from the death on the cross onwards—is the history of
a gradual and ever coarser misunderstanding of an original symbolism.
With every extension of Christianity over ever larger and ruder
masses, who were ever less able to grasp its first principles, the
need of _vulgarising and barbarising it_ increased proportionately—it
absorbed the teachings and rites of all the _subterranean_ cults of the
_imperium Romanum,_ as well as the nonsense of every kind of morbid
reasoning. The fatal feature of Christianity lies in the necessary
fact that its faith had to become as morbid, base and vulgar as the
needs to which it had to minister were morbid, base and vulgar. _Morbid
barbarism_ at last braces itself together for power in the form of the
Church—the Church, this deadly hostility to all honesty, to all
loftiness of the soul, to all discipline of the mind, to all frank and
kindly humanity.—_Christian_ and _noble_ values: only we spirits _who
have become free have_ re-established this contrast in values which is
the greatest that has ever existed on earth!—


38

—I cannot, at this point, stifle a sigh. There are days when I
am visited by a feeling blacker than the blackest melancholy—the
_contempt of man._ And in order that I may leave you in no doubt as
to what I despise, _whom_ I despise: I declare that it is the man of
to-day, the man with whom I am fatally contemporaneous. The man of
to-day, I am asphyxiated by his foul breath.... Towards the past, like
all knights of knowledge, I am profoundly tolerant,—that is to say,
I exercise a sort of _generous_ self-control: with gloomy caution I
pass through whole millennia of this mad-house world, and whether it
be called “Christianity,” “Christian Faith,” or “Christian Church,” I
take care not to hold mankind responsible for its mental disorders.
But my feeling suddenly changes, and vents itself the moment I enter
the modern age, _our_ age. Our age _knows...._ That which formerly
was merely morbid, is now positively indecent It is indecent nowadays
to be a Christian. _And it is here that my loathing begins._ I look
about me: not a word of what was formerly known as “truth” has remained
standing; we can no longer endure to hear a priest even pronounce the
word “truth.” Even he who makes but the most modest claims upon truth,
_must_ know at present, that a theologian, a priest, or a pope, not
only errs but actually _ties,_ with every word that he utters,—and
that he is no longer able to lie from “innocence,” from “ignorance.”
Even the priest knows quite as well as everybody else does that there
is no longer any “God,” any “sinner” or any “Saviour,” and that “free
will,” and “a moral order of the universe” are _lies._ Seriousness,
the profound self-conquest of the spirit no longer allows anyone to
be _ignorant_ about this.... All the concepts of the Church have been
revealed in their true colours—that is to say, as the most vicious
frauds on earth, calculated to _depreciate_ nature and all natural
values. The priest himself has been recognised as what he is—that is
to say, as the most dangerous kind of parasite, as the actual venomous
spider of existence.... At present we know, our _conscience_ knows,
the real value of the gruesome inventions which the priests and the
Church have made, _and what end they served._ By means of them that
state of self-profanation on the part of man has been attained, the
sight of which makes one heave. The concepts “Beyond,” “Last Judgment,”
“Immortality of the Soul,” the “soul” itself, are merely so many
instruments of torture, so many systems of cruelty, on the strength
of which the priest became and remained master.... Everybody knows
this, _and nevertheless everything remains as it was._ Whither has
the last shred of decency, of self-respect gone, if nowadays even
our statesmen—a body of men who are otherwise so unembarrassed, and
such thorough anti-Christians in deed—still declare themselves
Christians and still flock to communion?[5].... Fancy a prince at the
head of his legions, magnificent as the expression of the egoism and
self-exaltation of his people,—but _shameless_ enough to acknowledge
himself a Christian!... What then does Christianity deny? What does
it call “world”? “The world” to Christianity means that a man is a
soldier, a judge, a patriot, that he defends himself, that he values
his honour, that he desires his own advantage, that he is _proud._
... The conduct of every moment, every instinct, every valuation that
leads to a deed, is at present anti-Christian: what an _abortion of
falsehood_ modern man must be, in order to be able _without a blush_
still to call himself a Christian!——


39

—I will retrace my steps, and will tell you the _genuine_
history of Christianity.—The very word “Christianity” is a
misunderstanding,—truth to tell, there never was more than one
Christian, and he _died_ on the Cross. The “gospel” _died_ on the
cross. That which thenceforward was called “gospel” was the reverse
of that “gospel” that Christ had lived: it was “evil tidings,” a
_dysangel_ It is false to the point of nonsense to see in “faith,”
in the faith in salvation through Christ, the distinguishing trait
of the Christian: the only thing that is Christian is the Christian
mode of existence, a life such as he led who died on the Cross.... To
this day a life of this kind is still possible; for certain men, it
is even necessary: genuine, primitive Christianity will be possible
in all ages.... _Not_ a faith, but a course of action, above all a
course of inaction, non-interference, and a different life.... States
of consciousness, any sort of faith, a holding of certain things
for true, as every psychologist knows, are indeed of absolutely no
consequence, and are only of fifth-rate importance compared with the
value of the instincts: more exactly, the whole concept of intellectual
causality is false. To reduce the fact of being a Christian, or of
Christianity, to a holding of something for true, to a mere phenomenon
of consciousness, is tantamount to denying Christianity. _In fact
there have never been any Christians._ The “Christian,” he who for two
thousand years has been called a Christian, is merely a psychological
misunderstanding of self. Looked at more closely, there ruled in
him, _notwithstanding_ all his faith, only instincts—and _what
instincts!_—“Faith” in all ages, as for instance in the case of
Luther, has always been merely a cloak, a pretext, a _screen,_ behind
which the instincts played their game,—a prudent form of _blindness_
in regard to the dominion of _certain_ instincts. “Faith” I have
already characterised as a piece of really Christian cleverness; for
people have always spoken of “faith” and acted according to their
instincts.... In the Christian’s world of ideas there is nothing which
even touches reality: but I have already recognised in the instinctive
hatred of reality the actual motive force, the only driving power at
the root of Christianity. What follows therefrom? That here, even
_in psychologicis_, error is fundamental,—that is to say capable
of determining the spirit of things,—that is to say, _substance._
Take one idea away from the whole, and put one realistic fact in its
stead,—and the whole of Christianity tumbles into nonentity!—Surveyed
from above, this strangest of all facts,-a religion not only dependent
upon error, but inventive and showing signs of genius only in those
errors which are dangerous and which poison life and the human
heart—remains a _spectacle for gods,_ for those gods who are at the
same time philosophers and whom I met for instance in those celebrated
dialogues on the island of Naxos. At the moment when they get rid
of their _loathing (—and we do as well!_), they will be thankful
for the spectacle the Christians have offered: the wretched little
planet called Earth perhaps deserves on account of _this_ curious
case alone, a divine glance, and divine interest.... Let us not
therefore underestimate the Christians: the Christian, false _to the
point of innocence in falsity,_ is far above the apes,—in regard to
the Christians a certain well-known theory of Descent becomes a mere
good-natured compliment.


40

—The fate of the gospel was decided at the moment of the death,—it
hung on the “cross.” ... It was only death, this unexpected and
ignominious death; it was only the cross which as a rule was reserved
simply for the _canaille,_—only this appalling paradox which
confronted the disciples with the actual riddle: _Who was that? what
was that?_—The state produced by the excited and profoundly wounded
feelings of these men, the suspicion that such a death might imply the
_refutation_ of their cause, and the terrible note of interrogation:
“why precisely thus?” will be understood only too well. In this case
everything _must_ be necessary, everything must have meaning, a reason,
the highest reason. The love of a disciple admits of no such thing as
accident. Only then did the chasm yawn: “who has killed him?” “who was
his natural enemy?”—this question rent the firmament like a flash of
lightning. Reply: _dominant_ Judaism, its ruling class. Thenceforward
the disciple felt himself in revolt _against_ established order; he
understood Jesus, after the fact, as one in _revolt against established
order._ Heretofore this warlike, this nay-saying and nay-doing feature
in Christ had been lacking; nay more, he was its contradiction. The
small primitive community had obviously understood _nothing_ of the
principal factor of all, which was the example of freedom and of
superiority to every form of _resentment_ which lay in this way of
dying. And this shows how little they understood him altogether! At
bottom Jesus could not have desired anything else by his death than to
give the strongest public _example_ and _proof_ of his doctrine....
But his disciples were very far from _forgiving this_ death—though if
they had done so it would have been in the highest sense evangelical
on their part,—neither were they prepared, with a gentle and serene
calmness of heart, to _offer_ themselves for a similar death....
Precisely the most unevangelical feeling, _revenge,_ became once more
ascendant. It was impossible for the cause to end with this death:
“compensation” and “judgment” were required (—and forsooth, what could
be more unevangelical than “compensation,” “punishment,” “judgment”!)
The popular expectation of a Messiah once more became prominent;
attention was fixed upon one historical moment: the “Kingdom of God”
descends to sit in judgment upon his enemies. But this proves that
everything was misunderstood: the “Kingdom of God” regarded as the last
scene of the last act, as a promise! But the Gospel had clearly been
the living, the fulfilment, the _reality_ of this “Kingdom of God.”
It was precisely a death such as Christ’s that was this “Kingdom of
God.” It was only now that all the contempt for the Pharisees and the
theologians, and all bitter feelings towards them, were introduced
into the character of the Master,—and by this means he himself was
converted into a Pharisee and a theologian! On the other hand, the
savage veneration of these completely unhinged souls could no longer
endure that evangelical right of every man to be the child of God,
which Jesus had taught: their revenge consisted in _elevating_ Jesus in
a manner devoid of all reason, and in separating him from themselves:
just as, formerly, the Jews, with the view of revenging themselves on
their enemies, separated themselves from their God, and placed him high
above them. The Only God, and the Only Son of God:—both were products
of resentment.


41

—And from this time forward an absurd problem rose into prominence:
“how _could_ God allow it to happen?” To this question the disordered
minds of the small community found a reply which in its absurdity
was literally terrifying: God gave his Son as a _sacrifice_ for the
forgiveness of sins. Alas! how prompt and sudden was the end of
the gospel! Expiatory sacrifice for guilt, and indeed in its most
repulsive and barbaric form,—the sacrifice of the _innocent_ for
the sins of the guilty! What appalling Paganism!—For Jesus himself
had done away with the concept “guilt,”—he denied any gulf between
God and man, he _lived_ this unity between God and man, it was this
that constituted _his_ “glad tidings.” ... And he did _not_ teach it
as a privilege!—Thenceforward there was gradually imported into the
type of the Saviour the doctrine of the Last Judgment, and of the
“second coming,” the doctrine of sacrificial death, and the doctrine
of _Resurrection,_ by means of which the whole concept “blessedness,”
the entire and only reality of the gospel, is conjured away—in favour
of a state _after_ death!... St Paul, with that rabbinic impudence
which characterises all his doings, rationalised this conception, this
prostitution of a conception, as follows: “if Christ did not rise from
the dead, our faith is vain.”—And, in a trice, the most contemptible
of all unrealisable promises, the _impudent_ doctrine of personal
immortality, was woven out of the gospel.... St Paul even preached this
immortality as a reward.


42

You now realise what it was that came to an end with the death on the
cross: a new and thoroughly original effort towards a Buddhistic
movement of peace, towards real and _not_ merely promised _happiness
on earth._ For, as I have already pointed out, this remains the
fundamental difference between the two religions _of decadence:_
Buddhism promises little but fulfils more, Christianity promises
everything but fulfils nothing.—The “glad tidings” were followed
closely by the absolutely _worst_ tidings—those of St Paul. Paul is
the incarnation of a type which is the reverse of that of the Saviour;
he is the genius in hatred, in the standpoint of hatred, and in the
relentless logic of hatred. And alas what did this dysangelist not
sacrifice to his hatred! Above all the Saviour himself: he nailed him
to _his_ cross. Christ’s life, his example, his doctrine and death,
the sense and the right of the gospel—not a vestige of alt this
was left, once this forger, prompted by his hatred, had understood
in it only that which could serve his purpose. _Not_ reality: _not_
historical truth! ... And once more, the sacerdotal instinct of
the Jew, perpetrated the same great crime against history,—he
simply cancelled the yesterday, and the day before that, out of
Christianity; he _contrived of his own accord a history of the birth
of Christianity._ He did more: he once more falsified the history of
Israel, so as to make it appear as a prologue to _his_ mission: all the
prophets had referred to _his_ “Saviour.” ... Later on the Church even
distorted the history of mankind so as to convert it into a prelude to
Christianity.... The type of the Saviour, his teaching, his life, his
death, the meaning of his death, even the sequel to his death—nothing
remained untouched, nothing was left which even remotely resembled
reality. St Paul simply transferred the centre of gravity of the whole
of that great life, to a place _behind_ this life,—in the _lie_ of
the “resuscitated” Christ. At bottom, he had no possible use for the
life of the Saviour,—he needed the death on the cross, _and_ something
more. To regard as honest a man like St Paul (a man whose home was the
very headquarters of Stoical enlightenment) when he devises a proof
of the continued existence of the Saviour out of a hallucination; or
even to believe him when he declares that he had this hallucination,
would amount to foolishness on the part of a psychologist: St Paul
desired the end, consequently he also desired the means.... Even what
he himself did not believe, was believed in by the idiots among whom
he spread _his_ doctrine.—What he wanted was power; with St Paul the
priest again aspired to power,—he could make use only of concepts,
doctrines, symbols with which masses may be tyrannised over, and
with which herds are formed. What was the only part of Christianity
which was subsequently borrowed by Muhamed? St Paul’s invention, his
expedient for priestly tyranny and to the formation of herds: the
belief in immortality—_that is to say, the doctrine of the “Last
Judgment.” ..._


43

When the centre of gravity of life is laid, _not_ in life, but in a
beyond—_in nonentity,_—life is utterly robbed of its balance. The
great lie of personal immortality destroys all reason, all nature in
the instincts,—everything in the instincts that is beneficent, that
promotes life and that is a guarantee of the future, henceforward
aroused suspicion. The very meaning of life is now construed as the
effort to live in such a way that life no longer has any point.... Why
show any public spirit? Why be grateful for one’s origin and one’s
forebears? Why collaborate with one’s fellows, and be confident? Why
be concerned about the general weal or strive after it?... All these
things are merely so many “temptations,” so many deviations from the
“straight path.” “One thing only is necessary.” ... That everybody, as
an “immortal soul,” should have equal rank, that in the totality of
beings, the “salvation” of each individual may lay claim to eternal
importance, that insignificant bigots and three-quarter-lunatics may
have the right to suppose that the laws of nature may be persistently
_broken_ on their account,—any such magnification of every kind
of selfishness to infinity, to _insolence,_ cannot be branded with
sufficient contempt And yet it is to this miserable flattery of
personal vanity that Christianity owes its _triumph,_—by this means
it lured all the bungled and the botched, all revolting and revolted
people, all abortions, the whole of the refuse and offal of humanity,
over to its side. The “salvation of the soul”—in plain English: “the
world revolves around me” ... The poison of the doctrine “_equal_
rights for all”—has been dispensed with the greatest thoroughness by
Christianity: Christianity, prompted by the most secret recesses of
bad instincts, has waged a deadly war upon all feeling of reverence
and distance between man and man—that is to say, the _prerequisite_
of all elevation, of every growth in culture; out of the resentment
of the masses it wrought its _principal weapons_ against us, against
everything noble, joyful, exalted on earth, against our happiness on
earth.... To grant “immortality” to every St Peter and St Paul, was
the greatest, the most vicious outrage upon _noble_ humanity that has
ever been perpetrated.—And do not let us underestimate the fatal
influence which, springing from Christianity, has insinuated itself
even into politics! Nowadays no one has the courage of special rights,
of rights of t dominion, of a feeling of self-respect and of respect
for his equals,—of _pathos of distance._ Our politics are diseased
with this lack of courage!—The aristocratic attitude of mind has been
most thoroughly undermined by the lie of the equality of souls; and if
the belief in the “privilege of the greatest number” creates and will
continue _to create revolutions,_—it is Christianity, let there be no
doubt about it, and Christian values, which convert every revolution
into blood and crime! Christianity is the revolt of all things that
crawl on their bellies against everything that is lofty: the gospel of
the “lowly” _lowers...._


44

—The Gospels are invaluable as a testimony of the corruption which
was already persistent _within_ the first Christian communities. That
which St Paul, with the logician’s cynicism of a Rabbi, carried to its
logical conclusion, was nevertheless merely the process of decay which
began with the death of the Saviour.—These gospels cannot be read
too cautiously; difficulties lurk behind every word they contain. I
confess, and people will not take this amiss, that they are precisely
on that account a joy of the first rank for a psychologist,—as the
reverse of all naive perversity, as refinement _par excellence,_ as
a masterpiece of art in psychological corruption. The gospels stand
alone. Altogether the Bible allows of no comparison. The _first_ thing
to be remembered if we do not wish to lose the scent here, is, that
we are among Jews. The dissembling of holiness which, here, literally
amounts to genius, and which has never been even approximately achieved
elsewhere either by books or by men, this fraud in word and pose
which in this book is elevated to an _Art,_ is not the accident of
any individual gift, of any exceptional nature. These qualities are
a matter of _race._ With Christianity, the art of telling holy lies,
which constitutes the whole of Judaism, reaches its final mastership,
thanks to many centuries of Jewish and most thoroughly serious training
and practice. The Christian, this _ultima ratio_ of falsehood, is the
Jew over again—he is even three times a Jew.... The fundamental will
only to make use of concepts, symbols and poses, which are demonstrated
by the practice of the priests, the instinctive repudiation of every
other kind of practice, every other standpoint of valuation and of
utility—all this is not only tradition, it is _hereditary;_ only as
an inheritance is it able to work like nature. The whole of mankind,
the best brains, and even the best ages—(one man only excepted who
is perhaps only a monster)—have allowed themselves to be deceived.
The gospels were read as the _book of innocence ..._ this is no
insignificant sign of the virtuosity with which deception has been
practised here.—Of course, if we could only succeed in seeing all
these amazing bigots and pretended saints, even for a moment, all
would be at an end—and it is precisely because _I_ can read no
single word of theirs, without seeing their pretentious poses, _that
I have made an end of them_.... I cannot endure a certain way they
have of casting their eyes heavenwards.—Fortunately for Christianity,
books are for the greatest number, merely literature. We must not let
ourselves be led away: “judge not!” they say, but they dispatch all
those to hell who stand in their way. Inasmuch as they let God do the
judging, they themselves, judge; inasmuch as they glorify God, they
glorify themselves; inasmuch as they exact those virtues of which
they themselves happen to be capable—nay more, of which they are in
need in order to be able to remain on top at all;—they assume the
grand airs of struggling for virtue, of struggling for the dominion of
virtue. “We live, we die, we sacrifice ourselves for the good” (—“the
Truth,” “the Light,” “the Kingdom of God”): as a matter of fact they
do only what they cannot help doing. Like sneaks they have to play a
humble part; sit away in corners, and remain obscurely in the shade,
and they make all this appear a duty; their humble life now appears as
a duty, and their humility is one proof the more of their piety!...
Oh, what a humble, chaste and compassionate kind of falsity! “Virtue
itself shall bear us testimony.” ... Only read the gospels as books
calculated to seduce by means of morality: morality is appropriated by
these petty people,—they know what morality can do! The best way of
leading mankind by the nose is with morality! The fact is that the most
conscious _conceit_ of people who believe themselves to be _chosen,_
here simulates modesty: in this way they, the Christian community, the
“good and the just” place themselves once and for all on a certain
side, the side “of Truth”—and the rest of mankind, “the world” on
the other.... This was the most fatal kind of megalomania that had
ever yet existed on earth: insignificant little abortions of bigots
and liars began to lay sole claim to the concepts “God,” “Truth,”
“Light,” “Spirit,” “Love,” “Wisdom,” “Life,” as if these things were,
so to speak, synonyms of themselves, in order to fence themselves off
from “the world”; little ultra-Jews, ripe for every kind of madhouse,
twisted values round in order to suit themselves, just as if the
Christian, alone, were the meaning, the salt, the standard and even the
“_ultimate tribunal_” of all the rest of mankind.... The whole fatality
was rendered possible only because a kind of megalomania, akin to this
one and allied to it in race,—the Jewish kind—was already to hand in
the world: the very moment the gulf between Jews and Judæo-Christians
was opened, the latter had no alternative left, but to adopt the same
self-preservative measures as the Jewish instinct suggested, even
_against_ the Jews themselves, whereas the Jews, theretofore, had
employed these same measures only against the Gentiles. The Christian
is nothing more than an anarchical Jew.


45

—Let me give you a few examples of what these paltry people have
stuffed into their heads, what they have laid _on the lips of their
Master_: quite a host of confessions from “beautiful souls.”—

“And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart
thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against
them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom
and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.” (Mark vi.
11.)—_How evangelical!..._

“And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in
me, it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and he were cast into the sea.” (Mark ix. 42.)—How _evangelical!..._

“And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it fa better for thee to
enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be
cast into hell fire: where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not
quenched.” (Mark ix. 47, 48.)—The eye is not precisely what is meant
in this passage....

“Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here,
which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God
come with power.” (Mark ix. 1.)—Well _lied,_ lion![6] ...

“Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me. _For_ ...” (_A psychologist’s comment._ Christian
morality is refuted by its “For’s”: its “reasons” refute,—this is
Christian.) (Mark viii. 34.)

“Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge,
ye shall be judged.” (Matthew vii. I, 2.)—What a strange notion of
justice on the part of a “just” judge!...

“For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even
the publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye
more _than others?_ do not even the publicans so?” (Matthew v. 46, 47.)
The principle of “Christian love”: it insists upon being _well paid_....

“But if ye forgive not men their trespasses neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses.” (Matthew vi. 15.)—Very compromising for the
“Father” in question.

“But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you.” (Matthew vi. 33)—“All these
things”—that is to say, food, clothing, all the necessities of life.
To use a moderate expression, this is an _error ..._. Shortly before
this God appears as a tailor, at least in certain cases....

“Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward
_is_ great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto
the prophets.” (Luke vi. 23.)—_Impudent_ rabble! They dare to compare
themselves with the prophets....

“Know ye not that ye are the temple of God and _that_ the Spirit of God
dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, _him shall God
destroy;_ for the temple of God is holy, which _temple ye are._” (St
Paul, I Corinthians iii. 16, 17.)—One cannot have too much contempt
for this sort of thing....

“Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world
shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?”
(St Paul, I Corinthians vi. 2.)—Unfortunately this is not merely the
speech of a lunatic.... This _appalling impostor_ proceeds thus: “Know
ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to
this life?”

“Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that in
the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by
the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe ... not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble _are called;_
But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound
the things which are mighty; And base things of the world, and things
which are despised, hath God chosen; _yea,_ and things which are not,
to bring to nought things that are: That no flesh should glory in
his presence.” (St Paul, I Corinthians i. 20 _et seq._)—In order to
_understand_ this passage, which is of the highest importance as an
example of the psychology of every Chandala morality, the reader should
refer to my _Genealogy of Morals:_ in this book, the contrast between
a _noble_ and a Chandala morality born of _resentment_ and impotent
revengefulness, is brought to light for the first time. St Paul was the
greatest of all the apostles of revenge....


46

_What follows from this?_ That one does well to put on one’s gloves
when reading the New Testament The proximity of so much pitch almost
defiles one. We should feel just as little inclined to hobnob with
“the first Christians” as with Polish Jews: not that we need explain
our objections.... They simply smell bad.—In vain have I sought for a
single sympathetic feature in the New Testament; there is not a trace
of freedom, kindliness, open-heartedness and honesty to be found in
it. Humaneness has not even made a start in this book, while _cleanly_
instincts are entirely absent from it.... Only evil instincts are to be
found in the New Testament, it shows no sign of courage, these people
lack even the courage of their evil instincts. All is cowardice, all is
a closing of one’s eyes and self-deception. Every book becomes clean,
after one has just read the New Testament: for instance, immediately
after laying down St Paul, I read with particular delight that most
charming and most wanton of scoffers, Petronius, of whom someone might
say what Domenico Boccaccio wrote to the Duke of Parma about Cæsar
Borgia: “_è tutto festo_”—immortally healthy, immortally cheerful
and well-constituted. ... These petty bigots err in their calculations
and in the most important thing of all. They certainly attack; but
everything they assail is, by that very fact alone, _distinguished._
He whom a “primitive Christian” attacks, is _not_ thereby sullied....
Conversely it is an honour to be opposed by “primitive Christians.”
One cannot read the New Testament without feeling a preference for
everything in it which is the subject of abuse—not to speak of the
“wisdom of this world,” which an impudent windbag tries in vain to
confound “by the foolishness of preaching.” Even the Pharisees and the
Scribes derive advantage from such opposition: they must certainly
have been worth something in order to have been hated in such a
disreputable way. Hypocrisy—as if this were a reproach which the
“first Christians” _were at liberty_ to make!—After all the Scribes
and Pharisees were the _privileged ones;_ this was quite enough, the
hatred of the Chandala requires no other reasons. I very much fear
that the “first Christian”—as also the “_last Christian” whom I may
yet be able to meet,—_ is in his deepest instincts a rebel against
everything privileged; he lives and struggles unremittingly for “equal
rights”!... Regarded more closely, he has no alternative.... If one’s
desire be personally to represent “one of the chosen of God”—or a
“temple of God,” or “a judge of angels,”—then every _other_ principle
of selection, for instance that based upon a standard of honesty,
intellect, manliness and pride, or upon beauty and freedom of heart,
becomes the “world,”—_evil in itself._ Moral: every word on the lips
of a “first Christian” is a lie, every action he does is an instinctive
falsehood,—all his values, all his aims are pernicious; but the man
he, hates, _the thing_ he hates, _has value._ ... The Christian, more
particularly the Christian priest, is a _criterion of values_—Do I
require to add that in the whole of the New Testament only _one_ figure
appears which we cannot help respecting? Pilate, the Roman Governor. To
take a Jewish quarrel _seriously_ was a thing he could not get himself
to do. One Jew more or less—what did it matter?... The noble scorn
of a Roman, in whose presence the word “truth” had been shamelessly
abused, has enriched the New Testament with the only saying which _is
of value,_—and this saying is not only the criticism, but actually the
shattering of that Testament: “What is truth!”...


47

—That which separates us from other people is not the fact that
we can discover no God, either in history, or in nature, or behind
nature,—but that we regard what has been revered as “God,” not as
“divine,” but as wretched, absurd, pernicious; not as an error, but as
a _crime against life._ ... We deny God as God.... If the existence
of this Christian God were _proved_ to us, we should feel even less
able to believe in him.—In a formula: _deus qualem Paulus creavit,
dei negatio._—A religion such as Christianity which never once comes
in touch with reality, and which collapses the very moment reality
asserts its rights even on one single point, must naturally be a mortal
enemy of the “wisdom of this world”—that is to say, _science._ It
will call all those means good with which mental discipline, lucidity
and severity in intellectual matters, nobility and freedom of the
intellect may be poisoned, calumniated and _decried_. “Faith” as an
imperative is a _veto_ against science,—_in praxi,_ it means lies
at any price. St Paul _understood_ that falsehood—that “faith” was
necessary; subsequently the Church understood St Paul.—That “God”
which St Paul invented for himself, a God who “confounds” the “wisdom
of this world” (in a narrower sense, the two great opponents of all
superstition, philology and medicine), means, in very truth, simply St
Paul’s firm _resolve_ to do so: to call his own will “God”, _thora,_
that is arch-Jewish. St Paul insists upon confounding the “wisdom of
this world”: his enemies are the _good old_ philologists and doctors of
the Alexandrine schools; it is on them that he wages war. As a matter
of fact no one is either a philologist or a doctor, who is not also an
_Antichrist._ As a philologist, for instance, a man sees _behind_ the
“holy books,” as a doctor he sees _behind_ the physiological rottenness
of the typical Christian. The doctor says “incurable,” the philologist
says “forgery.”


48

—Has anybody ever really understood the celebrated story which stands
at the beginning of the Bible,—concerning God’s deadly panic over
_science?_ ... Nobody has understood it This essentially sacerdotal
book naturally begins with the great inner difficulty of the priest:
_he_ knows only one great danger, _consequently_ “God” has only one
great danger.—

The old God, entirely “spirit,” a high-priest through and through, and
wholly perfect, is wandering in a leisurely fashion round his garden;
but he is bored. Against boredom even the gods themselves struggle in
vain.[7] What does he do? He invents man,—man is entertaining.... But,
behold, even man begins to be bored. God’s compassion for the only
form of misery which is peculiar to all paradises, exceeds all bounds:
so forthwith he creates yet other animals. God’s _first_ mistake: man
did not think animals entertaining,—he dominated them, he did not even
wish to be an “animal.” Consequently God created woman. And boredom did
indeed cease from that moment,—but many other things ceased as well!
Woman was God’s _second_ mistake.—“Woman in her innermost nature is a
serpent, Heva”—every priest knows this: “all evil came into this world
through woman,”—every priest knows this too. “_Consequently science_
also comes from woman.” ... Only through woman did man learn to taste
of the tree of knowledge.—What had happened? Panic had seized the
old God Man himself had been his _greatest_ mistake, he had created
a rival for himself, science makes you _equal to God,_—it is all up
with priests and gods when man becomes scientific!—Moral: science is
the most prohibited thing of all,—it alone, is forbidden. Science is
the _first,_ the germ of all sins, the original sin. _This alone is
morality._—“Thou shalt _not_ know”:—the rest follows as a matter of
course, God’s panic did not deprive him of his intelligence. How can
one _guard_ against science? For ages this was his principal problem.
Reply: man must be kicked out of paradise! Happiness, leisure leads to
thinking,—all thoughts are bad thoughts.... Man _must_ not think.—And
the “priest-per-se” proceeds to invent distress, death, the vital
danger of pregnancy, every kind of misery, decrepitude, and affliction,
and above all _disease,_—all these are but weapons employed in the
struggle with science! Trouble prevents man from thinking.... And
notwithstanding all these precautions! Oh, horror! the work of science
towers aloft, it storms heaven itself, it rings the death-knell of the
gods,—what’s to be done?—The old God invents _war;_ he separates the
nations, and contrives to make men destroy each other mutually (—the
priests have always been in need of war....) War, among other things,
is a great disturber of science!—Incredible! Knowledge, _the rejection
of the sacerdotal yoke,_ nevertheless increases.—So the old God
arrives at this final decision: “Man has become scientific,—_there is
no help for it, he must be drowned!_” ...


49

You have understood me The beginning of the Bible contains the whole
psychology of the priest—The priest knows only one great danger, and
that is science,—the healthy concept of cause and effect But, on the
whole, science flourishes onlyunder happy conditions,—a man must
have time, he must also have superfluous mental energy in order to
“pursue knowledge” ... “_Consequently_ man must be made unhappy,”—this
has been the argument of the priest of all ages.—You have already
divined what, in accordance with such a manner of arguing, must
first have come into the world:—“sin.” ... The notion of guilt and
punishment, the whole “moral order of the universe,” was invented
against science,—against the deliverance of man from the priest....
Man must _not_ cast his glance upon the outer world, he must turn it
inwards into himself; he must not as a learner look cleverly and
cautiously _into_ things; he must not see at all: he must _suffer._
... And he must suffer, so that he may be in need of the priest every
minute.—Away with doctors! What is needed is a Saviour!—The notion of
guilt and punishment, including the doctrine of “grace,” of “salvation”
and of “forgiveness”—all _lies_ through and through without a shred
of psychological reality—were invented in order to destroy man’s
_sense of causality:_ they are an attack on the concept of cause and
effect!—And _not_ an attack with the fist, with the knife, with
honesty in hate and love! But one actuated by the most cowardly, most
crafty, and most ignoble instincts! A _priests_ attack! A _parasite’s_
attack! A vampyrism of pale subterranean leeches!—... When the natural
consequences of an act are no longer “natural,” but are thought to
be conjured up by phantom concepts of superstition, by “God,” by
“spirits,” and by “souls,” as merely moral consequences, in the form
of rewards, punishments, hints, and educational means,—then the whole
basis of knowledge is destroyed,—_then the greatest crime against man
has been perpetrated._—Sin, I repeat, this form of self-pollution _par
excellence_ on the part of man, was invented in order to make science,
culture and every elevation and noble trait in man quite impossible; by
means of the invention of sin the priest is able to _rule._


50

—I cannot here dispense with a psychology of “faith” and of the
“faithful,” which will naturally be to the advantage of the “faithful.”
If to-day there are still many who do not know how very _indecent_ it
is to be a “believer”—_or_ to what extent such a state is the sign
of decadence, and of the broken will to Life,—they will know it no
later than to-morrow. My voice can make even those hear who are hard
of hearing.—If perchance my ears have not deceived me, it seems that
among Christians there is such a thing as a kind of criterion of truth,
which is called “the proof of power.” “Faith saveth; _therefore_ it
is true.”—It might be objected here that it is precisely salvation
which is not proved but only _promised:_ salvation is bound up with
the condition “faith,”—one _shall_ be saved, _because_ one has
faith.... But how prove _that_ that which the priest promises to the
faithful really will take place, to wit: the “Beyond” which defies
all demonstration?—The assumed “proof of power” is at bottom once
again only a belief in the fact that the effect which faith promises
will not fail to take place. In a formula: “I believe that faith
saveth;—_consequently_ it is true.”—But with this we are at the end
of our tether. This “consequently” would be the _absurdum_ itself as
a criterion of truth.—Let us be indulgent enough to assume, however,
that salvation is proved by faith (—_not_ only desired, and _not_
merely promised by the somewhat suspicious lips of a priest): could
salvation—or, in technical terminology, _happiness_—ever be a proof
of truth? So little is it so that, when pleasurable sensations make
their influence felt in replying to the question “what is true,” they
furnish almost the contradiction of truth, or at any rate they make
it in the highest degree suspicious. The proof through “happiness,”
is a proof of happiness—and nothing else; why in the world should
we take it for granted that _true_ judgments cause more pleasure than
false ones, and that in accordance with a pre-established harmony, they
necessarily bring pleasant feelings in their wake?—The experience of
all strict and profound minds teaches the _reverse._ Every inch of
truth has been conquered only after a struggle, almost everything to
which our heart, our love and our trust in life cleaves, has had to be
sacrificed for it Greatness of soul is necessary for this: the service
of truth is the hardest of all services.—What then is meant by honesty
in things intellectual? It means that a man is severe towards his own
heart, that he scorns “beautiful feelings,” and that he makes a matter
of conscience out of every Yea and Nay!—-Faith saveth: _consequently_
it lies....


51

The fact that faith may in certain circumstances save, the fact that
salvation as the result of an _idée fixe_ does not constitute a true
idea, the fact that faith moves _no_ mountains, but may very readily
raise them where previously they did not exist—all these things are
made sufficiently clear by a mere casual stroll through a _lunatic
asylum._ Of course _no_ priest would find this sufficient: for he
instinctively denies that illness is illness or that lunatic asylums
are lunatic asylums. Christianity is in _need_ of illness, just as
Ancient Greece was in need of a superabundance of health. The actual
ulterior motive of the whole of the Church’s system of salvation
is to _make people ill._ And is not the Church itself the Catholic
madhouse as an ultimate ideal?—The earth as a whole converted into a
madhouse?—The kind of religious man which the Church aims at producing
is a typical _decadent_ The moment of time at which a religious crisis
attains the ascendancy over a people, is always characterised by
nerve-epidemics; the “inner world” of the religious man is ridiculously
like the “inner world” of over-irritable and exhausted people; the
“highest” states which Christianity holds up to mankind as the value
of values, are epileptic in character,—the Church has pronounced only
madmen _or_ great swindlers _in majorem dei honorem_ holy. Once I
ventured to characterise the whole of the Christian training of penance
and salvation (which nowadays is best studied in England) as a _folie
circulaire_ methodically generated upon a soil which, of course, is
already prepared for it,—that is to say, which is thoroughly morbid.
Not every one who likes can be a Christian: no man is “converted”
to Christianity,—he must be sick enough for it ... We others who
possess enough courage both for health and for contempt, how rightly
_we_ may despise a religion which taught men to misunderstand the
body I which would not rid itself of the superstitions of the soul!
which made a virtue of taking inadequate nourishment! which in health
combats a sort of enemy, devil, temptation! which persuaded itself that
it was possible to bear a perfect soul about in a cadaverous body,
and which, to this end, had to make up for itself a new concept of
“perfection,” a pale, sickly, idiotically gushing ideal,—so-called
“holiness,”—holiness, which in itself is simply a symptom of an
impoverished, enervated and incurably deteriorated body!... The
movement of Christianity, as a European movement, was from first to
last, a general accumulation of the ruck and scum of all sorts and
kinds (—and these, by means of Christianity, aspire to power). It
does _not_ express the downfall of a race, it is rather a conglomerate
assembly of all the decadent elements from everywhere which seek each
other and crowd together. It was not, as some believe, the corruption
of antiquity, of _noble_ antiquity, which made Christianity possible:
the learned idiocy which nowadays tries to support such a notion cannot
be too severely contradicted. At the time when the morbid and corrupted
Chandala classes became Christianised in the whole of the _imperium,_
the very _contrary type,_ nobility, was extant in its finest and
maturest forms. The greatest number became master; the democracy of
Christian instincts triumphed.... Christianity was not “national,” it
was not determined by race,—it appealed to all the disinherited forms
of life, it had its allies everywhere. Christianity is built upon the
rancour of the sick; its instinct is directed _against_ the sound,
against health. Everything well-constituted, proud, high-spirited,
and beautiful is offensive to its ears and eyes. Again I remind you
of St Paul’s priceless words: “And God hath chosen the _weak_ things
of the world, the _foolish_ things of the world; and _base_ things of
the world, and things which are _despised”_: this was the formula, _in
hoc signo_ decadence triumphed.—_God on the Cross_—does no one yet
understand the terrible ulterior motive of this symbol?—Everything
that suffers, everything that hangs on the cross, is _divine...._ All
of us hang on the cross, consequently we are _divine ..._. We alone are
divine.... Christianity was a victory; a _nobler_ type of character
perished through it,—Christianity has been humanity’s greatest
misfortune hitherto.——


52

Christianity also stands opposed to everything happily constituted
in the _mind,_—it can make use only of morbid reason as Christian
reason; it takes the side of everything idiotic, it utters a curse
upon “intellect,” upon the _superbia_ of the healthy intellect. Since
illness belongs to the essence of Christianity, the typically Christian
state, “faith,” _must_ also be a form of illness, and all straight,
honest and scientific roads to knowledge must be repudiated by the
Church as forbidden.... Doubt in itself is already a sin.... The total
lack of psychological cleanliness in the priest, which reveals itself
in his look, is a _result_ of decadence. Hysterical women, as also
children with scrofulous constitutions, should be observed as a proof
of how invariably instinctive falsity, the love of lying for the sake
of lying, and the in ability either to look or to walk straight, are
the expression of decadence. “Faith” simply means the refusal to know
what is true. The pious person, the priest of both sexes, is false
because he is ill: his instinct _demands_ that truth should not assert
its right anywhere. “That which makes ill is good: that which proceeds
from abundance, from superabundance and from power, is evil”: that
is the view of the faithful. The _constraint to lie_—that is the
sign by which I recognise every predetermined theologian.—Another
characteristic of the theologian is his lack of _capacity_ for
_philology._ What I mean here by the word philology is, in a general
sense to be understood as the art of reading well, of being able to
take account of facts _without_ falsifying them by interpretation,
without losing either caution, patience or subtlety owing to one’s
desire to understand. Philology as _ephexis_[8] in interpretation,
whether one be dealing with books, newspaper reports, human destinies
or meteorological records,—not to speak of the “salvation of the
soul.” ... The manner in which a theologian, whether in Berlin or in
Rome, interprets a verse from the “Scriptures,” or an experience, or
the triumph of his nation’s army for instance, under the superior
guiding light of David’s Psalms, is always so exceedingly _daring,_
that it is enough to make a philologist’s hair stand on end. And what
is he to do, when pietists and other cows from Swabia explain their
miserable every-day lives in their smoky hovels by means of the “Finger
of God,” a miracle of “grace,” of “Providence,” of experiences of
“salvation”! The most modest effort of the intellect, not to speak of
decent feeling, ought at least to lead these interpreters to convince
themselves of the absolute childishness and unworthiness of any such
abuse of the dexterity of God’s fingers. However small an amount of
loving piety we might possess, a god who cured us in time of a cold in
the nose, or who arranged for us to enter a carriage just at the moment
when a cloud burst over our heads, would be such an absurd God, that he
would have to be abolished, even if he existed.[9] God as a domestic
servant, as a postman, as a general provider,—in short, merely a word
for the most foolish kind of accidents.... “Divine Providence,” as it
is believed in to-day by almost every third man in “cultured Germany,”
would be an argument against God, in fact it would be the strongest
argument against God that could be Imagined. And in any case it is an
argument against the Germans.


53

—The notion that martyrs prove anything at all in favour of a thing,
is so exceedingly doubtful, that I would fain deny that there has ever
yet existed a martyr who had anything to do with truth. In the very
manner in which a martyr flings his little parcel of truth at the
head of the world, such a low degree of intellectual honesty and such
obtuseness in regard to the question “truth” makes itself felt, that
one never requires to refute a martyr. Truth is not a thing which one
might have and another be without: only peasants or peasant-apostles,
after the style of Luther, can think like this about truth. You may be
quite sure, that the greater a man’s degree of conscientiousness may
be in matters intellectual, the more modest he will show himself on
this point To _know_ about five things, and with a subtle wave of the
hand to refuse to know _others._ ... “Truth” as it is understood by
every prophet, every sectarian, every free thinker, every socialist and
every church-man, is an absolute proof of the fact that these people
haven’t even begun that discipline of the mind and that process of
self-mastery, which is necessary for the discovery of any small, even
exceedingly small truth.—Incidentally, the deaths of martyrs have
been a great misfortune in the history of the world: they led people
astray.... The conclusion which all idiots, women and common people
come to, that there must be something in a cause for which someone lays
down his life (or which, as in the case of primitive Christianity,
provokes an epidemic of sacrifices),—this conclusion put a tremendous
check upon all investigation, upon the spirit of investigation and of
caution. Martyrs have _harmed_ the cause of truth. ... Even to this day
it only requires the crude fact of persecution, in order to create an
honourable name for any obscure sect who does not matter in the least
What? is a cause actually changed in any way by the fact that some
one has laid down his life for it? An error which becomes honourable,
is simply an error that possesses one seductive charm the more: do
you suppose, dear theologians, that we shall give you the chance of
acting the martyrs for your lies?—A thing is refuted by being laid
respectfully on ice, and theologians are refuted in the same way. This
was precisely the world-historic foolishness of all persecutors; they
lent the thing they combated a semblance of honour by conferring the
fascination of martyrdom upon it.... Women still lie prostrate before
an error to-day, because they have been told that some one died on the
cross for it _Is the cross then an argument?_—But concerning all these
things, one person alone has said what mankind has been in need of for
thousands of years,—_Zarathustra._

“Letters of blood did they write on the way they went, and their folly
taught that truth is proved by blood.

“But blood is the very worst testimony of truth; blood poisoneth even
the purest teaching, and turneth it into delusion and into blood feuds.

“And when a man goeth through fire for his teaching—what does that
prove? Verily, it is more when out of one’s own burning springeth one’s
own teaching.”[10]


54

Do not allow yourselves to be deceived: great minds are sceptical.
Zarathustra is a sceptic. Strength and the _freedom_ which proceeds
from the power and excessive power of the mind, _manifests_ itself
through scepticism. Men of conviction are of no account whatever
in regard to any principles of value or of non-value. Convictions
are prisons. They never see far enough, they do not look down from
a sufficient height: but in order to have any say in questions of
value and non-value, a man must see five hundred convictions _beneath_
him,—_behind_ him.... A spirit who desires great things, and who also
desires the means thereto, is necessarily a sceptic. Freedom from every
kind of conviction _belongs_ to strength, to the _ability_ to open
one’s eyes freely.... The great passion of a sceptic, the basis and
power of his being, which is more enlightened and more despotic than he
is himself, enlists all his intellect into its service; it makes him
unscrupulous; it even gives him the courage to employ unholy means;
in certain circumstances it even allows him convictions. Conviction
as a _means:_ much is achieved merely by means of a conviction. Great
passion makes use of and consumes convictions, it does not submit to
them—it knows that it is a sovereign power. Conversely; the need of
faith, of anything either absolutely affirmative or negative, Carlylism
(if I may be allowed this expression), is the need of _weakness._
The man of beliefs, the “believer” of every sort and condition, is
necessarily a dependent man;—he is one who cannot regard _himself_ as
an aim, who cannot postulate aims from the promptings of his own heart
The “believer” does not belong to himself, he can be only a means,
he must be _used up,_ he is in need of someone who uses him up. His
instinct accords the highest honour to a morality of self-abnegation:
everything in him, his prudence, his experience, his vanity, persuade
him to adopt this morality. Every sort of belief is in itself an
expression of self-denial, of self-estrangement. ... If one considers
how necessary a regulating code of conduct is to the majority of
people, a code of conduct which constrains them and fixes them from
outside; and how control, or in a higher sense, _slavery,_ is the only
and ultimate condition under which the weak-willed man, and especially
woman, flourish; one also understands conviction, “faith.” The man
of conviction finds in the latter his _backbone._ To be _blind_ to
many things, to be impartial about nothing, to belong always to a
particular side, to hold a strict and necessary point of view in all
matters of values—these are the only conditions under which such a man
can survive at all. But all this is the reverse of, the _antagonist_
of, the truthful man,—of truth.... The believer is not at liberty to
have a conscience for the question “true” and “untrue”: to be upright
on _this_ point would mean his immediate downfall. The pathological
limitations of his standpoint convert the convinced man into the
fanatic—Savonarola, Luther Rousseau, Robespierre, Saint-Simon,—these
are the reverse type of the strong spirit that has become _free._ But
the grandiose poses of these _morbid_ spirits, of these epileptics
of ideas, exercise an influence over the masses,—fanatics are
picturesque, mankind prefers to look at poses than to listen to reason.


55

One step further in the psychology of conviction of “faith.” It
is already some time since I first thought of considering whether
convictions were not perhaps more dangerous enemies of truth than lies
(“Human All-too-Human,” Part I, Aphs. 54 and 483). Now I would fain put
the decisive question: is there any difference at all between a lie
and a conviction?—All the world believes that there is, but what in
Heaven’s name does not all the world believe! Every conviction has its
history, its preliminary stages, its period of groping and of mistakes:
it becomes a conviction only after it has _not_ been one for a long
time, only after it has _scarcely_ been one for a long time. What?
might not falsehood be the embryonic form of conviction?—At times
all that is required is a change of personality: very often what was
a lie in the father becomes a conviction in the son.—I call a lie,
to refuse to see something that one sees, to refuse to see it exactly
_as_ one sees it: whether a lie is perpetrated before witnesses or not
is beside the point.—The most common sort of lie is the one uttered
to one’s self; to lie to others is relatively exceptional. Now this
refusal to see what one sees, this refusal to see a thing exactly as
one sees it, is almost the first condition for all those who belong
to a _party_ in any sense whatsoever: the man who belongs to a party
perforce becomes a liar. German historians, for instance, are convinced
that Rome stood for despotism, whereas the Teutons introduced the
spirit of freedom into the world: what difference is there between
this conviction and a lie? After this is it to be wondered at, that
all parties, including German historians, instinctively adopt the
grandiloquent phraseology of morality,—that morality almost owes
its _survival_ to the fact that the man who belongs to a party, no
matter what it may be, is in need of morality every moment?—“This
is our conviction: we confess it to the whole world, we live and die
for it,—let us respect every thing that has a conviction!”—I have
actually heard antisemites speak in this way. On the contrary, my dear
sirs! An antisemite does not become the least bit more respectable
because he lies on principle.... Priests, who in such matters are
more subtle, and who perfectly understand the objection to which the
idea of a conviction lies open—that is to say of a falsehood which
is perpetrated on principle _because_ it serves a purpose, borrowed
from the Jews the prudent measure of setting the concept “God,” “Will
of God,” “Revelation of God,” at this place. Kant, too, with his
categorical imperative, was on the same road: this was his _practical_
reason.—There are some questions in which it is _not_ given to man
to decide between true and false; all the principal questions, all
the principal problems of value, stand beyond human reason.... To
comprehend the limits of reason—this alone is genuine philosophy. For
what purpose did God give man revelation? Would God have done anything
superfluous? Man cannot of his own accord know what is good and what is
evil, that is why God taught man his will.... Moral: the priest does
_not_ lie, such questions as “truth” or “falseness” have nothing to do
with the things concerning which the priest speaks; such things do not
allow of lying. For, in order to lie, it would be necessary to know
_what_ is true in this respect. But that is precisely what man cannot
know: hence the priest is only the mouthpiece of God.—This sort of
sacerdotal syllogism is by no means exclusively Judaic or Christian;
the right to lie and the _prudent measure_ of “revelation” belongs
to the priestly type, whether of decadent periods or of Pagan times
(—Pagans are all those who say yea to life, and to whom “God” is the
word for the great yea to all things). The “law,” the “will of God,”
the “holy book,” and inspiration.—All these things are merely words
for the conditions under which the priest attains to power, and with
which he maintains his power,—these concepts are to be found at the
base of all sacerdotal organisations, of all priestly or philosophical
and ecclesiastical governments. The “holy lie,” which is common to
Confucius, to the law-book of Manu, to Muhamed, and to the Christian
church, is not even absent in Plato. “Truth is here”; this phrase
means, wherever it is uttered: _the priest lies...._


56

After all, the question is, to what _end_ are falsehoods perpetrated?
The fact that, in Christianity, “holy” ends are entirely absent,
constitutes _my_ objection to the means it employs. Its ends are only
_bad_ ends: the poisoning, the calumniation and the denial of life,
the contempt of the body, the degradation and self-pollution of man by
virtue of the concept sin,—consequently its means are bad as well.—My
feelings are quite the reverse when I read the law-book of _Manu, an_
incomparably superior and more intellectual work, which it would be
a sin against the _spirit_ even to _mention_ in the same breath with
the Bible. You will guess immediately why: it has a genuine philosophy
behind it, _in_ it, not merely an evil-smelling Jewish distillation
of Rabbinism and superstition,—it gives something to chew even
to the most fastidious psychologist. And, _not_ to forget the most
important point of all, it is fundamentally different from every kind
of Bible: by means of it the _noble classes,_ the philosophers and the
warriors guard and guide the masses; it is replete with noble values,
it is filled with a feeling of perfection, with a saying of yea to
life, and a triumphant sense of well-being in regard to itself and to
life,—the sun shines upon the whole book.—All those things which
Christianity smothers with its bottomless vulgarity: procreation,
woman, marriage, are here treated with earnestness, with revere nee,
with love and confidence. How can one possibly place in the hands of
children and women, a book that contains those vile words: “to avoid
fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman
have her own husband ... it is better to marry than to burn.”[11]
And is it decent to be a Christian so long as the very origin of
man is Christianised,—that is to say, befouled, by the idea of the
_immaculata conceptio?_ ... I know of no book in which so many delicate
and kindly things are said to woman, as in the Law-Rook of Manu; these
old grey-beards and saints have a manner of being gallant to women
which, perhaps, cannot be surpassed. “The mouth of a woman,” says Manu
on one occasion, “the breast of a maiden, the prayer of a child, and
the smoke of the sacrifice, are always pure.” Elsewhere he says: “there
is nothing purer than the light of the sun, the shadow cast by a cow,
air, water, fire and the breath of a maiden.” And finally—perhaps this
is also a holy lie:—“all the openings of the body above the navel are
pure, all those below the navel are impure. Only in a maiden is the
whole body pure.”


57

The unholiness of Christian means is caught _in flagranti,_ if only
the end aspired to by Christianity be compared with that of the
Law-Book of Manu; if only these two utterly opposed aims be put under
a strong light The critic of Christianity simply cannot avoid making
Christianity _contemptible._—A Law-Book like that of Manu comes into
being like every good law-book: it epitomises the experience, the
precautionary measures, and the experimental morality of long ages,
it settles things definitely, it no longer creates. The prerequisite
for a codification of this kind, is the recognition of the fact that
the means which procure authority for a _truth_ to which it has cost
both time and great pains to attain, are fundamentally different from
those with which that same truth would be proved. A law-book never
relates the utility, the reasons, the preliminary casuistry, of a
law: for it would be precisely in this way that it would forfeit its
imperative tone, the “thou shalt,” the first condition of its being
obeyed. The problem lies exactly in this.—At a certain stage in the
development of a people, the most far-seeing class within it (that is
to say, the class that sees farthest backwards and forwards), declares
the experience of how its fellow-creatures ought to live—_can_
live—to be finally settled. Its object is, to reap as rich and as
complete a harvest as possible, in return for the ages of experiment
and _terrible_ experience it has traversed. Consequently, that which
has to be avoided, above all, is any further experimentation, the
continuation of the state when values are still fluid, the testing,
choosing, and criticising of values _in infinitum. _ Against all this a
double wall is built up: in the first place, _Revelation,_ which is the
assumption that the rationale of every law is not human in its origin,
that it was not sought and found after ages of error, but that it is
divine in its origin, completely and utterly without a history, gift, a
miracle, a mere communication.... And secondly, _tradition,_ which is
the assumption that the law has obtained since the most primeval times,
that it is impious and a crime against one’s ancestors to attempt to
doubt it. The authority of law is established on the principles: God
_gave_ it, the ancestors _lived_ it.—The superior reason of such a
procedure lies in the intention to draw consciousness off step by step
from that mode of life which has been recognised as correct (_i.e.,
proved_ after enormous and carefully examined experience), so that
perfect automatism of the instincts may be attained,—this being the
only possible basis of all mastery of every kind of perfection in
the Art of Life. To draw up a law-book like Manu’s, is tantamount
to granting a people mastership for the future, perfection for the
future,—the right to aspire to the highest Art of Life. _To that
end it must be made unconscious;_ this is the object of every holy
lie.—_The order of castes,_ the highest, the dominating law, is only
the sanction of a _natural order,_ of a natural legislation of the
first rank, over which no arbitrary innovation, no “modern idea” has
any power. Every healthy society falls into three distinct types, which
reciprocally condition one another and which gravitate differently in
the physiological sense; and each of these has its own hygiene, its
own sphere of work, its own special feeling of perfection, and its
own mastership. It is Nature, not Manu, that separates from the rest,
those individuals preponderating in intellectual power, those excelling
in muscular strength and temperament, and the third class which is
distinguished neither in one way nor the other, the mediocre,—the
latter as the greatest number, the former as the _élite._ The superior
caste—I call them the _fewest,_—has, as the perfect caste, the
privileges of the fewest: it devolves upon them to represent happiness,
beauty and goodness on earth. Only the most intellectual men have
the right to beauty, to the beautiful: only in them is goodness not
weakness. _Pulchrum est paucorum hominum:_ goodness is a privilege.
On the other hand there is nothing which they should be more strictly
forbidden than repulsive manners or a pessimistic look, a look that
makes everything _seem ugly,_—or even indignation at the general
aspect of things. Indignation is the privilege of the Chandala, and so
is pessimism. “_The world is perfect_”—that is what the instinct of
the most intellectual says, the yea-saying instinct; “imperfection,
every kind of _inferiority_ to us, distance, the pathos of distance,
even the Chandala belongs to this perfection.” The most intellectual
men, as the _strongest_ find their happiness where others meet
with their ruin: in the labyrinth, in hardness towards themselves
and others, in endeavour; their delight is self-mastery: with them
asceticism becomes a second nature, a need, an instinct They regard
a difficult task as their privilege; to play with burdens which crush
their fellows is to them a _recreation...._ Knowledge, a form of
asceticism.—They are the most honourable kind of men: but that does
not prevent them from being the most cheerful and most gracious. They
rule, not because they will, but because they _are;_ they are not at
liberty to take a second place.—The second in rank are the guardians
of the law, the custodians of order and of security, the noble
warriors, the king, above all, as the highest formula of the warrior,
the judge, and keeper of the law. The second in rank are the executive
of the most intellectual, the nearest to them in duty, relieving them
of all that is _coarse_ in the work of ruling,—their retinue, their
right hand, their best disciples. In all this, I repeat, there is
nothing arbitrary, nothing “artificial,” that which is _otherwise_ is
artificial,—by that which is otherwise, nature is put to shame.... The
order of castes, and the order of rank merely formulates the supreme
law of life itself; the differentiation of the three types is necessary
for the maintenance of society, and for enabling higher and highest
types to be reared,—the _inequality_ of rights is the only condition
of there being rights at all.—A right is a privilege. And in his
way, each has his privilege. Let us not underestimate the privileges
of the _mediocre._ Life always gets harder towards the summit,—the
cold increases, responsibility increases. A high civilisation is a
pyramid: it can stand only upon a broad base, its first prerequisite is
a strongly and soundly consolidated mediocrity. Handicraft, commerce,
agriculture, science, the greater part of art,—in a word, the whole
range of professional and business callings, is compatible only with
mediocre ability and ambition; such pursuits would be out of place
among exceptions, the instinct pertaining thereto would oppose not
only aristocracy but anarchy as well. The fact that one is publicly
useful, a wheel, a function, presupposes a certain natural destiny: it
is not _society,_ but the only kind of _happiness_ of which the great
majority are capable, that makes them intelligent machines. For the
mediocre it is a joy to be mediocre; in them mastery in one thing, a
speciality, is a natural instinct. It would be absolutely unworthy of
a profound thinker to see any objection in mediocrity _per se._ For
in itself it is the first essential condition under which exceptions
are possible; a high culture is determined by it. When the exceptional
man treats the mediocre with more tender care than he does himself or
his equals, this is not mere courtesy of heart on his part—but simply
his _duty._ ... Whom do I hate most among the rabble of the present
day? The socialistic rabble, the Chandala apostles, who undermine the
working man’s instinct, his happiness and his feeling of contentedness
with his insignificant existence,—who make him envious, and who teach
him revenge. ... The wrong never lies in unequal rights; it lies in the
claim to equal rights. What is _bad?_ But I have already replied to
this: Everything that proceeds from weakness, envy and _revenge._—The
anarchist and the Christian are offspring of the same womb....


58

In point of fact, it matters greatly to what end one lies: whether one
preserves or _destroys_ by means of falsehood. It is quite justifiable
to bracket the _Christian_ and the _Anarchist_ together: their object,
their instinct, is concerned only with destruction. The proof of this
proposition can be read quite plainly from history: history spells it
with appalling distinctness. Whereas we have just seen a religious
legislation, whose object was to render the highest possible means of
making life _flourish,_ and of making a grand organisation of society,
eternal,—Christianity found its mission in putting an end to such an
organisation, _precisely because life flourishes through it._ In the
one case, the net profit to the credit of reason, acquired through
long ages of experiment and of insecurity, is applied usefully to the
most remote ends, and the harvest, which is as large, as rich and
as complete as possible, is reaped and garnered: in the other case,
on the contrary, the harvest is _blighted_ in a single night That
which stood there, _ære perennius,_ the _imperium Romanum,_ the most
magnificent form of organisation, under difficult conditions, that has
ever been achieved, and compared with which everything that preceded,
and everything which followed it, is mere patchwork, gimcrackery,
and dilettantism,—those holy anarchists made it their “piety,” to
destroy “the world”—that is to say, the _imperium Romanum,_ until
no two stones were left standing one on the other,—until even the
Teutons and other clodhoppers were able to become master of it The
Christian and the anarchist are both decadents; they are both incapable
of acting in any other way than disintegratingly, poisonously and
witheringly, like _blood-suckers;_ they are both actuated by an
instinct of _mortal hatred_ of everything that stands erect, that is
great, that is lasting, and that is a guarantee of the future....
Christianity was the vampire of the _imperium Romanum,_—in a night
it shattered the stupendous achievement of the Romans, which was to
acquire the territory for a vast civilisation which could _bide its
time._—Does no one understand this yet? The _imperium Romanum_ that
we know, and which the history of the Roman province teaches us to
know ever more thoroughly, this most admirable work of art on a grand
scale, was the beginning, its construction was calculated _to prove_
its worth by millenniums,—unto this day nothing has ever again been
built in this fashion, nor have men even dreamt since of building on
this scale _sub specie aterni!_—This organisation was sufficiently
firm to withstand bad emperors: the accident of personalities must
have nothing to do with such matters—the _first_ principle of all
great architecture. But it was not sufficiently firm to resist the
_corruptest_ form of corruption, to resist the Christians.... These
stealthy canker-worms, which under the shadow of night, mist and
duplicity, insinuated themselves into the company of every individual,
and proceeded to drain him of all seriousness for _real_ things,
of all his instinct for _realities;_ this cowardly, effeminate and
sugary gang have step by step alienated all “souls” from this colossal
edifice,—those valuable, virile and noble natures who felt that
the cause of Rome was their own personal cause, their own personal
seriousness, their own personal _pride._ The stealth of the bigot,
the secrecy of the conventicle, concepts as black as hell such as
the sacrifice of the innocent, the _unto mystica_ in the drinking
of blood, above all the slowly kindled fire of revenge, of Chandala
revenge—such things became master of Rome, the same kind of religion
on the pre-existent form of which Epicurus had waged war. One has
only to read Lucretius in order to understand what Epicurus combated,
_not_ Paganism, but “Christianity,” that is to say the corruption of
souls through the concept of guilt, through the concept of punishment
and immortality. He combated the _subterranean_ cults, the whole of
latent Christianity—to deny immortality was at that time a genuine
_deliverance._—And Epicurus had triumphed, every respectable thinker
in the Roman Empire was an Epicurean: _then St Paul appeared_ ... St
Paul, the Chandala hatred against Rome, against “the world,” the Jew,
the eternal Jew _par excellence,_ become flesh and genius. ... What
he divined was, how, by the help of the small sectarian Christian
movement, independent of Judaism, a universal conflagration could be
kindled; how, with the symbol of the “God on the Cross,” everything
submerged, everything secretly insurrectionary, the whole offspring
of anarchical intrigues could be gathered together to constitute an
enormous power. “For salvation is of the Jews.”—Christianity is
the formula for the supersession, _and_ epitomising of all kinds of
subterranean cults, that of Osiris, of the Great Mother, of Mithras for
example: St Paul’s genius consisted in his discovery of this. In this
matter his instinct was so certain, that, regardless of doing violence
to truth, he laid the ideas by means of which those Chandala religions
fascinated, upon the very lips of the “Saviour” he had invented, and
not only upon his lips,—that he _made_ out of him something which even
a Mithras priest could understand.... This was his moment of Damascus:
he saw that he had _need of_ the belief in immortality in order to
depreciate “the world,” that the notion of “hell” would become master
of Rome, that with a “Beyond” _this life_ can be killed. ... Nihilist
and Christian,—they rhyme in German, and they do not only rhyme.


59

The whole labour of the ancient world _in vain:_ I am at a loss for a
word which could express my feelings at something so atrocious.—And
in view of the fact that its labour was only preparatory, that with
adamantine self-consciousness it laid the substructure, alone, to
a work which was to last millenniums, the whole _significance_ of
the ancient world was certainly in vain!... What was the use of the
Greeks? what was the use of the Romans?—All the prerequisites of a
learned culture, all the scientific methods already existed, the great
and peerless art of reading well had already been established—that
indispensable condition to tradition, to culture and to scientific
unity; natural science hand in hand with mathematics and mechanics
was on the best possible road,—the sense for facts, the last and
most valuable of all senses, had its schools, and its tradition was
already centuries old! Is this understood? Everything _essential_ had
been discovered to make it possible for work to be begun:—methods,
and this cannot be said too often, are the essential thing, also the
most difficult thing, while they moreover have to wage the longest war
against custom and indolence. That which to-day we have successfully
reconquered for ourselves, by dint of unspeakable self-discipline—for
in some way or other all of us still have the bad instincts, the
Christian instincts, in our body,—the impartial eye for reality,
the cautious hand, patience and seriousness in the smallest details,
complete _uprightness_ in knowledge,—all this was already there; it
had been there over two thousand years before! And in addition to this
there was also that excellent and subtle tact and taste! _Not_ in the
form of brain drilling! _Not_ in the form of “German” culture with the
manners of a boor! But incarnate, manifesting itself in men’s bearing
and in their instinct,—in short constituting reality.... _All this
in vain!_ In one night it became merely a memory!—The Greeks! The
Romans! Instinctive nobility, instinctive taste, methodic research,
the genius of organisation and administration, faith, the _will_ to
the future of mankind, the great _yea_ to all things materialised
in the _imperium Romanum,_ become visible to all the senses, grand
style no longer manifested in mere art, but in reality, in truth,
in _life._—And buried in a night, not by a natural catastrophe!
Not stamped to death by Teutons and other heavy-footed vandals!
But destroyed by crafty, stealthy, invisible anæmic vampires! Not
conquered,—but only drained of blood!... The concealed lust of
revenge, miserable envy become _master!_ Everything wretched, inwardly
ailing, and full of ignoble feelings, the whole Ghetto-world of souls,
was in a trice _uppermost!_—One only needs to read any one of the
Christian agitators—St Augustine, for instance,—in order to realise,
in order to _smell,_ what filthy fellows came to the top in this
movement. You would deceive yourselves utterly if you supposed that the
leaders of the Christian agitation showed any lack of understanding
—Ah! they were shrewd, shrewd to the point of holiness were these
dear old Fathers of the Church I What they lack is something quite
different. Nature neglected them,—it forgot to give them a modest
dowry of decent, of respectable and of _cleanly_ instincts.... Between
ourselves, they are not even men. If Islam despises Christianity, it is
justified a thousand times over; for Islam presupposes men.


60

Christianity destroyed the harvest we might have reaped from the
culture of antiquity, later it also destroyed our harvest of the
culture of Islam. The wonderful Moorish world of Spanish culture, which
in its essence is more closely related to _us,_ and which appeals
more to our sense and taste than Rome and Greece, was _trampled to
death_(—I do not say by what kind of feet), why?—because it owed
its origin to noble, to manly instincts, because it said yea to life,
even that life so full of the rare and refined luxuries of the Moors!
... Later on the Crusaders waged war upon something before which it
would have been more seemly in them to grovel in the dust,—a culture,
beside which even our Nineteenth Century would seem very poor and
very “senile.”—Of course they wanted booty: the Orient was rich....
For goodness’ sake let us forget our prejudices! Crusades—superior
piracy, that is all! German nobility—that is to say, a Viking nobility
at bottom, was in its element in such wars: the Church was only too
well aware of how German nobility is to be won.... German nobility
was always the “Swiss Guard” of the Church, always at the service of
all the bad instincts of the Church; but it was _well paid for it
all...._ Fancy the Church having waged its deadly war upon everything
noble on earth, precisely with the help of German swords, German blood
and courage! A host of painful _questions_ might be raised on this
point German nobility scarcely takes a place in the history of higher
culture: the reason of this is obvious; Christianity, alcohol—the two
_great_ means of corruption. As a matter of fact choice ought to be
just as much out of the question between Islam and Christianity, as
between an Arab and a Jew. The decision is already self-evident; nobody
is at liberty to exercise a choice in this matter. A man is either of
the Chandala or he is _not ..._ “War with Rome to the knife! Peace
and friendship with Islam”: this is what that great free spirit, that
genius among German emperors,—Frederick the Second, not only felt
but also _did._ What? Must a German in the first place be a genius, a
free-spirit, in order to have _decent_ feelings? I cannot understand
how a German was ever able to have _Christian_ feelings.

Here it is necessary to revive a memory which will be a hundred times
more painful to Germans. The Germans have destroyed the last great
harvest of culture which was to be garnered for Europe,—it destroyed
the _Renaissance._ Does anybody at last understand, _will_ anybody
understand what the Renaissance was? _The transvaluation of Christian
values,_ the attempt undertaken with all means, all instincts and all
genius to make the _opposite_ values, the _noble_ values triumph,...
Hitherto there has been only _this_ great war: there has never yet
been a more decisive question than the Renaissance,—_my_ question
is the question of the Renaissance:—there has never been a more
fundamental, a more direct and a more severe _attack,_ delivered with
a whole front upon the centre of the foe. To attack at the decisive
quarter, at the very seat of Christianity, and there to place _noble_
values on the throne,—that is to say, to _introduce_ them into the
instincts, into the most fundamental needs and desires of those
sitting there.... I see before me a possibility perfectly magic in
its charm and glorious colouring—it seems to me to scintillate
with all the quivering grandeur of refined beauty, that there is
an art at work within it which is so divine, so infernally divine,
that one might seek through millenniums in vain for another such
possibility; I see a spectacle so rich in meaning and so wonderfully
paradoxical to boot, that it would be enough to make all the gods of
Olympus rock with immortal laughter,—_Cæsar Borgia as Pope._ ...
Do you understand me? ... Very well then, this would have been the
triumph which I alone am longing for to-day:—this would have _swept_
Christianity _away!_—What happened? A German monk, Luther, came to
Rome. This monk, with all the vindictive instincts of an abortive
priest in his body, foamed with rage over the Renaissance in Rome....
Instead of, with the profoundest gratitude, understanding the vast
miracle that had taken place, the overcoming of Christianity at its
_headquarters,_—the fire of his hate knew only how to draw fresh fuel
from this spectacle. A religious man thinks only of himself.—Luther
saw the corruption of the Papacy when the very reverse stared him in
the face: the old corruption, the _peceatum originate,_ Christianity
_no_ longer sat upon the Papal chair! But Life! The triumph of
Life! The great yea to all lofty, beautiful and daring things!...
And Luther reinstated the Church; he attacked it The Renaissance
thus became an event without meaning, a great _in vain!_—Ah these
Germans, what have they not cost us already! In vain—this has always
been the achievement of the Germans.—The Reformation, Leibniz,
Kant and so-called German philosophy, the Wars of Liberation, the
Empire—in each case are in vain for something which had already
existed, for something which _cannot be recovered._ ... I confess it,
these Germans are my enemies: I despise every sort of uncleanliness
in concepts and valuations in them, every kind of cowardice in the
face of every honest yea or nay. For almost one thousand years, now,
they have tangled and confused everything they have laid their hands
on; they have on their conscience all the half-measures, all the
three-eighth measures of which Europe is sick; they also have the
most unclean, the most incurable, and the most irrefutable kind of
Christianity—Protestantism—on their conscience.... If we shall never
be able to get rid of Christianity, the _Germans_ will be to blame.


62

—With this I will now conclude and pronounce my judgment. I _condemn_
Christianity and confront it with the most terrible accusation that
an accuser has ever had in his mouth. To my mind it is the greatest
of all conceivable corruptions, it has had the will to the last
imaginable corruption. The Christian Church allowed nothing to escape
from its corruption; it converted every value into its opposite, every
truth into a He, and every honest impulse into an ignominy of the
soul. Let anyone dare to speak to me of its humanitarian blessings!
To _abolish_ any sort of distress was opposed to its profoundest
interests; its very existence depended on states of distress; it
created states of distress in order to make itself immortal.... The
cancer germ of sin, for instance: the Church was the first to enrich
mankind with this misery!—The “equality of souls before God,” this
falsehood, this _pretext_ for the _rancunes_ of all the base-minded,
this anarchist bomb of a concept, which has ultimately become the
revolution, the modern idea, the principle of decay of the whole of
social order,—this is _Christian_ dynamite ... The “humanitarian”
blessings of Christianity! To breed a self-contradiction, an art of
self-profanation, a will to lie at any price, an aversion, a contempt
of all good and honest instincts out of _humanitas!_ Is this what you
call the blessings of Christianity?—Parasitism as the only method of
the Church; sucking all the blood, all the love, all the hope of life
out of mankind with anæmic and sacred ideals. A “Beyond” as the will to
deny all reality; the cross as the trade-mark of the most subterranean
form of conspiracy that has ever existed,—against health, beauty,
well-constitutedness, bravery, intellect, kindliness of soul, _against
Life itself...._

This eternal accusation against Christianity I would fain write on all
walls, wherever there are walls,—I have letters with which I can make
even the blind see.... I call Christianity the one great curse, the one
enormous and innermost perversion, the one great instinct of revenge,
for which no means are too venomous, too underhand, too underground and
too _petty,_—I call it the one immortal blemish of mankind....

And _time_ is reckoned from the _dies nefastus_ upon which this
fatality came into being—from the first day of Christianity!—_why
not rather from its last day?—From to-day?_—Transvaluation of all
Values!...


[1] The German “_Tüchtigkeit_” has a nobler ring than our word
“efficiency.”—TR.

[2] _Cf._ Disraeli: “But enlightened Europe is not happy. Its existence
is a fever which it calls progress. Progress to what?” (“Tancred,” Book
III., Chap, vii.).—TR.

[3] It will be seen from this that in spite of Nietzsche’s ruthless
criticism of the priests, he draws a sharp distinction between
Christianity and the Church. As the latter still contained elements
of order, it was more to his taste than the denial of authority
characteristic of real Christianity.—TR.

[4] “_reine Thorheit_” in the German text, referring once again to
Parsifal.—Tr.

[5] This applies apparently to Bismarck, the forger of the Ems telegram
and a sincere Christian.—Tr.

[6] An adaptation of Shakespeare’s “Well roared, lion” (_Mid. N. D.,_
Act 5, Sc. i.), the lion, as is well known, being the symbol for St
Mark in Christian literature and Art—TR.

[7] A parody on a line in Schiller’s “_Jungfrau von Orleans_” (Act 3,
Sc. vi.): “_Mit der Dummheit kämpfen Götter selbst vergebens._” (With
stupidity even the gods themselves struggle in vain).—TR.

[8] ἒφεξις = Lat. Retentio, Inhibitio (Stephanus, Thesaurus Græcæ
Linguæ); therefore: reserve, caution. The Greek Sceptics were also
called Ephectics owing to their caution in judging and in concluding
from facts.—TR.

[9] The following passage from Multatuti will throw light on this
passage:—

“Father:—‘Behold, my son, how wisely Providence has arranged
everything! This bird lays its eggs in its nest and the young will be
hatched just about the time when there will be worms and flies with
which to feed them. Then they will sing a song of praise in honour of
the Creator who overwhelms his creatures with blessings.’—

“Son:—‘Will the worms join in the song, Dad?’”.—TR.

[10] “Thus Spake Zarathustra.” The Priests.—TR.

[11] I Corinthians vii. 2, 9.—TR.




THE ETERNAL RECURRENCE

AND

EXPLANATORY NOTES TO “THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA.”


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

The notes concerning the Eternal Recurrence, in this volume, are said
by Mrs Foerster-Nietzsche to have been the first that Nietzsche ever
wrote on the subject of his great doctrine. This being so, they must
have been composed towards the autumn of the year 1881.

I have already pointed out elsewhere (_Will to Power,_ vol. ii.,
Translator’s Preface) how much importance Nietzsche himself ascribed
to this doctrine, and how, until the end, he regarded it as the
inspiration which had led to his chief work, _Thus Spake Zarathustra._
For the details relating to its inception, however, I would refer the
reader to Mrs Foerster-Nietzsche’s Introduction to her brother’s chief
work, which was translated for the eleventh volume of this Edition of
the Complete Works.

In reading these notes it would be well to refer to Nietzsche’s other
utterances on the subject which are to be found at the end of vol.
ii. of the _Will to Power,_ and also, if possible, to have recourse
to the original German text. Despite the greatest care, I confess
that in some instances, I have felt a little doubt as to the precise
English equivalent for the thoughts expressed under the heading
_Eternal Recurrence;_ and, though I have attributed this difficulty to
the extreme novelty of the manner in which the subject is presented,
it is well that the reader should be aware that such doubt has been
entertained. For I disbelieve utterly in mere verbal translation,
however accurate, and would question anybody’s right to convert a
German sentence into English—even though he were so perfect in
both languages as to be almost absolutely bilingual,—if he did not
completely grasp the thought behind the sentence.

The writing of the collected Explanatory Notes to _Thus Spake
Zarathustra_, cannot be given any exact date. Some of them consist of
comments, written down by Nietzsche after the completion of the book,
and kept as the nucleus of an actual commentary to Zarathustra, which
it seems to have been his intention, one day, to write; while others
are merely memoranda and rough sketches, probably written before the
completion of the work, and which served the purpose of a draft of his
original plan. The reader who knows _Thus Spake Zarathustra_ will be
able to tell wherein the book ultimately differed from the plan visible
in these preliminary notes.

As an authoritative, though alas! all too fragmentary elucidation of a
few of the more obscure passages of Zarathustra, some of these notes
are of the greatest value; and, in paragraph 73, for instance, there
is an interpretation of the Fourth and Last Part, which I myself would
have welcomed with great enthusiasm, at the time when I was having my
first struggles with the spirit of this great German sage’s life work.

ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.




I. ETERNAL RECURRENCE


1. THE DOCTRINE EXPOUNDED AND SUBSTANTIATED.


1.

The extent of universal energy is limited; it is not “infinite”: we
should beware of such excesses in our concepts! Consequently the number
of states, changes, combinations, and evolutions of this energy,
although it may be enormous and practically incalculable, is at any
rate definite and not unlimited. The time, however, in which this
universal energy works its changes is infinite—that is to say, energy
remains eternally the same and is eternally active:—at this moment an
infinity has already elapsed, that is to say, every possible evolution
must already have taken place. Consequently the present process of
evolution must be a repetition, as was also the one before it, as will
also be the one which will follow. And so on forwards and backwards!
Inasmuch as the entire state of all forces continually returns,
everything has existed an infinite number of times. Whether, apart from
this, anything exactly like something that formerly existed has ever
appeared, is completely beyond proof. It would seem that each complete
state of energy forms all qualities afresh even to the smallest
degree, so that two different complete states could have nothing in
common. Is it to be supposed that in one and the same complete states
two precisely similar things could appear—for instance two leaves?
I doubt it: it would take for granted that they had both had an
absolutely similar origin, and in that case we should have to assume
that right back in infinity two similar things had also existed despite
all the changes in the complete states and their creation of new
qualities—an impossible assumption.


2

Formerly it was thought that unlimited energy was a necessary corollary
to unlimited activity in time, and that this energy could be exhausted
by no form of consumption. Now it is thought that energy remains
constant and docs not require to be infinite. It is eternally active
but it is no longer able eternally to create new forms, it must repeat
itself: that is my conclusion.


3

An incalculable number of complete states of energy have existed,
but these have not been infinitely different: for if they had been,
unlimited energy would have been necessary. The energy of the universe
can only have a given number of possible qualities.


4

The endless evolution of new forms is a contradiction, for it would
imply eternally increasing energy. But whence would it grow? Whence
would it derive its nourishment and its surplus of nourishment? The
assumption that the universe is an organism contradicts the very
essence of the organic.


5

In what principle and belief is that decisive turning point in
philosophical thought best expressed which has come into being thanks
to the preponderance of the scientific spirit over the religious and
God-creating one? We insist upon the fact that the world as a sum of
energy must not be regarded as unlimited—we forbid ourselves the
concept infinite energy, because it seems incompatible with the concept
energy.


6

An unlimited number of new changes and states on the part of limited
energy is a contradiction, however extensive one may imagine it to be,
and however economical the changes may be, provided it is infinite.
We are therefore forced to conclude: (1) either that the universe
began its activity at a given moment of time and will end in a similar
fashion,—but the beginning of activity is absurd; if a state of
equilibrium had been reached it would have persisted to all eternity;
(2) Or there is no such thing as an endless number of changes, but
a circle consisting of a definite number of them which continually
recurs: activity is eternal, the number of the products and states of
energy is limited.


7

If all the possible combinations and relations of forces had not
already been exhausted, then an infinity would not yet lie behind
us. Now since infinite time must be assumed, no fresh possibility
can exist and everything must have appeared already, and moreover an
infinite number of times.


8

The present world of forces leads back to a state of greatest
simplicity in these forces: it likewise leads forwards to such a
state,—cannot and must not _both_ states be identical? No incalculable
number of states can evolve out of a system of limited forces, that
is to say, out of a given quantity of energy which may be precisely
measured. Only when we falsely assume that space is unlimited, and that
therefore energy gradually becomes dissipated, can the final state be
an unproductive and lifeless one.


9

First principles.—The last physical state of energy which we can
imagine must necessarily be the first also. The absorption of energy
in latent energy must be the cause of the production of the most vital
energy. For a highly positive state must follow a negative state Space
like matter is a subjective form, time is not. The notion of space
first arose from the assumption that space could be empty. But there is
no such thing as empty space. Everything is energy.

We cannot think of that which moves and that which is moved together,
but both these things constitute matter and space. We isolate.


10

Concerning the resurrection of the world.—Out of two negatives, when
they are forces, a positive arises. (Darkness comes of light opposed to
light, cold arises from warmth opposed to warmth, &c, &c.)


11

An uncertain state of equilibrium occurs just as seldom in nature as
two absolutely equal triangles. Consequently anything like a static
state of energy in general is impossible. If stability were possible it
would already have been reached.


12

Either complete equilibrium must in itself be an impossibility, or
the changes of energy introduce themselves in the circular process
before that equilibrium which is in itself possible has appeared.—But
it would be madness to ascribe a feeling of self-preservation to
existence! And the same applies to the conception of a contest of pain
and pleasure among atoms.


13

Physics supposes that energy may be divided up: but every one of its
possibilities must first be adjusted to reality. There can therefore
be no question of dividing energy into equal parts; in every one of
its states it manifests a certain quality, and qualities cannot be
subdivided: hence a state of equilibrium in energy is impossible.


14

If energy had ever reached a stage of equilibrium that stage would
have persisted: it has therefore never reached such a stage. The
present condition of things contradicts this assumption. If we assume
that there has ever been a state absolutely like the present one this
assumption is in no wise refuted by the present state. For, among
all the endless possibilities, this case must already have occurred,
as an infinity is already behind us. If equilibrium were possible it
would already have been reached.—And if this momentary state has
already existed then that which bore it and the previous one also would
likewise have existed and so on backwards,—and from this it follows
that it has already existed not only twice but three times,—just as it
will exist again not only twice but three times,—in fact an infinite
number of times backwards and forwards. That is to say, the whole
process of Becoming consists of a repetition of a definite number of
precisely similar states.—Clearly the human brain cannot be left to
imagine the whole series of possibilities: but in any case, quite apart
from our ability to judge or our inability to conceive the whole range
of possibilities, the present state at least is a possible one—because
it is a real one. We should therefore say: in the event of the number
of possibilities not being infinite, and assuming that in the course of
unlimited time a limited number of these must appear, all real states
must have been preceded by similar states? Because from every given
moment a whole infinity is to be calculated backwards? The stability of
forces and their equilibrium is a possible alternative: but it has not
been reached; consequently the number of possibilities is greater than
the number of real states. The fact that nothing similar recurs could
not be explained by appealing to accident, but only by supposing that a
certain intention, that no similar things should recur, were actually
inherent in the essence of energy: for, if we grant that the number of
cases is enormous, the occurrence of like cases is more probable than
absolute disparity.


15

Let us think backwards a moment If the world had a goal, this goal
must have been reached: if a certain (unintentional) final state
existed for the world, this state also would have been reached. If
it were in any way capable of a stationary or stable condition, and
if in the whole course of its existence only one second of Being, in
the strict sense of the word, had been possible, then there could
no longer be such a process as evolution, and therefore no thinking
and no observing of such a process. If on the other hand the world
were something which continually renovated itself, it would then be
understood to be something miraculous and free to create itself—in
fact something divine. Eternal renovation presupposes that energy
voluntarily increases itself, that it not only has the intention, but
also the power, to avoid repeating itself or to avoid returning into a
previous form, and that every instant it adjusts itself in every one of
its movements to prevent such a contingency,—or that it was incapable
of returning to a state it had already passed through. That would
mean that the whole sum of energy was not constant, any more than its
attributes were But a sum of energy which would be inconstant and which
would fluctuate is quite unthinkable Let us not indulge our fancy
any longer with unthinkable things in order to fall once more before
the concept of a Creator (multiplication out of nothing, reduction
out of nothing, absolute arbitrariness and freedom in growth and in
qualities):—


16

He who does not believe in the circular process of the universe must
pin his faith to an arbitrary God—thus my doctrine becomes necessary
as opposed to all that has been said hitherto in matters of Theism.


17

The hypothesis which I would oppose to that of the eternal circular
process:—Would it be just as possible to explain the laws of the
mechanical world as exceptions and seemingly as accidents among the
things of the universe, as one possibility only among an incalculable
number of possibilities? Would it be possible to regard ourselves
as accidentally thrust into this corner of the mechanical universal
arrangement?—That all chemical philosophy is likewise an exception
and an accident in the world’s economy, and finally that organic life
is a mere exception and accident in the chemical world? Should we have
to assume as the most general form of existence a world which was
not yet mechanical, which was outside all mechanical laws (although
accessible to them)?—and that as a matter of fact this world would
be the most general now and for evermore, so that the origin of the
mechanical world would be a lawless game which would ultimately acquire
such consistency as the organic laws seem to have now from our point
of view? So that all our mechanical laws would be not eternal, but
evolved, and would have survived innumerable different mechanical
laws, or that they had attained supremacy in isolated corners of the
world and not in others?—It would seem that we need caprice, actual
lawlessness, and only a capacity for law, a primeval state of stupidity
which is not even able to concern itself with mechanics? The origin of
qualities presupposes the existence of quantities, and these, for their
part, might arise from a thousand kinds of mechanical processes.

Is not the existence of some sort of irregularity and incomplete
circular form in the world about us, a sufficient refutation of
the regular circularity of everything that exists? Whence comes
this variety within the circular process? Is not everything far too
complicated to have been the outcome of unity? And are not the many
chemical laws and likewise the organic species and forms inexplicable
as the result of homogeneity? or of duality?—Supposing there were
such a thing as a regular contracting energy in all the centres of
force in the universe, the question would be, whence could the most
insignificant difference spring? For then the whole world would have
to be resolved into innumerable completely equal rings and spheres of
existence and we should have an incalculable number of exactly equal
worlds side by side. Is it necessary for me to assume this? Must I
suppose that an eternal sequence of like worlds also involves eternal
juxta-position of like worlds? But the multifariousness and disorder
in the world which we have known hitherto contradicts this; no such
universal similarity has existed in evolution, for in that case even
for our part of the cosmos a regular spherical form must have been
formed. Should the production of qualities not be subject to any strict
laws? Can it be possible that different things have been derived from
“energy”? Arbitrarily? Is the conformity to law which we observe
perhaps only a deception? Is it possible that it is not a primeval law?
Is it possible that the multifariousness of qualities even in our part
of the world is the result of the absolute occurrence of arbitrary
characteristics? But that these characteristics no longer appear in our
corner of the globe? Or that our corner of existence has adopted a rule
which we call cause and effect when all the while it is no such thing
(an arbitrary phenomenon become a rule, as for instance oxygen and
hydrogen in chemistry)??? Is this rule simply a protracted kind of mood?


18

If the universe had been able to become an organism it would have
become one already. _As_ a whole we must try and regard it in the
light of a thing _as_ remote _as possible_ from the organic. I believe
that even our chemical affinity and coherence may be perhaps recently
evolved and that these appearances only occur in certain corners of
the universe at certain epochs. Let us believe in absolute necessity
in the universe but let us guard against postulating any sort of law,
even if it be a primitive and mechanical one of our own experience,
as ruling over the whole and constituting one of its eternal
characteristics.—All chemical qualities might have been evolved and
might disappear and return. Innumerable characteristics might have been
developed which for us,—from our limited point of view in time and
space, defy observation. The transformation of a chemical quality may
perhaps now be taking place, but so slowly that it escapes our most
delicate calculations.


19

Inorganic matter, even though in most cases it may once have
been organic, can have stored up no experience,—it is always
without a pastl If the reverse were the case a repetition would be
impossible—for then matter would for ever be producing new qualities
with new pasts.


20

We must guard against ascribing any aspiration or any goal to this
circular process: Likewise we must not, from the point of view of our
own needs, regard it as either monotonous or foolish, &c. We may grant
that the greatest possible irrationality, as also its reverse, may be
an essential feature of it: but we must not value it according to this
hypothesis. Rationality or irrationality cannot stand as attributes of
the universe.—We must not think of the law of this circular process as
a thing evolved, by drawing false analogies with the circular motions
occurring _within_ the circle. There was no primitive chaos followed
gradually by a more harmonious and finally definite circular motion of
all forces: On the contrary everything is eternal and unevolved. If
there ever was a chaos of forces, then that chaos itself was eternal
and was repeated at its particular moment of time in the turn of the
world wheel. The circular process is not the outcome of evolution, it
is a primitive principle like the quantum of energy, and allows of no
exception or violation. All Becoming takes place within the circular
process and the quantum of energy which constitutes it: therefore we
must not apply ephemeral processes like those for instance of heavenly
bodies, of the ebb and flow of tides, of day and night, of the seasons,
to the drawing of analogies for characterising the eternal circular
process.


21

The “chaos of the universe,” inasmuch as it excludes any aspiration to
a goal, does not oppose the thought of the circular process: the latter
is simply an irrational necessity, absolutely free from any formal
ethical or æsthetical significance. Arbitrariness in small things as in
great is completely lacking here.


22

Let us guard against believing that the universe has a tendency to
attain to certain forms, or that it aims at becoming more beautiful,
more perfect, more complicated! All that is anthropomorphism! Anarchy,
ugliness, form—are unrelated concepts. There is no such thing as
imperfection in the realm of mechanics.

Everything has returned: Sirius, and the spider, and thy thoughts at
this moment, and this last thought of thine that all these things will
return.


23

Our whole world consists of the ashes of an incalculable number of
living creatures: and even if living matter is ever so little compared
with the whole, everything has already been transformed into life once
before and thus the process goes on. If we grant eternal time we must
assume the eternal change of matter.


24

Whoever thou mayest be, beloved stranger, whom I meet here for the
first time, avail thyself of this happy hour and of the stillness
around us, and above us, and let me tell thee something of the thought
which has suddenly risen before me like a star which would fain shed
down its rays upon thee and every one, as befits the nature of light—


25

The world of energy suffers no diminution: otherwise with eternal
time it would have grown weak and finally have perished altogether.
The world of energy suffers no stationary state, otherwise this would
already have been reached, and the clock of the universe would be at
a standstill. The world of energy does not therefore reach a state of
equilibrium; for no instant in its career has it had rest; its energy
and its movement have been the same for all time. Whatever state this
world could have reached must ere now have been attained, and not
only once but an incalculable number of times. This applies to this
very moment It has already been here once before, and several times,
and will recur in the same way, with all forces distributed as they
are to-day: and the same holds good of the moment of time which bore
the present and of that which shall be the child of the present.
Fellow-man! Your whole life, like a sandglass, will always be reversed
and will ever run out again,—a long minute of time will elapse until
all those conditions out of which you were evolved return in the wheel
of the cosmic process. And then you will find every pain and every
pleasure, every friend and every enemy, every hope and every error,
every blade of grass and every ray of sunshine once more, and the whole
fabric of things that makes up your life. This ring in which you are
but a grain will glitter afresh for ever. And in every one of these
cycles of human life there will be one hour where for the first time
one man, and then many, will perceive the mighty thought of the eternal
recurrence of all things:—and for mankind this is always the hour of
Noon.




2. THE EFFECTS OF THE DOCTRINE UPON MANKIND


26

How can we give weight to our inner life without making it evil and
fanatical towards people who think otherwise. Religious belief is
declining and man is beginning to regard himself as ephemeral and
unessential, a point of view which is making him weak; he does not
exercise so much effort in striving or enduring. What he wants is
momentary enjoyment He would make things light for himself,—and a good
deal of his spirit gets squandered in this endeavour.


27

The political mania at which I smile just as merrily as my
contemporaries smile at the religious mania of former times is above
all Materialism, a belief in the world, and in the repudiation of a
“Beyond,” of a “back-world.” The object of those who believe in the
latter is the well-being of the ephemeral individual: that is why
Socialism is its fruit; for with Socialism ephemeral individuals wish
to secure their happiness by means of socialisation. They have no
reason to wait, as those men had who believed in eternal souls, in
eternal development and eternal amelioration. My doctrine is: Live
so that thou mayest desire to live again,—that is thy duty,—for in
any case thou wilt live again He unto whom striving is the greatest
happiness, let him strive; he unto whom peace is the greatest
happiness, let him rest; he unto whom subordination, following,
obedience, is the greatest happiness, let him obey. All that is
necessary is that he should know what it is that gives him the highest
happiness, and to fight shy of no means! Eternity is at stake!


28

“But if everything is necessary, what control have I over my actions?”
Thought and faith are a form of ballast which burden thee in addition
to other burdens thou mayest have, and which are even more weighty than
the latter. Sayest thou that nutrition, the land of thy birth, air, and
society change thee and determine thee? Well, thy opinions do this to
a much greater degree, for they even prescribe thy nourishment, thy
land of adoption, thy atmosphere, and thy society for thee.—If thou
ever assimilatest the thought of thoughts it will also alter thee. The
question which thou wilt have to answer before every deed that thou
doest: “is this such a deed as I am prepared to perform an incalculable
number of times?” is the best ballast.


29

The mightiest of all thoughts absorbs a good deal of energy which
formerly stood at the disposal of other aspirations, and in this way
it exercises a modifying influence; it creates new laws of motion in
energy, though no new energy. But it is precisely in this respect that
there lies some possibility of determining new emotions and new desires
in men.


30

Let us try and discover how the thought that something gets repeated
has affected mankind hitherto (the year, for instance, or periodical
illnesses, waking and sleeping, &c). Even supposing the recurrence of
the cycle is only a probability or a possibility, even a thought, even
a possibility, can shatter us and transform us. It is not only feelings
and definite expectations that do this! See what effect the thought of
eternal damnation has had!


31

From the moment when this thought begins to prevail all colours will
change their hue and a new history will begin.


32

The history of the future: this thought will tend to triumph ever more
and more, and those who disbelieve in it will be forced, according to
their nature, ultimately to die out.

He, alone, who will regard his existence as capable of eternal
recurrence will remain over: but among such as these a state will be
possible of which the imagination of no utopist has ever dreamt!


33

Ye fancy that ye will have a long rest ere your second birth takes
place,—but do not deceive yourselves! ’Twixt your last moment of
consciousness and the first ray of the dawn of your new life no time
will elapse,—as a flash of lightning will the space go by, even though
living creatures think it is billions of years, and are not even able
to reckon it. Timelessness and immediate re-birth are compatible, once
intellect is eliminated!


34

Thou feelest that thou must soon take thy leave perhaps—and the sunset
glow of this feeling pierces through thy happiness. Give heed to this
sign: it means that thou lovest life and thyself, and life as it has
hitherto affected thee and moulded thee,—and that thou cravest for its
eternity—_Non alia sed hac vita sempiterna!_

Know also, that transiency singeth its short song for ever afresh and
that at the sound of the first verse thou wilt almost die of longing
when thou thinkest that it might be for the last time.


35

Let us stamp the impress of eternity upon our lives! This thought
contains more than all the religions which taught us to contemn this
life as a thing ephemeral, which bade us squint upwards to another and
indefinite existence.—


36

We must not strive after distant and unknown states of bliss and
blessings and acts of grace, but we must live so that we would fain
live again and live for ever so, to all eternity!—Our duty is present
with us every instant.


37

The leading tendencies: (1) We must implant the love of life, the
love of every man’s own life in every conceivable way! However each
individual may understand this love of self his neighbour will
acquiesce, and will have to learn great tolerance towards it: however
much it may often run counter to his taste,—provided the individual in
question really helps to increase his joy in his own life!

(2) We must all be one in our hostility towards everything and
everybody who tends to cast a slur upon the value of life: towards
all gloomy, dissatisfied and brooding natures. We must prevent these
from procreating! But our hostility itself must be a means to our joy!
Thus we shall laugh; we shall mock and we shall exterminate without
bitterness I Let this be our mortal combat

This life is thy eternal life!


38

What was the cause of the downfall of the Alexandrian culture? With all
its useful discoveries and its desire to investigate the nature of this
world, it did not know how to lend this life its ultimate importance,
the thought of a Beyond was more important to it! To teach anew in
this regard is still the most important thing of all:—perhaps if
metaphysics are applied to this life in the most emphatic way,—as in
the case of my doctrine!


39

This doctrine is lenient towards those who do not believe in it It
speaks of no hells and it contains no threats. He who does not believe
in it has but a fleeting life in his consciousness.


40

It would be terrible if we still believed in sin, but whatever we may
do, however often we may repeat it, it is all innocent. If the thought
of the eternal recurrence of all things does not overwhelm thee, then
it is not thy fault: and if it does overwhelm thee, this does not stand
to thy merit either.—We think more leniently of our forebears than
they themselves thought of themselves; we mourn over the errors which
were to them constitutional; but we do not mourn over their evil.


41

Let us guard against teaching such a doctrine as if it were a suddenly
discovered religion! It must percolate through slowly, and whole
generations must build on it and become fruitful through it,—in order
that it may grow into a large tree which will shelter all posterity.
What are the two thousand years in which Christianity has maintained
its sway? For the mightiest thought of all many millenniums will be
necessary,—long, long, long will it have to remain puny and weak!


42

For this thought we do not require thirty years of glory with drums
and fifes, and thirty years of grave-digging followed by an eternity
of macaberesque stillness, as is the case with so many other famous
thoughts.

Simple and well-nigh arid as it is, this thought must not even require
eloquence to uphold it.


43

Are ye now prepared? Ye must have experienced every form of
scepticism and ye must have wallowed with voluptuousness in ice-cold
baths,—otherwise ye have no right to this thought; I wish to protect
myself against those who are over-ready to believe, likewise against
those who gush over anything! I would defend my doctrine in advance.
It must be the religion of the freest, most cheerful and most sublime
souls, a delightful pastureland somewhere between golden ice and a pure
heaven!




EXPLANATORY NOTES TO “THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA”


1

All goals have been annihilated: valuations are turning against each
other:

People call him good who hearkens to the dictates of his own heart, but
they also call him good who merely does his duty;

People call the mild and conciliating man good, but they also call him
good who is brave, inflexible and severe;

People call him good who does not do violence to himself, but they also
call the heroes of self-mastery good;

People call the absolute friend of truth good-, but they also call him
good who is pious and a transfigurer of things;

People call him good who can obey his own voice, but they also call the
devout man good;

People call the noble and the haughty man good, but also him who does
not despise and who does not assume condescending airs.

People call him good who is kindhearted and who steps out of the way of
broils, but he who thirsts for fight and triumph is also called good;

People call him good who always wishes to be first, but they also call
him good who does not wish to be ahead of anybody in anything.


2

We possess a powerful store of moral _feelings,_ but we have no goal
for them all. They mutually contradict each other: they have their
origin in different tables of values.

There is a wonderful amount of moral power, but there is no longer any
goal towards which all this power can be directed.


3

All goals have been annihilated, mankind must give themselves a fresh
goal. It is an error to suppose that they had one: they gave themselves
all the goals they ever had. But the prerequisites of all previous
goals have been annihilated.

Science traces the course of things but points to no goal: what it does
give consists of the fundamental facts upon which the new goal must be
based.


4

The profound sterility of the nineteenth century. I have not
encountered a single man who really had a new ideal to bring
forward. The character of German music kept me hoping longest, but
in vain. A stronger type in which all our powers are synthetically
correlated—this constitutes my faith.

Apparently everything is decadence. We should so direct this movement
of decline that it may provide the strongest with a new form of
existence.


5

The dissolution of morality, in its practical consequences, leads
to the atomistic individual, and further to the subdivision of the
individual into a quantity of parts—absolute liquefaction.

That is why a goal is now more than ever necessary; and love, but a new
love.


6

I say: “As long as your morality hung over me I breathed like one
asphyxiated. That is why I throttled this snake. I wished to live,
consequently it had to die.”


7

As long as people are still _forced to_ act, that is to say as long as
commands are given, synthesis (the suppression of the moral man) will
not be realised To be unable to be otherwise: instincts and commanding
reason extending beyond any immediate object: the ability to enjoy
one’s own nature in action.


8

None of them wish to bear the burden of the commander; but they will
perform the most strenuous task if only thou commandest them.


9

We must overcome the past in ourselves: we must combine the instincts
afresh and direct the whole together to one goal:—an extremely
difficult undertaking! It is not only the evil instincts which have to
be overcome,—the so-called good instincts must be conquered also and
consecrated anew!


10

No leaps must be made in virtue! But everyone must be given a different
path! Not leading to the highest development of each! Yet everyone may
be a bridge and an example for others.


11

To help, to pity, to submit and to renounce personal attacks with a
good will,—these things may make even insignificant and superficial
men tolerable to the eye: such men must not be contradicted in their
belief that this good will is “virtue in itself.”


12

Man makes a deed valuable: but how might a deed make man valuable?


13

Morality is the concern of those who cannot free themselves from
it: for such people morality therefore belongs to the conditions of
existence. It is impossible to refute conditions of existence: the only
thing one can do is not to have them.


14

If it were true that life did not deserve to be welcomed, the moral
man, precisely on account of his self-denial and obligingness, would
then be guilty of misusing his fellow to his own personal advantage.


15

“Love thy neighbour”—this would mean first and foremost: “Let thy
neighbour go his own way”—and it is precisely this kind of virtue that
is the most difficult!


16

The bad man as the parasite. We must not be merely feasters and
gourmets of life: this is ignoble.


17

It is a noble sense which forbids our being only feasters and gourmets
of life—this sense revolts against hedonism—: we want to perform
something in return!—But the fundamental feeling of the masses is that
one must live for nothing,—that is their vulgarity.


18

The converse valuations hold good for the lower among men: in their
case therefore it is necessary to implant virtues. They must be
elevated above their lives, by means of absolute commands and terrible
taskmasters.


19

What is required: the new law must be made practicable—and out of its
fulfilment, the overcoming of this law, and higher law, must evolve
Zarathustra defines the attitude towards law, inasmuch as he suppresses
the law of laws which is morality.

Laws as the backbone They must be worked at and created, by being
fulfilled. The slavish attitude which has reigned hitherto towards law!


20

The self-overcoming of Zarathustra as the prototype of mankind’s
self-overcoming for the benefit of Superman. To this end the overcoming
of morality is necessary.


21

The type of the lawgiver, his development and his suffering. What is
the purpose of giving laws at all?

Zarathustra is the herald who calls forth many lawgivers.


22

_Individual instruments._

1. The Commanders, the mighty—who do not love, unless it be that they
love the images according to which they create. The rich in vitality,
the versatile, the free, who overcome that which is extant

2. The obedient, the “emancipated”—love and reverence constitute their
happiness, they have a sense of what is higher (their deficiencies are
made whole by the sight of the lofty).

3. The slaves, the order of “henchmen”—: they must be made
comfortable, they must cultivate pity for one another.


23

The giver, the creator, the teacher—these are preludes of the ruler.


24

All virtue and all self-mastery has only one purpose: that of preparing
for the rule!


25

Every sacrifice that the ruler makes is rewarded a hundredfold.


26

How much does not the warrior, the prince, the man who is responsible
for himself, sacrifice!—this should be highly honoured.


27

The terrible task of the ruler who educates himself:—the kind of man
and people over which he will rule must be forecast in him: it is in
himself therefore that he must first have become a ruler!


28

The great educator like nature must elevate obstacles in order that
these may be overcome.


29

The new teachers as preparatory stages for the highest Architect (they
must impose their type on things).


30

Institutions may be regarded as the after effects of great individuals
and the means of giving great individuals root and soil—until the
fruit ultimately appears.


31

As a matter of fact mankind is continually trying to be able to
dispense with great individuals by means of corporations, &c But they
are utterly dependent upon such great individuals for their ideal.


32

The eudæmonistic and social ideals lead men backwards,—it may be that
they aim at a very useful working class,—they are creating the ideal
slave of the future, the lower caste which must on no account be
lacking!


33

Equal rights for all!—this is the most extraordinary form of
injustice, for with it the highest men do not get their due.


34

It is not a matter of the rights of the stronger, for strong and weak
are alike in this, that they all extend their power as far as they can.


35

A new form of estimating man: above all the question:

How much power has he got?

How manifold are his instincts?

How great is his capacity for communication and assimilation?

The ruler as the highest type.


36

Zarathustra rejoices that the war of the classes is at last over,
and that now at length the time is ripe for an order of rank among
individuals. His hatred of the democratic system of levelling is only
a blind; as a matter of fact he is very pleased that this has gone so
far. Now he can perform his task.—

Hitherto his doctrines had been directed only at the ruling caste of
the future. These lords of the earth must now take the place of God,
and must create for themselves the profound and absolute confidence
of those they rule. Their new holiness, their renunciation of
happiness and ease, must be their first principle. To the lowest they
grant the heirloom of happiness, not to themselves. They deliver the
physiologically botched by teaching them the doctrine of “swift death.”
They offer religions and philosophical systems to each according to his
rank.


37

“The conflict in the heart of the ruler is the contest between the love
which is in his heart for him who is most remote, and the love which he
feels for his neighbour.”

To be a creator and to be capable of goodness are not at all things
which exclude one another. They are rather one and the same thing; but
the creator is farsighted and the good man nearsighted.


38

The feeling of power. The strife of all egos to discover that thought
which will remain poised above men like a star.—The ego is a _primum
mobile._


39

The struggle for the application of the power which mankind now
represents! Zarathustra calls to the gladiators of this struggle.


40

We must make our ideals prevail:—We must strive for power in such a
way as our ideal commands.


41

The doctrine of the Eternal Recurrence is the turning point of history.


42

Suddenly the terrible chamber of truth is opened, an unconscious
self-protectiveness, caution, ambush, defence keeps us from the gravest
knowledge. Thus have I lived heretofore. I suppress something; but the
restless babbling and rolling down of stones has rendered my instinct
over-powerful. Now I am rolling my last stone, the most appalling truth
stands close to my hand.

Truth has been exorcised out of its grave:—we created it, we waked it:
the highest expression of courage and of the feeling of power. Scorn of
all pessimism that has existed hitherto!

We fight with it,—we find out that our only means of enduring it is
to create a creature who is able to endure it:—unless, of course, we
voluntarily dazzle ourselves afresh and blind ourselves in regard to it
But this we are no longer able to do!

We it was who created the gravest thought,—let us now create a being
unto whom it will be not only light but blessed.

In order to be able to create we must allow ourselves greater freedom
than has ever been vouch-safed us before; to this end we must be
emancipated from morality, and we must be relieved by means of feasts
(Premonitions of the future! We must celebrate the future and no longer
the past! We must compose the myth poetry of the future! We must live
in hopes!) Blessed moments I And then we must once again pull down the
curtain and turn our thoughts to the next unswerving purpose.


43

Mankind must set its goal above itself—not in a false world, however,
but in one which would be a continuation of humanity.


44

The half-way house is always present when the will to the future
arises: the greatest event stands immediately before it.


45

Our very essence is to create a being higher than ourselves. We must
create beyond ourselves. That is the instinct of procreation, that is
the instinct of action and of work.—Just as all willing presupposes a
purpose, so does mankind presuppose a creature which is not yet formed
but which provides the aim of life. This is the freedom of all will.
Love, reverence, yearning for perfection, longing, all these things are
inherent in a purpose.


46

My desire: to bring forth creatures which stand sublimely above the
whole species man: and to sacrifice “one’s neighbours” and oneself to
this end.

The morality which has existed hitherto was limited within the confines
of the species: all moralities that have existed hitherto have been
useful in the first place in order to give unconditional stability to
this species: once this has been achieved the aim can be elevated.

One movement is absolute; it is nothing more than the levelling down of
mankind, great ant-organisations, &c.

The other movement, my movement, is conversely the accentuation of all
contrasts and gulfs, and the elimination of equality, together with the
creation of supremely powerful creatures.

The first movement brings forth the last man, my movement brings forth
the Superman. It is by no means the goal to regard the latter as the
master of the first: two races ought to exist side by side,—separated
as far asunder as possible; the one, like the Epicurean gods, not
concerning themselves in the least with the others.


47

The opposite of the Superman is the last man: I created him
simultaneously with the former.


48

The more an individual is free and firm, the more exacting becomes his
love: at last he yearns for Superman, because nothing else is able to
appease his love,


49

Half-way round the course Superman arises.


50

Among men I was frightened: among men I desired a host of things and
nothing satisfied me. It was then that I went into solitude and created
Superman. And when I had created him I draped him in the great veil of
Becoming and let the light of midday shine upon him.


51

“We wish to create a Being,” we all wish to have a hand in it, to love
it. We all want to be pregnant—and to honour and respect ourselves on
that account.

We must have a goal in view of which we may all love each other! All
other goals are only fit for the scrap heap.


52

The strongest in body and soul are the best—Zarathustra’s fundamental
proposition—; from them is generated that higher morality of the
creator. Man must be regenerated after his own image: this is what he
wants, this is his honesty.


53

Genius to Zarathustra seems like the incarnation of his thought.


54

Loneliness for a certain time is necessary in order that a creature
may become completely permeated with his own soul—cured and hard. A
new form of community would be one in which we should assert ourselves
martially. Otherwise the spirit becomes tame. No Epicurean “gardens”
and mere “retirement from the masses.” War (but without powder) between
different thoughts and the hosts who support them I

A new nobility, the result of breeding. Feasts celebrating the
foundation of families.

The day divided up afresh; bodily exercise for all ages. Ἀγών
as a principle.

The love of the sexes as a contest around the principle in becoming and
coming.—Ruling will be taught and practised, its hardness as well as
its mildness. As soon as one faculty is acquired in a masterly manner
another one must be striven after.

We must let ourselves be taught by the evil, and allow them an
opportunity of a contest. We must make use of the degenerate—The right
of punishment will consist in this, that the offender may be used as
an experimental subject (in dietetics): this is the consecration of
punishment, that one man be used for the highest needs of a future
being.

We protect our new community because it is the bridge to our ideal of
the future And for it we work and let others work.


55

The measure and mean must be found in striving to attain to something
beyond mankind: the highest and strongest kind of man must be
discovered! The highest tendency must be represented continually
in small things:—perfection, maturity, rosy-cheeked health, mild
discharges of power. Just as an artist works, must we apply ourselves
to our daily task and bring ourselves to perfection in everything we
do. We must be honest in acknowledging our real motives to ourselves,
as is becoming in the mighty man.


56

No impatience! Superman is our next stage and to this end, to this
limit, moderation and manliness are necessary.

Mankind must surpass itself, as the Greeks did—and no fleshless
fantasies must be indulged. The higher mind which is associated with a
sickly and nervous character must be suppressed. The goal: the higher
culture of the whole body and not only of the brain.


57

“Man is something that must be surpassed”:—it is a matter of tempo:
the Greeks were wonderful, there was no haste about them.—My
predecessors: Heraclitus, Empedocles, Spinoza, Goethe.


58

1. Dissatisfaction with ourselves. An antidote to repentance.
The transformation of temperament (_e.g.,_ by means of inorganic
substances). Good will to this dissatisfaction. We should wait for our
thirst and let it become great in order to discover its source.

2. Death must be transformed into a means of victory and triumph.

3. The attitude towards disease. Freedom where death is concerned.

4. The love of the sexes is a means to an ideal (it is the striving of
a being to perish through his opposite). The love for a suffering deity.

5. Procreation is the holiest of all things. Pregnancy, the creation of
a woman and a man, who wish to enjoy their unity, and erect a monument
to it by means of a child.

6. Pity as a danger. Circumstances must be created which enable
everyone to be able to help himself, and which leave him to choose
whether he would be helped.

7. Education must be directed at making men evil, at developing their
inner devil.

8. Inner war as “development”

9. “The maintenance of the species,” and the thought of eternal
recurrence.


59

Principal doctrine. We must strive to make every stage one of
perfection, and rejoice therein,—we must make no leaps!

In the first place, the promulgation of laws. After the Superman the
doctrine of eternal recurrence will strike us with horror: Now it is
endurable.


60

Life itself created this thought which is the most oppressive for life.
Life wishes to get beyond its greatest obstacle I

We must desire to perish in order to arise afresh,—from one day to
the other. Wander through a hundred souls,—let that be thy life and
thy fate! And then finally: desire to go through the whole process once
more!


61

The highest thing of all would be for us to be able to endure our
immortality.


62

The moment in which I begot recurrence is immortal, for the sake of
that moment alone I will endure recurrence.


63

The teaching of eternal recurrence—it is at first oppressive to the
more noble souls and apparently a means of weeding them out,—then the
inferior and less sensitive natures would remain over! “This doctrine
must be suppressed and Zarathustra killed.”


64

The hesitation of the disciples. “We are already able to bear with this
doctrine, but we should destroy the many by means of it!”

Zarathustra laughs: “Ye shall be the hammer: I laid this hammer in your
hands.”


65

I do not speak to you as I speak to the people. The highest thing for
them would be to despise and to annihilate themselves: the next highest
thing would be for them to despise and annihilate each other.


66

“My will to do good compels me to remain silent. But my will to the
Superman bids me speak and sacrifice even my friends.”

“I would fain form and transform you, how could I endure things
otherwise!”


67

The history of higher man. The rearing of the better man is
incalculably more painful. The ideal of the necessary sacrifice which
it involves, as in the case of Zarathustra, should be demonstrated: A
man should leave his home, his family and his native land. Live under
the scorn of the prevailing morality. The anguish of experiments and
errors. The solution of all the joys offered by the older ideals (they
are now felt to be partly hostile and partly strange).


68

What is it which gives a meaning, a value, an importance to things?
It is the creative heart which yearns and which created out of this
yearning. It created joy and woe. It wanted to sate itself also with
woe. Every kind of pain that man or beast has suffered, we must take
upon ourselves and bless, and have a goal whereby such suffering would
acquire some meaning.


69

Principal doctrine: the transfiguration of pain into a blessing, and of
poison into food, lies in our power. The will to suffering.


70

Concerning heroic greatness as the only state of pioneers. (A yearning
for utter ruin as a means of enduring one’s existence.)

We must not desire one state only; we must rather desire to be
periodical creatures—like existence.

Absolute indifference to other people’s opinions (because we know their
weights and measures), but their opinions of themselves should be the
subject of pity.


71

Disciples must unite three qualities in themselves: they must be
true, they must be able and willing to be communicative, they must
have profound insight into each other.


72

All kinds of higher men and their oppression and blighting (as a case
in point, Duhring, who was ruined by isolation)—on the whole, this
is the fate of higher men to-day, they seem to be a species that is
condemned to die out: this fact seems to come to Zarathustra’s ears
like a great cry for help. All kinds of insane degenerations of higher
natures seem to approach him (nihilism for instance).


73

_Higher Men who come to Zarathustra in Despair._

Temptations to return prematurely to the world—thanks to the
provocation of one’s sympathies.

1. The rolling stone, the homeless one, the wanderer:—he who has
unlearned the love of his people because he has learned to love many
peoples,—the good European.

2. The gloomy, ambitious son of the people, shy, lonely, and ready for
anything,—who chooses rather to be alone than to be a destroyer,—he
offers himself as an instrument.

3. The ugliest man, who is obliged to adorn himself (historical sense)
and who is always in search of a new garment: he desires to make his
appearance becoming, and finally retires into solitude in order not to
be seen, he is ashamed of himself.

4. He who honours facts (“the brain of a leech”), the most subtle
intellectual conscience, and because he has it in excess, a guilty
conscience,—he wants to get rid of himself.

5. The poet, who at bottom thirsts, for savage freedom,—he chooses
loneliness and the severity of knowledge.

6. The discoverer of new intoxicants,—the musician, the sorcerer, who
finally drops on his knees before a loving heart and says: “Not to me
do I wish to lead you but yonder to him.”

Those who are sober to excess and who have a yearning for intoxication
which they do not gratify. The Supersobersides.

7. Genius (as an attack of insanity), becoming frozen through lack of
love: “I am neither a genius nor a god.” Great tenderness: “people must
show him more love!”

8. The rich man who has given everything away and who asks everybody:
“Have you anything you do not want? give me some of it!” as a beggar.

9. The Kings who renounce dominion: “we seek him who is more worthy
to rule”—against “equality”: the great man is lacking, consequently
reverence is lacking too.

10. The actor of happiness.

11. The pessimistic soothsayer who detects fatigue everywhere.

12. The fool of the big city.

13. The youth from the mount

14. The woman (seeks the man).

15. The envious emaciated toiler and _arriviste.

16. The good,            } and their mad fancy:

17. The pious,           } “For God” that

18. The self-centred and } means “For me.”
        saints,


74

“I gave you the most weighty thought: maybe mankind will perish through
it, perhaps also mankind will be elevated through it inasmuch as by
its means the elements which are hostile to life will be overcome and
eliminated.” “Ye must not chide Life, but yourselves!”—The destiny
of higher man is to be a creator. The organisation of higher men, the
education of the future ruler. “YE must rejoice in your superior power
when ye rule and when ye form anew.” “Not only man but Superman will
recur eternally!”


75

The typical suffering of the reformer and also his consolations. The
seven solitudes.

He lives as though he were beyond all ages: his loftiness allows him to
have intercourse with the anchorites and the misunderstood of every age.

Only his beauty is his defence. He lays his hands on the next thousand
years.

His love increases as he sees the impossibility of avoiding the
affliction of pain with it.


76

Zarathustra’s mood is not one of mad impatience for Superman! It is
peaceful, it can wait: but all action has derived some purpose from
being the road and means thither,—and must be done well and perfectly.

The repose of the great stream! Consecration of the smallest thing.
All unrest, and violent longing, all loathing should be presented in
the third part and be overcome! The gentleness, and mildness, &c, in
the first and second parts are both signs of a power which is not yet
self-reliant!

With the recovery of Zarathustra, Cæsar stands there inexorable
and kind:—the gulf separating creation, goodness, and wisdom is
annihilated.

Clearness, peace, no exaggerated craving, happiness in the moment which
is properly occupied and immortalised!


77

Zarathustra, Part III.: “I myself am happy.”—When he had taken leave
of mankind he returned unto himself. Like a cloud it vanishes from him.
The manner in which Superman must live: like an Epicurean God.

Divine suffering is the substance of the third part of Zarathustra. The
human state of the legislator is only brought forward as an example.

His intense love for his friends seems to him a disease,—once more he
becomes peaceful.

When the invitations come he gently evades them.


78

In the fourth part it is necessary to say precisely why it is that the
time of the great noon has come: It is really a description of the age
given by means of visits, but interpreted by Zarathustra.

In the fourth part it is necessary to say precisely why “a chosen
people” has first to be created:—they are the lucky cases of nature
as opposed to the unlucky (exemplified by the visitors): only to them
—the lucky cases—is Zarathustra able to express himself concerning
ultimate problems, them alone is he able to inspire with activity on
behalf of this theory. They are strong, healthy, hard and above all
noble enough for him to give them the hammer with which to remould the
whole world.


79

The unity in power of the creator, the lover and the knight of
knowledge.


80

Love alone shall judge—(the creative love which forgets itself in its
work).


81

Zarathustra can only dispense happiness once the order of rank is
established. Therefore this doctrine must be taught first.

The order of rank develops into a system of earthly dominion: the lords
of the earth come last, a new ruling caste. Here and there there arises
from them a perfectly Epicurean God, a Superman, a transfigurer of
existence.

The Superhuman’s notion of the world. Dionysus. Returning from these
most strange of all pursuits Zarathustra comes back with love to the
narrowest and smallest things,—he blesses all his experiences and dies
with a blessing on his lips.


82

From people who merely pray we must become people who bless.


================================================================================
[The Antichrist (적그리스도)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Antichrist
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Antichrist

Author: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

Translator: H. L. Mencken


        
Release date: September 18, 2006 [eBook #19322]
                Most recently updated: June 2, 2007

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/19322

Credits: Produced by Laura Wisewell and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ANTICHRIST ***




Produced by Laura Wisewell and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







THE ANTICHRIST


BORZOI POCKET BOOKS

A complete list to date of this series of popular reprints, bound
uniformly with a design and endpapers by Claude Bragdon, may be found at
the back of this volume. One book will appear each month, numbered for
convenience in ordering.




                             THE ANTICHRIST


                                  _by_

                            F. W. NIETZSCHE


                      _Translated from the German
                        with an introduction by_
                             H. L. MENCKEN



                               _New York_
                             ALFRED A. KNOPF



               COPYRIGHT, 1918, BY ALFRED A. KNOPF, INC.

            _Pocket Book Edition, Published September, 1923
                    Second Printing, November, 1924_


      _Set up, electrotyped, and printed by the Vail-Ballou Press,
                           Binghamton, N. Y._

     _Paper manufactured by W. C. Hamilton & Sons, Miquon, Pa., and
            furnished by W. F. Etherington & Co., New York._

             MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.




CONTENTS


                                            PAGE
    INTRODUCTION BY H. L. MENCKEN              7
    AUTHOR'S PREFACE                          37
    THE ANTICHRIST                            41




INTRODUCTION


Save for his raucous, rhapsodical autobiography, "Ecce Homo," "The
Antichrist" is the last thing that Nietzsche ever wrote, and so it may
be accepted as a statement of some of his most salient ideas in their
final form. Notes for it had been accumulating for years and it was to
have constituted the first volume of his long-projected _magnum opus_,
"The Will to Power." His full plan for this work, as originally drawn
up, was as follows:

  Vol.   I.  The Antichrist: an Attempt at a Criticism of Christianity.

  Vol.  II.  The Free Spirit: a Criticism of Philosophy as a Nihilistic
             Movement.

  Vol. III.  The Immoralist: a Criticism of Morality, the Most Fatal
             Form of Ignorance.

  Vol.  IV.  Dionysus: the Philosophy of Eternal Recurrence.

The first sketches for "The Will to Power" were made in 1884, soon after
the publication of the first three parts of "Thus Spake Zarathustra,"
and thereafter, for four years, Nietzsche piled up notes. They were
written at all the places he visited on his endless travels in search of
health--at Nice, at Venice, at Sils-Maria in the Engadine (for long his
favourite resort), at Cannobio, at Zuerich, at Genoa, at Chur, at
Leipzig. Several times his work was interrupted by other books, first by
"Beyond Good and Evil," then by "The Genealogy of Morals" (written in
twenty days), then by his Wagner pamphlets. Almost as often he changed
his plan. Once he decided to expand "The Will to Power" to ten volumes,
with "An Attempt at a New Interpretation of the World" as a general
sub-title. Again he adopted the sub-title of "An Interpretation of All
That Happens." Finally, he hit upon "An Attempt at a Transvaluation of
All Values," and went back to four volumes, though with a number of
changes in their arrangement. In September, 1888, he began actual work
upon the first volume, and before the end of the month it was completed.
The Summer had been one of almost hysterical creative activity. Since
the middle of June he had written two other small books, "The Case of
Wagner" and "The Twilight of the Idols," and before the end of the year
he was destined to write "Ecce Homo." Some time during December his
health began to fail rapidly, and soon after the New Year he was
helpless. Thereafter he wrote no more.

The Wagner diatribe and "The Twilight of the Idols" were published
immediately, but "The Antichrist" did not get into type until 1895. I
suspect that the delay was due to the influence of the philosopher's
sister, Elisabeth Foerster-Nietzsche, an intelligent and ardent but by no
means uniformly judicious propagandist of his ideas. During his dark
days of neglect and misunderstanding, when even family and friends kept
aloof, Frau Foerster-Nietzsche went with him farther than any other, but
there were bounds beyond which she, also, hesitated to go, and those
bounds were marked by crosses. One notes, in her biography of him--a
useful but not always accurate work--an evident desire to purge him of
the accusation of mocking at sacred things. He had, she says, great
admiration for "the elevating effect of Christianity ... upon the weak
and ailing," and "a real liking for sincere, pious Christians," and "a
tender love for the Founder of Christianity." All his wrath, she
continues, was reserved for "St. Paul and his like," who perverted the
Beatitudes, which Christ intended for the lowly only, into a universal
religion which made war upon aristocratic values. Here, obviously, one
is addressed by an interpreter who cannot forget that she is the
daughter of a Lutheran pastor and the grand-daughter of two others; a
touch of conscience gets into her reading of "The Antichrist." She even
hints that the text may have been garbled, after the author's collapse,
by some more sinister heretic. There is not the slightest reason to
believe that any such garbling ever took place, nor is there any
evidence that their common heritage of piety rested upon the brother as
heavily as it rested upon the sister. On the contrary, it must be
manifest that Nietzsche, in this book, intended to attack Christianity
headlong and with all arms, that for all his rapid writing he put the
utmost care into it, and that he wanted it to be printed exactly as it
stands. The ideas in it were anything but new to him when he set them
down. He had been developing them since the days of his beginning. You
will find some of them, clearly recognizable, in the first book he ever
wrote, "The Birth of Tragedy." You will find the most important of all
of them--the conception of Christianity as _ressentiment_--set forth at
length in the first part of "The Genealogy of Morals," published under
his own supervision in 1887. And the rest are scattered through the
whole vast mass of his notes, sometimes as mere questionings but often
worked out very carefully. Moreover, let it not be forgotten that it was
Wagner's yielding to Christian sentimentality in "Parsifal" that
transformed Nietzsche from the first among his literary advocates into
the most bitter of his opponents. He could forgive every other sort of
mountebankery, but not that. "In me," he once said, "the Christianity of
my forbears reaches its logical conclusion. In me the stern intellectual
conscience that Christianity fosters and makes paramount turns _against_
Christianity. In me Christianity ... devours itself."

In truth, the present philippic is as necessary to the completeness of
the whole of Nietzsche's system as the keystone is to the arch. All the
curves of his speculation lead up to it. What he flung himself against,
from beginning to end of his days of writing, was always, in the last
analysis, Christianity in some form or other--Christianity as a system
of practical ethics, Christianity as a political code, Christianity as
metaphysics, Christianity as a gauge of the truth. It would be
difficult to think of any intellectual enterprise on his long list that
did not, more or less directly and clearly, relate itself to this master
enterprise of them all. It was as if his apostasy from the
faith of his fathers, filling him with the fiery zeal of the convert,
and particularly of the convert to heresy, had blinded him to every
other element in the gigantic self-delusion of civilized man. The will
to power was his answer to Christianity's affectation of humility and
self-sacrifice; eternal recurrence was his mocking criticism of
Christian optimism and millennialism; the superman was his candidate for
the place of the Christian ideal of the "good" man, prudently abased
before the throne of God. The things he chiefly argued for were
anti-Christian things--the abandonment of the purely moral view of life,
the rehabilitation of instinct, the dethronement of weakness and
timidity as ideals, the renunciation of the whole hocus-pocus of
dogmatic religion, the extermination of false aristocracies (of the
priest, of the politician, of the plutocrat), the revival of the
healthy, lordly "innocence" that was Greek. If he was anything in a
word, Nietzsche was a Greek born two thousand years too late. His
dreams were thoroughly Hellenic; his whole manner of thinking was
Hellenic; his peculiar errors were Hellenic no less. But his Hellenism,
I need not add, was anything but the pale neo-Platonism that has run
like a thread through the thinking of the Western world since the days
of the Christian Fathers. From Plato, to be sure, he got what all of us
must get, but his real forefather was Heraclitus. It is in Heraclitus
that one finds the germ of his primary view of the universe--a view, to
wit, that sees it, not as moral phenomenon, but as mere aesthetic
representation. The God that Nietzsche imagined, in the end, was not far
from the God that such an artist as Joseph Conrad imagines--a supreme
craftsman, ever experimenting, ever coming closer to an ideal balancing
of lines and forces, and yet always failing to work out the final
harmony.

The late war, awakening all the primitive racial fury of the Western
nations, and therewith all their ancient enthusiasm for religious taboos
and sanctions, naturally focused attention upon Nietzsche, as upon the
most daring and provocative of recent amateur theologians. The Germans,
with their characteristic tendency to explain their every act in terms
as realistic and unpleasant as possible, appear to have mauled him in a
belated and unexpected embrace, to the horror, I daresay, of the Kaiser,
and perhaps to the even greater horror of Nietzsche's own ghost. The
folks of Anglo-Saxondom, with their equally characteristic tendency to
explain all their enterprises romantically, simultaneously set him up as
the Antichrist he no doubt secretly longed to be. The result was a great
deal of misrepresentation and misunderstanding of him. From the pulpits
of the allied countries, and particularly from those of England and the
United States, a horde of patriotic ecclesiastics denounced him in
extravagant terms as the author of all the horrors of the time, and in
the newspapers, until the Kaiser was elected sole bugaboo, he shared the
honors of that office with von Hindenburg, the Crown Prince, Capt.
Boy-Ed, von Bernstorff and von Tirpitz. Most of this denunciation, of
course, was frankly idiotic--the naive pishposh of suburban Methodists,
notoriety-seeking college professors, almost illiterate editorial
writers, and other such numskulls. In much of it, including not a few
official hymns of hate, Nietzsche was gravely discovered to be the
teacher of such spokesmen of the extremest sort of German nationalism
as von Bernhardi and von Treitschke--which was just as intelligent as
making George Bernard Shaw the mentor of Lloyd-George. In other solemn
pronunciamentoes he was credited with being philosophically responsible
for various imaginary crimes of the enemy--the wholesale slaughter or
mutilation of prisoners of war, the deliberate burning down of Red Cross
hospitals, the utilization of the corpses of the slain for soap-making.
I amused myself, in those gaudy days, by collecting newspaper clippings
to this general effect, and later on I shall probably publish a digest
of them, as a contribution to the study of war hysteria. The thing went
to unbelievable lengths. On the strength of the fact that I had
published a book on Nietzsche in 1906, six years after his death, I was
called upon by agents of the Department of Justice, elaborately
outfitted with badges, to meet the charge that I was an intimate
associate and agent of "the German monster, Nietzsky." I quote the
official _proces verbal_, an indignant but often misspelled document.
Alas, poor Nietzsche! After all his laborious efforts to prove that he
was not a German, but a Pole--even after his heroic readiness, via
anti-anti-Semitism, to meet the deduction that, if a Pole, then probably
also a Jew!

But under all this alarmed and preposterous tosh there was at least a
sound instinct, and that was the instinct which recognized Nietzsche as
the most eloquent, pertinacious and effective of all the critics of the
philosophy to which the Allies against Germany stood committed, and on
the strength of which, at all events in theory, the United States had
engaged itself in the war. He was not, in point of fact, involved with
the visible enemy, save in remote and transient ways; the German,
officially, remained the most ardent of Christians during the war and
became a democrat at its close. But he was plainly a foe of democracy in
all its forms, political, religious and epistemological, and what is
worse, his opposition was set forth in terms that were not only
extraordinarily penetrating and devastating, but also uncommonly
offensive. It was thus quite natural that he should have aroused a
degree of indignation verging upon the pathological in the two countries
that had planted themselves upon the democratic platform most boldly,
and that felt it most shaky, one may add, under their feet. I daresay
that Nietzsche, had he been alive, would have got a lot of satisfaction
out of the execration thus heaped upon him, not only because, being a
vain fellow, he enjoyed execration as a tribute to his general
singularity, and hence to his superiority, but also and more importantly
because, being no mean psychologist, he would have recognized the
disconcerting doubts underlying it. If Nietzsche's criticism of
democracy were as ignorant and empty, say, as the average evangelical
clergyman's criticism of Darwin's hypothesis of natural selection, then
the advocates of democracy could afford to dismiss it as loftily as the
Darwinians dismiss the blather of the holy clerks. And if his attack
upon Christianity were mere sound and fury, signifying nothing, then
there would be no call for anathemas from the sacred desk. But these
onslaughts, in point of fact, have behind them a tremendous learning and
a great deal of point and plausibility--there are, in brief, bullets in
the gun, teeth in the tiger,--and so it is no wonder that they excite
the ire of men who hold, as a primary article of belief, that their
acceptance would destroy civilization, darken the sun, and bring Jahveh
to sobs upon His Throne.

But in all this justifiable fear, of course, there remains a false
assumption, and that is the assumption that Nietzsche proposed to
destroy Christianity altogether, and so rob the plain people of the
world of their virtue, their spiritual consolations, and their hope of
heaven. Nothing could be more untrue. The fact is that Nietzsche had no
interest whatever in the delusions of the plain people--that is,
intrinsically. It seemed to him of small moment _what_ they believed, so
long as it was safely imbecile. What he stood against was not their
beliefs, but the elevation of those beliefs, by any sort of democratic
process, to the dignity of a state philosophy--what he feared most was
the pollution and crippling of the superior minority by intellectual
disease from below. His plain aim in "The Antichrist" was to combat that
menace by completing the work begun, on the one hand, by Darwin and the
other evolutionist philosophers, and, on the other hand, by German
historians and philologians. The net effect of this earlier attack, in
the eighties, had been the collapse of Christian theology as a serious
concern of educated men. The mob, it must be obvious, was very little
shaken; even to this day it has not put off its belief in the essential
Christian doctrines. But the _intelligentsia_, by 1885, had been pretty
well convinced. No man of sound information, at the time Nietzsche
planned "The Antichrist," actually believed that the world was created
in seven days, or that its fauna was once overwhelmed by a flood as a
penalty for the sins of man, or that Noah saved the boa constrictor, the
prairie dog and the _pediculus capitis_ by taking a pair of each into
the ark, or that Lot's wife was turned into a pillar of salt, or that a
fragment of the True Cross could cure hydrophobia. Such notions, still
almost universally prevalent in Christendom a century before, were now
confined to the great body of ignorant and credulous men--that is, to
ninety-five or ninety-six percent. of the race. For a man of the
superior minority to subscribe to one of them publicly was already
sufficient to set him off as one in imminent need of psychiatrical
attention. Belief in them had become a mark of inferiority, like the
allied belief in madstones, magic and apparitions.

But though the theology of Christianity had thus sunk to the lowly
estate of a mere delusion of the rabble, propagated on that level by the
ancient caste of sacerdotal parasites, the ethics of Christianity
continued to enjoy the utmost acceptance, and perhaps even more
acceptance than ever before. It seemed to be generally felt, in fact,
that they simply _must_ be saved from the wreck--that the world would
vanish into chaos if they went the way of the revelations supporting
them. In this fear a great many judicious men joined, and so there arose
what was, in essence, an absolutely new Christian cult--a cult, to wit,
purged of all the supernaturalism superimposed upon the older cult by
generations of theologians, and harking back to what was conceived to be
the pure ethical doctrine of Jesus. This cult still flourishes;
Protestantism tends to become identical with it; it invades Catholicism
as Modernism; it is supported by great numbers of men whose intelligence
is manifest and whose sincerity is not open to question. Even Nietzsche
himself yielded to it in weak moments, as you will discover on examining
his somewhat laborious effort to make Paul the villain of Christian
theology, and Jesus no more than an innocent bystander. But this
sentimental yielding never went far enough to distract his attention for
long from his main idea, which was this: that Christian ethics were
quite as dubious, at bottom, as Christian theology--that they were
founded, just as surely as such childish fables as the story of Jonah
and the whale, upon the peculiar prejudices and credulities, the special
desires and appetites, of inferior men--that they warred upon the best
interests of men of a better sort quite as unmistakably as the most
extravagant of objective superstitions. In brief, what he saw in
Christian ethics, under all the poetry and all the fine show of altruism
and all the theoretical benefits therein, was a democratic effort to
curb the egoism of the strong--a conspiracy of the _chandala_ against
the free functioning of their superiors, nay, against the free progress
of mankind. This theory is the thing he exposes in "The Antichrist,"
bringing to the business his amazingly chromatic and exigent eloquence
at its finest flower. This is the "conspiracy" he sets forth in all the
panoply of his characteristic italics, dashes, _sforzando_ interjections
and exclamation points.

Well, an idea is an idea. The present one may be right and it may be
wrong. One thing is quite certain: that no progress will be made against
it by denouncing it as merely immoral. If it is ever laid at all, it
must be laid evidentially, logically. The notion to the contrary is
thoroughly democratic; the mob is the most ruthless of tyrants; it is
always in a democratic society that heresy and felony tend to be most
constantly confused. One hears without surprise of a Bismarck
philosophizing placidly (at least in his old age) upon the delusion of
Socialism and of a Frederick the Great playing the hose of his cynicism
upon the absolutism that was almost identical with his own person, but
men in the mass never brook the destructive discussion of their
fundamental beliefs, and that impatience is naturally most evident in
those societies in which men in the mass are most influential. Democracy
and free speech are not facets of one gem; democracy and free speech are
eternal enemies. But in any battle between an institution and an idea,
the idea, in the long run, has the better of it. Here I do not venture
into the absurdity of arguing that, as the world wags on, the truth
always survives. I believe nothing of the sort. As a matter of fact, it
seems to me that an idea that happens to be true--or, more exactly, as
near to truth as any human idea can be, and yet remain generally
intelligible--it seems to me that such an idea carries a special and
often fatal handicap. The majority of men prefer delusion to truth. It
soothes. It is easy to grasp. Above all, it fits more snugly than the
truth into a universe of false appearances--of complex and irrational
phenomena, defectively grasped. But though an idea that is true is thus
not likely to prevail, an idea that is _attacked_ enjoys a great
advantage. The evidence behind it is now supported by sympathy, the
sporting instinct, sentimentality--and sentimentality is as powerful as
an army with banners. One never hears of a martyr in history whose
notions are seriously disputed today. The forgotten ideas are those of
the men who put them forward soberly and quietly, hoping fatuously that
they would conquer by the force of their truth; these are the ideas that
we now struggle to rediscover. Had Nietzsche lived to be burned at the
stake by outraged Mississippi Methodists, it would have been a glorious
day for his doctrines. As it is, they are helped on their way every time
they are denounced as immoral and against God. The war brought down upon
them the maledictions of vast herds of right-thinking men. And now "The
Antichrist," after fifteen years of neglect, is being reprinted....

One imagines the author, a sardonic wraith, snickering somewhat sadly
over the fact. His shade, wherever it suffers, is favoured in these days
by many such consolations, some of them of much greater horsepower.
Think of the facts and arguments, even the underlying theories and
attitudes, that have been borrowed from him, consciously and
unconsciously, by the foes of Bolshevism during these last thrilling
years! The face of democracy, suddenly seen hideously close, has scared
the guardians of the reigning plutocracy half to death, and they have
gone to the devil himself for aid. Southern Senators, almost illiterate
men, have mixed his acids with well water and spouted them like
affrighted geysers, not knowing what they did. Nor are they the first to
borrow from him. Years ago I called attention to the debt incurred with
characteristic forgetfulness of obligation by the late Theodore
Roosevelt, in "The Strenuous Life" and elsewhere. Roosevelt, a typical
apologist for the existing order, adeptly dragging a herring across the
trail whenever it was menaced, yet managed to delude the native boobery,
at least until toward the end, into accepting him as a fiery exponent of
pure democracy. Perhaps he even fooled himself; charlatans usually do
so soon or late. A study of Nietzsche reveals the sources of much that
was honest in him, and exposes the hollowness of much that was sham.
Nietzsche, an infinitely harder and more courageous intellect, was
incapable of any such confusion of ideas; he seldom allowed
sentimentality to turn him from the glaring fact. What is called
Bolshevism today he saw clearly a generation ago and described for what
it was and is--democracy in another aspect, the old _ressentiment_ of the
lower orders in free function once more. Socialism, Puritanism,
Philistinism, Christianity--he saw them all as allotropic forms of
democracy, as variations upon the endless struggle of quantity against
quality, of the weak and timorous against the strong and enterprising,
of the botched against the fit. The world needed a staggering
exaggeration to make it see even half of the truth. It trembles today as
it trembled during the French Revolution. Perhaps it would tremble less
if it could combat the monster with a clearer conscience and less burden
of compromising theory--if it could launch its forces frankly at the
fundamental doctrine, and not merely employ them to police the
transient orgy.

Nietzsche, in the long run, may help it toward that greater honesty. His
notions, propagated by cuttings from cuttings from cuttings, may
conceivably prepare the way for a sounder, more healthful theory of
society and of the state, and so free human progress from the
stupidities which now hamper it, and men of true vision from the
despairs which now sicken them. I say it is conceivable, but I doubt
that it is probable. The soul and the belly of mankind are too evenly
balanced; it is not likely that the belly will ever put away its hunger
or forget its power. Here, perhaps, there is an example of the eternal
recurrence that Nietzsche was fond of mulling over in his blacker moods.
We are in the midst of one of the perennial risings of the lower orders.
It got under way long before any of the current Bolshevist demons was
born; it was given its long, secure start by the intolerable tyranny of
the plutocracy--the end product of the Eighteenth Century revolt against
the old aristocracy. It found resistance suddenly slackened by civil war
within the plutocracy itself--one gang of traders falling upon another
gang, to the tune of vast hymn-singing and yells to God. Perhaps it has
already passed its apogee; the plutocracy, chastened, shows signs of a
new solidarity; the wheel continues to swing 'round. But this combat
between proletariat and plutocracy is, after all, itself a civil war.
Two inferiorities struggle for the privilege of polluting the world.
What actual difference does it make to a civilized man, when there is a
steel strike, whether the workmen win or the mill-owners win? The
conflict can interest him only as spectacle, as the conflict between
Bonaparte and the old order in Europe interested Goethe and Beethoven.
The victory, whichever way it goes, will simply bring chaos nearer, and
so set the stage for a genuine revolution later on, with (let us hope) a
new feudalism or something better coming out of it, and a new Thirteenth
Century at dawn. This seems to be the slow, costly way of the worst of
habitable worlds.

In the present case my money is laid upon the plutocracy. It will win
because it will be able, in the long run, to enlist the finer
intelligences. The mob and its maudlin causes attract only
sentimentalists and scoundrels, chiefly the latter. Politics, under a
democracy, reduces itself to a mere struggle for office by flatterers
of the proletariat; even when a superior man prevails at that disgusting
game he must prevail at the cost of his self-respect. Not many superior
men make the attempt. The average great captain of the rabble, when he
is not simply a weeper over irremediable wrongs, is a hypocrite so far
gone that he is unconscious of his own hypocrisy--a slimy fellow,
offensive to the nose. The plutocracy can recruit measurably more
respectable janissaries, if only because it can make self-interest less
obviously costly to _amour propre_. Its defect and its weakness lie in
the fact that it is still too young to have acquired dignity. But lately
sprung from the mob it now preys upon, it yet shows some of the habits
of mind of that mob: it is blatant, stupid, ignorant, lacking in all
delicate instinct and governmental finesse. Above all, it remains
somewhat heavily moral. One seldom finds it undertaking one of its
characteristic imbecilities without offering a sonorous moral reason; it
spends almost as much to support the Y. M. C. A., vice-crusading,
Prohibition and other such puerilities as it spends upon Congressmen,
strike-breakers, gun-men, kept patriots and newspapers. In England the
case is even worse. It is almost impossible to find a wealthy industrial
over there who is not also an eminent non-conformist layman, and even
among financiers there are praying brothers. On the Continent, the day
is saved by the fact that the plutocracy tends to become more and more
Jewish. Here the intellectual cynicism of the Jew almost counterbalances
his social unpleasantness. If he is destined to lead the plutocracy of
the world out of Little Bethel he will fail, of course, to turn it into
an aristocracy--_i. e._, a caste of gentlemen--, but he will at least
make it clever, and hence worthy of consideration. The case against the
Jews is long and damning; it would justify ten thousand times as many
pogroms as now go on in the world. But whenever you find a
Davidsbuendlerschaft making practise against the Philistines, there you
will find a Jew laying on. Maybe it was this fact that caused Nietzsche
to speak up for the children of Israel quite as often as he spoke
against them. He was not blind to their faults, but when he set them
beside Christians he could not deny their general superiority. Perhaps
in America and England, as on the Continent, the increasing Jewishness
of the plutocracy, while cutting it off from all chance of ever
developing into an aristocracy, will yet lift it to such a dignity that
it will at least deserve a certain grudging respect.

But even so, it will remain in a sort of half-world, midway between the
gutter and the stars. Above it will still stand the small group of men
that constitutes the permanent aristocracy of the race--the men of
imagination and high purpose, the makers of genuine progress, the brave
and ardent spirits, above all petty fears and discontents and above all
petty hopes and ideals no less. There were heroes before Agamemnon;
there will be Bachs after Johann Sebastian. And beneath the Judaized
plutocracy, the sublimated _bourgeoisie_, there the immemorial
proletariat, I venture to guess, will roar on, endlessly tortured by its
vain hatreds and envies, stampeded and made to tremble by its ancient
superstitions, prodded and made miserable by its sordid and degrading
hopes. It seems to me very likely that, in this proletariat,
Christianity will continue to survive. It is nonsense, true enough, but
it is sweet. Nietzsche, denouncing its dangers as a poison, almost falls
into the error of denying it its undoubtedly sugary smack. Of all the
religions ever devised by the great practical jokers of the race, this
is the one that offers most for the least money, so to speak, to the
inferior man. It starts out by denying his inferiority in plain terms:
_all_ men are equal in the sight of God. It ends by erecting that
inferiority into a sort of actual superiority: it is a merit to be
stupid, and miserable, and sorely put upon--of such are the celestial
elect. Not all the eloquence of a million Nietzsches, nor all the
painful marshalling of evidence of a million Darwins and Harnacks, will
ever empty that great consolation of its allure. The most they can ever
accomplish is to make the superior orders of men acutely conscious of
the exact nature of it, and so give them armament against the contagion.
This is going on; this is being done. I think that "The Antichrist" has
a useful place in that enterprise. It is strident, it is often
extravagant, it is, to many sensitive men, in the worst of possible
taste, but at bottom it is enormously apt and effective--and on the
surface it is undoubtedly a good show. One somehow enjoys, with the
malice that is native to man, the spectacle of anathemas batted back; it
is refreshing to see the pitchfork employed against gentlemen who have
doomed such innumerable caravans to hell. In Nietzsche they found, after
many long years, a foeman worthy of them--not a mere fancy swordsman
like Voltaire, or a mob orator like Tom Paine, or a pedant like the
heretics of exegesis, but a gladiator armed with steel and armoured with
steel, and showing all the ferocious gusto of a mediaeval bishop. It is
a pity that Holy Church has no process for the elevation of demons, like
its process for the canonization of saints. There must be a long roll of
black miracles to the discredit of the Accursed Friedrich--sinners
purged of conscience and made happy in their sinning, clerics shaken in
their theology by visions of a new and better holy city, the strong made
to exult, the weak robbed of their old sad romance. It would be a
pleasure to see the _Advocatus Diaboli_ turn from the table of the
prosecution to the table of the defence, and move in solemn form for the
damnation of the Naumburg hobgoblin....

Of all Nietzsche's books, "The Antichrist" comes nearest to
conventionality in form. It presents a connected argument with very few
interludes, and has a beginning, a middle and an end. Most of his works
are in the form of collections of apothegms, and sometimes the subject
changes on every second page. This fact constitutes one of the counts in
the orthodox indictment of him: it is cited as proof that his capacity
for consecutive thought was limited, and that he was thus deficient
mentally, and perhaps a downright moron. The argument, it must be
obvious, is fundamentally nonsensical. What deceives the professors is
the traditional prolixity of philosophers. Because the average
philosophical writer, when he essays to expose his ideas, makes such
inordinate drafts upon the parts of speech that the dictionary is almost
emptied these defective observers jump to the conclusion that his
intrinsic notions are of corresponding weight. This is not unseldom
quite untrue. What makes philosophy so garrulous is not the profundity
of philosophers, but their lack of art; they are like physicians who
sought to cure a slight hyperacidity by giving the patient a carload of
burned oyster-shells to eat. There is, too, the endless poll-parrotting
that goes on: each new philosopher must prove his learning by
laboriously rehearsing the ideas of all previous philosophers....
Nietzsche avoided both faults. He always assumed that his readers knew
the books, and that it was thus unnecessary to rewrite them. And, having
an idea that seemed to him to be novel and original, he stated it in as
few words as possible, and then shut down. Sometimes he got it into a
hundred words; sometimes it took a thousand; now and then, as in the
present case, he developed a series of related ideas into a connected
book. But he never wrote a word too many. He never pumped up an idea to
make it appear bigger than it actually was. The pedagogues, alas, are
not accustomed to that sort of writing in serious fields. They resent
it, and sometimes they even try to improve it. There exists, in fact, a
huge and solemn tome on Nietzsche by a learned man of America in which
all of his brilliancy is painfully translated into the windy phrases of
the seminaries. The tome is satisfactorily ponderous, but the meat of
the cocoanut is left out: there is actually no discussion of the
Nietzschean view of Christianity!... Always Nietzsche daunts the
pedants. He employed too few words for them--and he had too many ideas.

       *       *       *       *       *

The present translation of "The Antichrist" is published by agreement
with Dr. Oscar Levy, editor of the English edition of Nietzsche. There
are two earlier translations, one by Thomas Common and the other by
Anthony M. Ludovici. That of Mr. Common follows the text very closely,
and thus occasionally shows some essentially German turns of phrase;
that of Mr. Ludovici is more fluent but rather less exact. I do not
offer my own version on the plea that either of these is useless; on the
contrary, I cheerfully acknowledge that they have much merit, and that
they helped me at almost every line. I began this new Englishing of the
book, not in any hope of supplanting them, and surely not with any
notion of meeting a great public need, but simply as a private amusement
in troubled days. But as I got on with it I began to see ways of putting
some flavour of Nietzsche's peculiar style into the English, and so
amusement turned into a more or less serious labour. The result, of
course, is far from satisfactory, but it at least represents a very
diligent attempt. Nietzsche, always under the influence of French
models, wrote a German that differs materially from any other German
that I know. It is more nervous, more varied, more rapid in tempo; it
runs to more effective climaxes; it is never stodgy. His marks begin to
show upon the writing of the younger Germans of today. They are getting
away from the old thunderous manner, with its long sentences and its
tedious grammatical complexities. In the course of time, I daresay, they
will develop a German almost as clear as French and almost as colourful
and resilient as English.

I owe thanks to Dr. Levy for his _imprimatur_, to Mr. Theodor Hemberger
for criticism, and to Messrs. Common and Ludovici for showing me the way
around many a difficulty.

                        H. L. MENCKEN.




PREFACE


This book belongs to the most rare of men. Perhaps not one of them is
yet alive. It is possible that they may be among those who understand my
"Zarathustra": how _could_ I confound myself with those who are now
sprouting ears?--First the day after tomorrow must come for me. Some men
are born posthumously.

The conditions under which any one understands me, and _necessarily_
understands me--I know them only too well. Even to endure my
seriousness, my passion, he must carry intellectual integrity to the
verge of hardness. He must be accustomed to living on mountain tops--and
to looking upon the wretched gabble of politics and nationalism as
_beneath_ him. He must have become indifferent; he must never ask of the
truth whether it brings profit to him or a fatality to him.... He must
have an inclination, born of strength, for questions that no one has the
courage for; the courage for the _forbidden_; predestination for the
labyrinth. The experience of seven solitudes. New ears for new music.
New eyes for what is most distant. A new conscience for truths that have
hitherto remained unheard. _And_ the will to economize in the grand
manner--to hold together his strength, his enthusiasm.... Reverence for
self; love of self; absolute freedom of self....

Very well, then! of that sort only are my readers, my true readers, my
readers foreordained: of what account are the _rest_?--The rest are
merely humanity.--One must make one's self superior to humanity, in
power, in _loftiness_ of soul,--in contempt.

                        FRIEDRICH W. NIETZSCHE.




THE ANTICHRIST


1.

--Let us look each other in the face. We are Hyperboreans--we know well
enough how remote our place is. "Neither by land nor by water will you
find the road to the Hyperboreans": even Pindar,[1] in his day, knew
_that_ much about us. Beyond the North, beyond the ice, beyond
_death_--_our_ life, _our_ happiness.... We have discovered that
happiness; we know the way; we got our knowledge of it from thousands of
years in the labyrinth. Who _else_ has found it?--The man of today?--"I
don't know either the way out or the way in; I am whatever doesn't know
either the way out or the way in"--so sighs the man of today.... _This_
is the sort of modernity that made us ill,--we sickened on lazy peace,
cowardly compromise, the whole virtuous dirtiness of the modern Yea and
Nay. This tolerance and _largeur_ of the heart that "forgives"
everything because it "understands" everything is a sirocco to us.
Rather live amid the ice than among modern virtues and other such
south-winds!... We were brave enough; we spared neither ourselves nor
others; but we were a long time finding out _where_ to direct our
courage. We grew dismal; they called us fatalists. _Our_ fate--it was
the fulness, the tension, the _storing up_ of powers. We thirsted for
the lightnings and great deeds; we kept as far as possible from the
happiness of the weakling, from "resignation"... There was thunder in
our air; nature, as we embodied it, became overcast--_for we had not yet
found the way_. The formula of our happiness: a Yea, a Nay, a straight
line, a _goal_....

[1] _Cf._ the tenth Pythian ode. See also the fourth book of Herodotus.
The Hyperboreans were a mythical people beyond the Rhipaean mountains,
in the far North. They enjoyed unbroken happiness and perpetual youth.


2.

What is good?--Whatever augments the feeling of power, the will to
power, power itself, in man.

What is evil?--Whatever springs from weakness.

What is happiness?--The feeling that power _increases_--that resistance
is overcome.

Not contentment, but more power; _not_ peace at any price, but war;
_not_ virtue, but efficiency (virtue in the Renaissance sense, _virtu_,
virtue free of moral acid).

The weak and the botched shall perish: first principle of _our_ charity.
And one should help them to it.

What is more harmful than any vice?--Practical sympathy for the botched
and the weak--Christianity....


3.

The problem that I set here is not what shall replace mankind in the
order of living creatures (--man is an end--): but what type of man must
be _bred_, must be _willed_, as being the most valuable, the most worthy
of life, the most secure guarantee of the future.

This more valuable type has appeared often enough in the past: but
always as a happy accident, as an exception, never as deliberately
_willed_. Very often it has been precisely the most feared; hitherto it
has been almost _the_ terror of terrors;--and out of that terror the
contrary type has been willed, cultivated and _attained_: the domestic
animal, the herd animal, the sick brute-man--the Christian....


4.

Mankind surely does _not_ represent an evolution toward a better or
stronger or higher level, as progress is now understood. This "progress"
is merely a modern idea, which is to say, a false idea. The European of
today, in his essential worth, falls far below the European of the
Renaissance; the process of evolution does _not_ necessarily mean
elevation, enhancement, strengthening.

True enough, it succeeds in isolated and individual cases in various
parts of the earth and under the most widely different cultures, and in
these cases a _higher_ type certainly manifests itself; something which,
compared to mankind in the mass, appears as a sort of superman. Such
happy strokes of high success have always been possible, and will remain
possible, perhaps, for all time to come. Even whole races, tribes and
nations may occasionally represent such lucky accidents.


5.

We should not deck out and embellish Christianity: it has waged a war to
the death against this _higher_ type of man, it has put all the deepest
instincts of this type under its ban, it has developed its concept of
evil, of the Evil One himself, out of these instincts--the strong man as
the typical reprobate, the "outcast among men." Christianity has taken
the part of all the weak, the low, the botched; it has made an ideal out
of _antagonism_ to all the self-preservative instincts of sound life; it
has corrupted even the faculties of those natures that are
intellectually most vigorous, by representing the highest intellectual
values as sinful, as misleading, as full of temptation. The most
lamentable example: the corruption of Pascal, who believed that his
intellect had been destroyed by original sin, whereas it was actually
destroyed by Christianity!--


6.

It is a painful and tragic spectacle that rises before me: I have drawn
back the curtain from the _rottenness_ of man. This word, in my mouth,
is at least free from one suspicion: that it involves a moral accusation
against humanity. It is used--and I wish to emphasize the fact
again--without any moral significance: and this is so far true that the
rottenness I speak of is most apparent to me precisely in those quarters
where there has been most aspiration, hitherto, toward "virtue" and
"godliness." As you probably surmise, I understand rottenness in the
sense of _decadence_: my argument is that all the values on which
mankind now fixes its highest aspirations are _decadence_-values.

I call an animal, a species, an individual corrupt, when it loses its
instincts, when it chooses, when it _prefers_, what is injurious to it.
A history of the "higher feelings," the "ideals of humanity"--and it is
possible that I'll have to write it--would almost explain why man is so
degenerate. Life itself appears to me as an instinct for growth, for
survival, for the accumulation of forces, for _power_: whenever the will
to power fails there is disaster. My contention is that all the highest
values of humanity have been emptied of this will--that the values of
_decadence_, of _nihilism_, now prevail under the holiest names.


7.

Christianity is called the religion of _pity_.--Pity stands in
opposition to all the tonic passions that augment the energy of the
feeling of aliveness: it is a depressant. A man loses power when he
pities. Through pity that drain upon strength which suffering works is
multiplied a thousandfold. Suffering is made contagious by pity; under
certain circumstances it may lead to a total sacrifice of life and
living energy--a loss out of all proportion to the magnitude of the
cause (--the case of the death of the Nazarene). This is the first view
of it; there is, however, a still more important one. If one measures
the effects of pity by the gravity of the reactions it sets up, its
character as a menace to life appears in a much clearer light. Pity
thwarts the whole law of evolution, which is the law of natural
selection. It preserves whatever is ripe for destruction; it fights on
the side of those disinherited and condemned by life; by maintaining
life in so many of the botched of all kinds, it gives life itself a
gloomy and dubious aspect. Mankind has ventured to call pity a virtue
(--in every _superior_ moral system it appears as a weakness--); going
still further, it has been called _the_ virtue, the source and
foundation of all other virtues--but let us always bear in mind that
this was from the standpoint of a philosophy that was nihilistic, and
upon whose shield _the denial of life_ was inscribed. Schopenhauer was
right in this: that by means of pity life is denied, and made _worthy of
denial_--pity is the technic of nihilism. Let me repeat: this depressing
and contagious instinct stands against all those instincts which work
for the preservation and enhancement of life: in the role of _protector_
of the miserable, it is a prime agent in the promotion of
_decadence_--pity persuades to extinction.... Of course, one doesn't say
"extinction": one says "the other world," or "God," or "the _true_
life," or Nirvana, salvation, blessedness.... This innocent rhetoric,
from the realm of religious-ethical balderdash, appears _a good deal
less innocent_ when one reflects upon the tendency that it conceals
beneath sublime words: the tendency to _destroy life_. Schopenhauer was
hostile to life: that is why pity appeared to him as a virtue....
Aristotle, as every one knows, saw in pity a sickly and dangerous state
of mind, the remedy for which was an occasional purgative: he regarded
tragedy as that purgative. The instinct of life should prompt us to seek
some means of puncturing any such pathological and dangerous
accumulation of pity as that appearing in Schopenhauer's case (and also,
alack, in that of our whole literary _decadence_, from St. Petersburg to
Paris, from Tolstoi to Wagner), that it may burst and be discharged....
Nothing is more unhealthy, amid all our unhealthy modernism, than
Christian pity. To be the doctors _here_, to be unmerciful _here_, to
wield the knife _here_--all this is _our_ business, all this is _our_
sort of humanity, by this sign we are philosophers, we Hyperboreans!--


8.

It is necessary to say just _whom_ we regard as our antagonists:
theologians and all who have any theological blood in their veins--this
is our whole philosophy.... One must have faced that menace at close
hand, better still, one must have had experience of it directly and
almost succumbed to it, to realize that it is not to be taken lightly
(--the alleged free-thinking of our naturalists and physiologists seems
to me to be a joke--they have no passion about such things; they have
not suffered--). This poisoning goes a great deal further than most
people think: I find the arrogant habit of the theologian among all who
regard themselves as "idealists"--among all who, by virtue of a higher
point of departure, claim a right to rise above reality, and to look
upon it with suspicion.... The idealist, like the ecclesiastic, carries
all sorts of lofty concepts in his hand (--and not only in his hand!);
he launches them with benevolent contempt against "understanding," "the
senses," "honor," "good living," "science"; he sees such things as
_beneath_ him, as pernicious and seductive forces, on which "the soul"
soars as a pure thing-in-itself--as if humility, chastity, poverty, in a
word, _holiness_, had not already done much more damage to life than all
imaginable horrors and vices.... The pure soul is a pure lie.... So long
as the priest, that _professional_ denier, calumniator and poisoner of
life, is accepted as a _higher_ variety of man, there can be no answer
to the question, What _is_ truth? Truth has already been stood on its
head when the obvious attorney of mere emptiness is mistaken for its
representative....


9.

Upon this theological instinct I make war: I find the tracks of it
everywhere. Whoever has theological blood in his veins is shifty and
dishonourable in all things. The pathetic thing that grows out of this
condition is called _faith_: in other words, closing one's eyes upon
one's self once for all, to avoid suffering the sight of incurable
falsehood. People erect a concept of morality, of virtue, of holiness
upon this false view of all things; they ground good conscience upon
faulty vision; they argue that no _other_ sort of vision has value any
more, once they have made theirs sacrosanct with the names of "God,"
"salvation" and "eternity." I unearth this theological instinct in all
directions: it is the most widespread and the most _subterranean_ form
of falsehood to be found on earth. Whatever a theologian regards as true
_must_ be false: there you have almost a criterion of truth. His
profound instinct of self-preservation stands against truth ever coming
into honour in any way, or even getting stated. Wherever the influence
of theologians is felt there is a transvaluation of values, and the
concepts "true" and "false" are forced to change places: whatever is
most damaging to life is there called "true," and whatever exalts it,
intensifies it, approves it, justifies it and makes it triumphant is
there called "false."... When theologians, working through the
"consciences" of princes (or of peoples--), stretch out their hands for
_power_, there is never any doubt as to the fundamental issue: the will
to make an end, the _nihilistic_ will exerts that power....


10.

Among Germans I am immediately understood when I say that theological
blood is the ruin of philosophy. The Protestant pastor is the
grandfather of German philosophy; Protestantism itself is its _peccatum
originale_. Definition of Protestantism: hemiplegic paralysis of
Christianity--_and_ of reason.... One need only utter the words
"Tuebingen School" to get an understanding of what German philosophy is
at bottom--a very artful form of theology.... The Suabians are the best
liars in Germany; they lie innocently.... Why all the rejoicing over
the appearance of Kant that went through the learned world of Germany,
three-fourths of which is made up of the sons of preachers and
teachers--why the German conviction still echoing, that with Kant came a
change for the _better_? The theological instinct of German scholars
made them see clearly just _what_ had become possible again.... A
backstairs leading to the old ideal stood open; the concept of the "true
world," the concept of morality as the _essence_ of the world (--the two
most vicious errors that ever existed!), were once more, thanks to a
subtle and wily scepticism, if not actually demonstrable, then _at
least_ no longer _refutable_.... _Reason_, the _prerogative_ of reason,
does not go so far.... Out of reality there had been made "appearance";
an absolutely false world, that of being, had been turned into
reality.... The success of Kant is merely a theological success; he was,
like Luther and Leibnitz, but one more impediment to German integrity,
already far from steady.--


11.

A word now against Kant as a moralist. A virtue must be _our_ invention;
it must spring out of _our_ personal need and defence. In every other
case it is a source of danger. That which does not belong to our life
_menaces_ it; a virtue which has its roots in mere respect for the
concept of "virtue," as Kant would have it, is pernicious. "Virtue,"
"duty," "good for its own sake," goodness grounded upon impersonality or
a notion of universal validity--these are all chimeras, and in them one
finds only an expression of the decay, the last collapse of life, the
Chinese spirit of Koenigsberg. Quite the contrary is demanded by the most
profound laws of self-preservation and of growth: to wit, that every man
find his _own_ virtue, his _own_ categorical imperative. A nation goes
to pieces when it confounds _its_ duty with the general concept of duty.
Nothing works a more complete and penetrating disaster than every
"impersonal" duty, every sacrifice before the Moloch of abstraction.--To
think that no one has thought of Kant's categorical imperative as
_dangerous to life_!... The theological instinct alone took it under
protection!--An action prompted by the life-instinct proves that it is a
_right_ action by the amount of pleasure that goes with it: and yet that
Nihilist, with his bowels of Christian dogmatism, regarded pleasure as
an _objection_.... What destroys a man more quickly than to work, think
and feel without inner necessity, without any deep personal desire,
without pleasure--as a mere automaton of duty? That is the recipe for
_decadence_, and no less for idiocy.... Kant became an idiot.--And such
a man was the contemporary of Goethe! This calamitous spinner of cobwebs
passed for _the_ German philosopher--still passes today!... I forbid
myself to say what I think of the Germans.... Didn't Kant see in the
French Revolution the transformation of the state from the inorganic
form to the _organic_? Didn't he ask himself if there was a single event
that could be explained save on the assumption of a moral faculty in
man, so that on the basis of it, "the tendency of mankind toward the
good" could be _explained_, once and for all time? Kant's answer: "That
is revolution." Instinct at fault in everything and anything, instinct
as a revolt against nature, German _decadence_ as a philosophy--_that is
Kant_!--


12.

I put aside a few sceptics, the types of decency in the history of
philosophy: the rest haven't the slightest conception of intellectual
integrity. They behave like women, all these great enthusiasts and
prodigies--they regard "beautiful feelings" as arguments, the "heaving
breast" as the bellows of divine inspiration, conviction as the
_criterion_ of truth. In the end, with "German" innocence, Kant tried to
give a scientific flavour to this form of corruption, this dearth of
intellectual conscience, by calling it "practical reason." He
deliberately invented a variety of reasons for use on occasions when it
was desirable not to trouble with reason--that is, when morality, when
the sublime command "thou shalt," was heard. When one recalls the fact
that, among all peoples, the philosopher is no more than a development
from the old type of priest, this inheritance from the priest, this
_fraud upon self_, ceases to be remarkable. When a man feels that he has
a divine mission, say to lift up, to save or to liberate mankind--when a
man feels the divine spark in his heart and believes that he is the
mouthpiece of supernatural imperatives--when such a mission inflames
him, it is only natural that he should stand beyond all merely
reasonable standards of judgment. He feels that he is _himself_
sanctified by this mission, that he is himself a type of a higher
order!... What has a priest to do with philosophy! He stands far above
it!--And hitherto the priest has _ruled_!--He has determined the meaning
of "true" and "not true"!...


13.

Let us not underestimate this fact: that _we
ourselves_, we free spirits, are already a "transvaluation of all
values," a _visualized_ declaration of war and victory against all the
old concepts of "true" and "not true." The most valuable intuitions are
the last to be attained; the most valuable of all are those which
determine _methods_. All the methods, all the principles of the
scientific spirit of today, were the targets for thousands of years of
the most profound contempt; if a man inclined to them he was excluded
from the society of "decent" people--he passed as "an enemy of God," as
a scoffer at the truth, as one "possessed." As a man of science, he
belonged to the Chandala[2].... We have had the whole pathetic stupidity
of mankind against us--their every notion of what the truth _ought_ to
be, of what the service of the truth _ought_ to be--their every "thou
shalt" was launched against us.... Our objectives, our methods, our
quiet, cautious, distrustful manner--all appeared to them as absolutely
discreditable and contemptible.--Looking back, one may almost ask one's
self with reason if it was not actually an _aesthetic_ sense that kept
men blind so long: what they demanded of the truth was picturesque
effectiveness, and of the learned a strong appeal to their senses. It
was our _modesty_ that stood out longest against their taste.... How
well they guessed that, these turkey-cocks of God!

[2] The lowest of the Hindu castes.


14.

We have unlearned something. We have become more modest in every way. We
no longer derive man from the "spirit," from the "godhead"; we have
dropped him back among the beasts. We regard him as the strongest of the
beasts because he is the craftiest; one of the results thereof is his
intellectuality. On the other hand, we guard ourselves against a conceit
which would assert itself even here: that man is the great second
thought in the process of organic evolution. He is, in truth, anything
but the crown of creation: beside him stand many other animals, all at
similar stages of development.... And even when we say that we say a bit
too much, for man, relatively speaking, is the most botched of all the
animals and the sickliest, and he has wandered the most dangerously from
his instincts--though for all that, to be sure, he remains the most
_interesting_!--As regards the lower animals, it was Descartes who first
had the really admirable daring to describe them as _machina_; the whole
of our physiology is directed toward proving the truth of this doctrine.
Moreover, it is illogical to set man apart, as Descartes did: what we
know of man today is limited precisely by the extent to which we have
regarded him, too, as a machine. Formerly we accorded to man, as his
inheritance from some higher order of beings, what was called "free
will"; now we have taken even this will from him, for the term no longer
describes anything that we can understand. The old word "will" now
connotes only a sort of result, an individual reaction, that follows
inevitably upon a series of partly discordant and partly harmonious
stimuli--the will no longer "acts," or "moves."... Formerly it was
thought that man's consciousness, his "spirit," offered evidence of his
high origin, his divinity. That he might be _perfected_, he was advised,
tortoise-like, to draw his senses in, to have no traffic with earthly
things, to shuffle off his mortal coil--then only the important part of
him, the "pure spirit," would remain. Here again we have thought out the
thing better: to us consciousness, or "the spirit," appears as a symptom
of a relative imperfection of the organism, as an experiment, a groping,
a misunderstanding, as an affliction which uses up nervous force
unnecessarily--we deny that anything can be done perfectly so long as it
is done consciously. The "pure spirit" is a piece of pure stupidity:
take away the nervous system and the senses, the so-called "mortal
shell," and _the rest is miscalculation_--that is all!...


15.

Under Christianity neither morality nor religion has any point of
contact with actuality. It offers purely imaginary _causes_ ("God,"
"soul," "ego," "spirit," "free will"--or even "unfree"), and purely
imaginary _effects_ ("sin," "salvation," "grace," "punishment,"
"forgiveness of sins"). Intercourse between imaginary _beings_ ("God,"
"spirits," "souls"); an imaginary _natural history_ (anthropocentric; a
total denial of the concept of natural causes); an imaginary
_psychology_ (misunderstandings of self, misinterpretations of agreeable
or disagreeable general feelings--for example, of the states of the
_nervus sympathicus_ with the help of the sign-language of
religio-ethical balderdash--, "repentance," "pangs of conscience,"
"temptation by the devil," "the presence of God"); an imaginary
_teleology_ (the "kingdom of God," "the last judgment," "eternal
life").--This purely _fictitious world_, greatly to its disadvantage, is
to be differentiated from the world of dreams; the latter at least
reflects reality, whereas the former falsifies it, cheapens it and
denies it. Once the concept of "nature" had been opposed to the concept
of "God," the word "natural" necessarily took on the meaning of
"abominable"--the whole of that fictitious world has its sources in
hatred of the natural (--the real!--), and is no more than evidence of a
profound uneasiness in the presence of reality.... _This explains
everything._ Who alone has any reason for living his way out of reality?
The man who suffers under it. But to suffer from reality one must be a
_botched_ reality.... The preponderance of pains over pleasures is the
cause of this fictitious morality and religion: but such a preponderance
also supplies the formula for _decadence_....


16.

A criticism of the _Christian concept of God_ leads inevitably to the
same conclusion.--A nation that still believes in itself holds fast to
its own god. In him it does honour to the conditions which enable it to
survive, to its virtues--it projects its joy in itself, its feeling of
power, into a being to whom one may offer thanks. He who is rich will
give of his riches; a proud people need a god to whom they can make
_sacrifices_.... Religion, within these limits, is a form of gratitude.
A man is grateful for his own existence: to that end he needs a
god.--Such a god must be able to work both benefits and injuries; he
must be able to play either friend or foe--he is wondered at for the
good he does as well as for the evil he does. But the castration,
against all nature, of such a god, making him a god of goodness alone,
would be contrary to human inclination. Mankind has just as much need
for an evil god as for a good god; it doesn't have to thank mere
tolerance and humanitarianism for its own existence.... What would be
the value of a god who knew nothing of anger, revenge, envy, scorn,
cunning, violence? who had perhaps never experienced the rapturous
_ardeurs_ of victory and of destruction? No one would understand such a
god: why should any one want him?--True enough, when a nation is on the
downward path, when it feels its belief in its own future, its hope of
freedom slipping from it, when it begins to see submission as a first
necessity and the virtues of submission as measures of self-preservation,
then it _must_ overhaul its god. He then becomes a hypocrite, timorous
and demure; he counsels "peace of soul," hate-no-more, leniency, "love"
of friend and foe. He moralizes endlessly; he creeps into every private
virtue; he becomes the god of every man; he becomes a private citizen, a
cosmopolitan.... Formerly he represented a people, the strength of a
people, everything aggressive and thirsty for power in the soul of a
people; now he is simply _the good god_.... The truth is that there is
no other alternative for gods: _either_ they are the will to power--in
which case they are national gods--_or_ incapacity for power--in which
case they have to be good....


17.

Wherever the will to power begins to decline, in whatever form, there is
always an accompanying decline physiologically, a _decadence_. The
divinity of this _decadence_, shorn of its masculine virtues and
passions, is converted perforce into a god of the physiologically
degraded, of the weak. Of course, they do not _call_ themselves the
weak; they call themselves "the good."... No hint is needed to indicate
the moments in history at which the dualistic fiction of a good and an
evil god first became possible. The same instinct which prompts the
inferior to reduce their own god to "goodness-in-itself" also prompts
them to eliminate all good qualities from the god of their superiors;
they make revenge on their masters by making a _devil_ of the latter's
god.--The _good_ god, and the devil like him--both are abortions of
_decadence_.--How can we be so tolerant of the naivete of Christian
theologians as to join in their doctrine that the evolution of the
concept of god from "the god of Israel," the god of a people, to the
Christian god, the essence of all goodness, is to be described as
_progress_?--But even Renan does this. As if Renan had a right to be
naive! The contrary actually stares one in the face. When everything
necessary to _ascending_ life; when all that is strong, courageous,
masterful and proud has been eliminated from the concept of a god; when
he has sunk step by step to the level of a staff for the weary, a
sheet-anchor for the drowning; when he becomes the poor man's god, the
sinner's god, the invalid's god _par excellence_, and the attribute of
"saviour" or "redeemer" remains as the one essential attribute of
divinity--just _what_ is the significance of such a metamorphosis?
what does such a _reduction_ of the godhead imply?--To be
sure, the "kingdom of God" has thus grown larger. Formerly he had only
his own people, his "chosen" people. But since then he has gone
wandering, like his people themselves, into foreign parts; he has given
up settling down quietly anywhere; finally he has come to feel at home
everywhere, and is the great cosmopolitan--until now he has the "great
majority" on his side, and half the earth. But this god of the "great
majority," this democrat among gods, has not become a proud heathen god:
on the contrary, he remains a Jew, he remains a god in a corner, a god
of all the dark nooks and crevices, of all the noisesome quarters of the
world!... His earthly kingdom, now as always, is a kingdom of the
underworld, a _souterrain_ kingdom, a ghetto kingdom.... And he himself
is so pale, so weak, so _decadent_.... Even the palest of the pale are
able to master him--messieurs the metaphysicians, those albinos of the
intellect. They spun their webs around him for so long that finally he
was hypnotized, and began to spin himself, and became another
metaphysician. Thereafter he resumed once more his old business of
spinning the world out of his inmost being _sub specie Spinozae_;
thereafter he became ever thinner and paler--became the "ideal," became
"pure spirit," became "the absolute," became "the thing-in-itself."...
_The collapse of a god_: he became a "thing-in-itself."


18.

The Christian concept of a god--the god as the patron of the sick, the
god as a spinner of cobwebs, the god as a spirit--is one of the most
corrupt concepts that has ever been set up in the world: it probably
touches low-water mark in the ebbing evolution of the god-type. God
degenerated into the _contradiction of life_. Instead of being its
transfiguration and eternal Yea! In him war is declared on life, on
nature, on the will to live! God becomes the formula for every slander
upon the "here and now," and for every lie about the "beyond"! In him
nothingness is deified, and the will to nothingness is made holy!...


19.

The fact that the strong races of northern Europe did not repudiate this
Christian god does little credit to their gift for religion--and not
much more to their taste. They ought to have been able to make an end of
such a moribund and worn-out product of the _decadence_. A curse lies
upon them because they were not equal to it; they made illness,
decrepitude and contradiction a part of their instincts--and since then
they have not managed to _create_ any more gods. Two thousand years have
come and gone--and not a single new god! Instead, there still exists,
and as if by some intrinsic right,--as if he were the _ultimatum_ and
_maximum_ of the power to create gods, of the _creator spiritus_ in
mankind--this pitiful god of Christian monotono-theism! This hybrid
image of decay, conjured up out of emptiness, contradiction and vain
imagining, in which all the instincts of _decadence_, all the cowardices
and wearinesses of the soul find their sanction!--


20.

In my condemnation of Christianity I surely hope I do no injustice to a
related religion with an even larger number of believers: I allude to
_Buddhism_. Both are to be reckoned among the nihilistic religions--they
are both _decadence_ religions--but they are separated from each other
in a very remarkable way. For the fact that he is able to _compare_ them
at all the critic of Christianity is indebted to the scholars of
India.--Buddhism is a hundred times as realistic as Christianity--it is
part of its living heritage that it is able to face problems objectively
and coolly; it is the product of long centuries of philosophical
speculation. The concept, "god," was already disposed of before it
appeared. Buddhism is the only genuinely _positive_ religion to be
encountered in history, and this applies even to its epistemology (which
is a strict phenomenalism). It does not speak of a "struggle with sin,"
but, yielding to reality, of the "struggle with suffering." Sharply
differentiating itself from Christianity, it puts the self-deception
that lies in moral concepts behind it; it is, in my phrase, _beyond_
good and evil.--The two physiological facts upon which it grounds itself
and upon which it bestows its chief attention are: first, an excessive
sensitiveness to sensation, which manifests itself as a refined
susceptibility to pain, and _secondly_, an extraordinary spirituality, a
too protracted concern with concepts and logical procedures, under the
influence of which the instinct of personality has yielded to a notion
of the "impersonal." (--Both of these states will be familiar to a few
of my readers, the objectivists, by experience, as they are to me).
These physiological states produced a _depression_, and Buddha tried to
combat it by hygienic measures. Against it he prescribed a life in the
open, a life of travel; moderation in eating and a careful selection of
foods; caution in the use of intoxicants; the same caution in arousing
any of the passions that foster a bilious habit and heat the blood;
finally, no _worry_, either on one's own account or on account of
others. He encourages ideas that make for either quiet contentment or
good cheer--he finds means to combat ideas of other sorts. He
understands good, the state of goodness, as something which promotes
health. _Prayer_ is not included, and neither is _asceticism_. There is
no categorical imperative nor any disciplines, even within the walls of
a monastery (--it is always possible to leave--). These things would
have been simply means of increasing the excessive sensitiveness above
mentioned. For the same reason he does not advocate any conflict with
unbelievers; his teaching is antagonistic to nothing so much as to
revenge, aversion, _ressentiment_ (--"enmity never brings an end to
enmity": the moving refrain of all Buddhism....) And in all this he was
right, for it is precisely these passions which, in view of his main
regiminal purpose, are _unhealthful_. The mental fatigue that he
observes, already plainly displayed in too much "objectivity" (that is,
in the individual's loss of interest in himself, in loss of balance and
of "egoism"), he combats by strong efforts to lead even the spiritual
interests back to the _ego_. In Buddha's teaching egoism is a duty. The
"one thing needful," the question "how can you be delivered from
suffering," regulates and determines the whole spiritual diet.
(--Perhaps one will here recall that Athenian who also declared war upon
pure "scientificality," to wit, Socrates, who also elevated egoism to
the estate of a morality).


21.

The things necessary to Buddhism are a very mild climate, customs of
great gentleness and liberality, and _no_ militarism; moreover, it must
get its start among the higher and better educated classes.
Cheerfulness, quiet and the absence of desire are the chief desiderata,
and they are _attained_. Buddhism is not a religion in which perfection
is merely an object of aspiration: perfection is actually normal.--

Under Christianity the instincts of the subjugated and the oppressed
come to the fore: it is only those who are at the bottom who seek their
salvation in it. Here the prevailing pastime, the favourite remedy for
boredom is the discussion of sin, self-criticism, the inquisition of
conscience; here the emotion produced by _power_ (called "God") is
pumped up (by prayer); here the highest good is regarded as
unattainable, as a gift, as "grace." Here, too, open dealing is lacking;
concealment and the darkened room are Christian. Here body is despised
and hygiene is denounced as sensual; the church even ranges itself
against cleanliness (--the first Christian order after the banishment of
the Moors closed the public baths, of which there were 270 in Cordova
alone). Christian, too, is a certain cruelty toward one's self and
toward others; hatred of unbelievers; the will to persecute. Sombre and
disquieting ideas are in the foreground; the most esteemed states of
mind, bearing the most respectable names, are epileptoid; the diet is so
regulated as to engender morbid symptoms and over-stimulate the nerves.
Christian, again, is all deadly enmity to the rulers of the earth, to
the "aristocratic"--along with a sort of secret rivalry with them (--one
resigns one's "body" to them; one wants _only_ one's "soul"...). And
Christian is all hatred of the intellect, of pride, of courage, of
freedom, of intellectual _libertinage_; Christian is all hatred of the
senses, of joy in the senses, of joy in general....


22.

When Christianity departed from its native soil, that of the lowest
orders, the _underworld_ of the ancient world, and began seeking power
among barbarian peoples, it no longer had to deal with _exhausted_ men,
but with men still inwardly savage and capable of self-torture--in
brief, strong men, but bungled men. Here, unlike in the case of the
Buddhists, the cause of discontent with self, suffering through self, is
_not_ merely a general sensitiveness and susceptibility to pain, but, on
the contrary, an inordinate thirst for inflicting pain on others, a
tendency to obtain subjective satisfaction in hostile deeds and ideas.
Christianity had to embrace _barbaric_ concepts and valuations in order
to obtain mastery over barbarians: of such sort, for example, are the
sacrifices of the first-born, the drinking of blood as a sacrament, the
disdain of the intellect and of culture; torture in all its forms,
whether bodily or not; the whole pomp of the cult. Buddhism is a
religion for peoples in a further state of development, for races that
have become kind, gentle and over-spiritualized (--Europe is not yet
ripe for it--): it is a summons that takes them back to peace and
cheerfulness, to a careful rationing of the spirit, to a certain
hardening of the body. Christianity aims at mastering _beasts of prey_;
its modus operandi is to make them _ill_--to make feeble is the
Christian recipe for taming, for "_civilizing_." Buddhism is a religion
for the closing, over-wearied stages of civilization. Christianity
appears before civilization has so much as begun--under certain
circumstances it lays the very foundations thereof.


23.

Buddhism, I repeat, is a hundred times more austere, more honest, more
objective. It no longer has to _justify_ its pains, its susceptibility
to suffering, by interpreting these things in terms of sin--it simply
says, as it simply thinks, "I suffer." To the barbarian, however,
suffering in itself is scarcely understandable: what he needs, first of
all, is an explanation as to _why_ he suffers. (His mere instinct
prompts him to deny his suffering altogether, or to endure it in
silence.) Here the word "devil" was a blessing: man had to have an
omnipotent and terrible enemy--there was no need to be ashamed of
suffering at the hands of such an enemy.--

At the bottom of Christianity there are several subtleties that belong
to the Orient. In the first place, it knows that it is of very little
consequence whether a thing be true or not, so long as it is _believed_
to be true. Truth and _faith_: here we have two wholly distinct worlds
of ideas, almost two diametrically _opposite_ worlds--the road to the
one and the road to the other lie miles apart. To understand that fact
thoroughly--this is almost enough, in the Orient, to _make_ one a sage.
The Brahmins knew it, Plato knew it, every student of the esoteric knows
it. When, for example, a man gets any _pleasure_ out of the notion that
he has been saved from sin, it is _not_ necessary for him to be actually
sinful, but merely to _feel_ sinful. But when _faith_ is thus exalted
above everything else, it necessarily follows that reason, knowledge and
patient inquiry have to be discredited: the road to the truth becomes a
forbidden road.--Hope, in its stronger forms, is a great deal more
powerful _stimulans_ to life than any sort of realized joy can ever be.
Man must be sustained in suffering by a hope so high that no conflict
with actuality can dash it--so high, indeed, that no fulfilment can
_satisfy_ it: a hope reaching out beyond this world. (Precisely because
of this power that hope has of making the suffering hold out, the Greeks
regarded it as the evil of evils, as the most _malign_ of evils; it
remained behind at the source of all evil.)[3]--In order that _love_ may
be possible, God must become a person; in order that the lower instincts
may take a hand in the matter God must be young. To satisfy the ardor of
the woman a beautiful saint must appear on the scene, and to satisfy
that of the men there must be a virgin. These things are necessary if
Christianity is to assume lordship over a soil on which some
aphrodisiacal or Adonis cult has already established a notion as to what
a cult ought to be. To insist upon _chastity_ greatly strengthens the
vehemence and subjectivity of the religious instinct--it makes the cult
warmer, more enthusiastic, more soulful.--Love is the state in which man
sees things most decidedly as they are _not_. The force of illusion
reaches its highest here, and so does the capacity for sweetening, for
_transfiguring_. When a man is in love he endures more than at any other
time; he submits to anything. The problem was to devise a religion which
would allow one to love: by this means the worst that life has to offer
is overcome--it is scarcely even noticed.--So much for the three
Christian virtues: faith, hope and charity: I call them the three
Christian _ingenuities_.--Buddhism is in too late a stage of
development, too full of positivism, to be shrewd in any such way.--

[3] That is, in Pandora's box.


24.

Here I barely touch upon the problem of the _origin_ of Christianity.
The _first_ thing necessary to its solution is this: that Christianity
is to be understood only by examining the soil from which it sprung--it
is _not_ a reaction against Jewish instincts; it is their inevitable
product; it is simply one more step in the awe-inspiring logic of the
Jews. In the words of the Saviour, "salvation is of the Jews."[4]--The
_second_ thing to remember is this: that the psychological type of the
Galilean is still to be recognized, but it was only in its most
degenerate form (which is at once maimed and overladen with foreign
features) that it could serve in the manner in which it has been used:
as a type of the _Saviour_ of mankind.--

[4] John iv, 22.

The Jews are the most remarkable people in the history of the world, for
when they were confronted with the question, to be or not to be, they
chose, with perfectly unearthly deliberation, to be _at any price_: this
price involved a radical _falsification_ of all nature, of all
naturalness, of all reality, of the whole inner world, as well as of
the outer. They put themselves _against_ all those conditions under
which, hitherto, a people had been able to live, or had even been
_permitted_ to live; out of themselves they evolved an idea which stood
in direct opposition to _natural_ conditions--one by one they distorted
religion, civilization, morality, history and psychology until each
became a _contradiction_ of its _natural significance_. We meet with the
same phenomenon later on, in an incalculably exaggerated form, but only
as a copy: the Christian church, put beside the "people of God," shows a
complete lack of any claim to originality. Precisely for this reason the
Jews are the most _fateful_ people in the history of the world: their
influence has so falsified the reasoning of mankind in this matter that
today the Christian can cherish anti-Semitism without realizing that it
is no more than the _final consequence of Judaism_.

In my "Genealogy of Morals" I give the first psychological explanation
of the concepts underlying those two antithetical things, a _noble_
morality and a _ressentiment_ morality, the second of which is a mere
product of the denial of the former. The Judaeo-Christian moral system
belongs to the second division, and in every detail. In order to be able
to say Nay to everything representing an _ascending_ evolution of
life--that is, to well-being, to power, to beauty, to self-approval--the
instincts of _ressentiment_, here become downright genius, had to invent
an _other_ world in which the _acceptance of life_ appeared as the most
evil and abominable thing imaginable. Psychologically, the Jews are a
people gifted with the very strongest vitality, so much so that when
they found themselves facing impossible conditions of life they chose
voluntarily, and with a profound talent for self-preservation, the side
of all those instincts which make for _decadence_--_not_ as if mastered
by them, but as if detecting in them a power by which "the world" could
be _defied_. The Jews are the very opposite of _decadents_: they have
simply been forced into _appearing_ in that guise, and with a degree of
skill approaching the _non plus ultra_ of histrionic genius they have
managed to put themselves at the head of all _decadent_ movements (--for
example, the Christianity of Paul--), and so make of them something
stronger than any party frankly saying _Yes_ to life. To the sort of
men who reach out for power under Judaism and Christianity,--that is to
say, to the _priestly_ class--_decadence_ is no more than a means to an
end. Men of this sort have a vital interest in making mankind sick, and
in confusing the values of "good" and "bad," "true" and "false" in a
manner that is not only dangerous to life, but also slanders it.


25.

The history of Israel is invaluable as a typical history of an attempt
to _denaturize_ all natural values: I point to five facts which bear
this out. Originally, and above all in the time of the monarchy, Israel
maintained the _right_ attitude of things, which is to say, the natural
attitude. Its Jahveh was an expression of its consciousness of power,
its joy in itself, its hopes for itself: to him the Jews looked for
victory and salvation and through him they expected nature to give them
whatever was necessary to their existence--above all, rain. Jahveh is
the god of Israel, and _consequently_ the god of justice: this is the
logic of every race that has power in its hands and a good conscience in
the use of it. In the religious ceremonial of the Jews both aspects of
this self-approval stand revealed. The nation is grateful for the high
destiny that has enabled it to obtain dominion; it is grateful for the
benign procession of the seasons, and for the good fortune attending its
herds and its crops.--This view of things remained an ideal for a long
while, even after it had been robbed of validity by tragic blows:
anarchy within and the Assyrian without. But the people still retained,
as a projection of their highest yearnings, that vision of a king who
was at once a gallant warrior and an upright judge--a vision best
visualized in the typical prophet (_i. e._, critic and satirist of the
moment), Isaiah.--But every hope remained unfulfilled. The old god no
longer _could_ do what he used to do. He ought to have been abandoned.
But what actually happened? Simply this: the conception of him was
_changed_--the conception of him was _denaturized_; this was the price
that had to be paid for keeping him.--Jahveh, the god of "justice"--he
is in accord with Israel _no more_, he no longer vizualizes the national
egoism; he is now a god only conditionally.... The public notion of this
god now becomes merely a weapon in the hands of clerical agitators, who
interpret all happiness as a reward and all unhappiness as a punishment
for obedience or disobedience to him, for "sin": that most fraudulent of
all imaginable interpretations, whereby a "moral order of the world" is
set up, and the fundamental concepts, "cause" and "effect," are stood on
their heads. Once natural causation has been swept out of the world by
doctrines of reward and punishment some sort of _un_-natural causation
becomes necessary: and all other varieties of the denial of nature
follow it. A god who _demands_--in place of a god who helps, who gives
counsel, who is at bottom merely a name for every happy inspiration of
courage and self-reliance.... _Morality_ is no longer a reflection of
the conditions which make for the sound life and development of the
people; it is no longer the primary life-instinct; instead it has become
abstract and in opposition to life--a fundamental perversion of the
fancy, an "evil eye" on all things. _What_ is Jewish, _what_ is
Christian morality? Chance robbed of its innocence; unhappiness polluted
with the idea of "sin"; well-being represented as a danger, as a
"temptation"; a physiological disorder produced by the canker worm of
conscience....


26.

The concept of god falsified; the concept of morality falsified;--but
even here Jewish priest-craft did not stop. The whole history of Israel
ceased to be of any value: out with it!--These priests accomplished that
miracle of falsification of which a great part of the Bible is the
documentary evidence; with a degree of contempt unparalleled, and in the
face of all tradition and all historical reality, they translated the
past of their people into _religious_ terms, which is to say, they
converted it into an idiotic mechanism of salvation, whereby all
offences against Jahveh were punished and all devotion to him was
rewarded. We would regard this act of historical falsification as
something far more shameful if familiarity with the _ecclesiastical_
interpretation of history for thousands of years had not blunted our
inclinations for uprightness _in historicis_. And the philosophers
support the church: the _lie_ about a "moral order of the world" runs
through the whole of philosophy, even the newest. What is the meaning
of a "moral order of the world"? That there is a thing called the will
of God which, once and for all time, determines what man ought to do and
what he ought not to do; that the worth of a people, or of an individual
thereof, is to be measured by the extent to which they or he obey this
will of God; that the destinies of a people or of an individual are
_controlled_ by this will of God, which rewards or punishes according to
the degree of obedience manifested.--In place of all that pitiable lie
_reality_ has this to say: the _priest_, a parasitical variety of man
who can exist only at the cost of every sound view of life, takes the
name of God in vain: he calls that state of human society in which he
himself determines the value of all things "the kingdom of God"; he
calls the means whereby that state of affairs is attained "the will of
God"; with cold-blooded cynicism he estimates all peoples, all ages and
all individuals by the extent of their subservience or opposition to the
power of the priestly order. One observes him at work: under the hand of
the Jewish priesthood the _great_ age of Israel became an age of
decline; the Exile, with its long series of misfortunes, was
transformed into a _punishment_ for that great age--during which priests
had not yet come into existence. Out of the powerful and _wholly free_
heroes of Israel's history they fashioned, according to their changing
needs, either wretched bigots and hypocrites or men entirely "godless."
They reduced every great event to the idiotic formula: "obedient _or_
disobedient to God."--They went a step further: the "will of God" (in
other words some means necessary for preserving the power of the
priests) had to be _determined_--and to this end they had to have a
"revelation." In plain English, a gigantic literary fraud had to be
perpetrated, and "holy scriptures" had to be concocted--and so, with the
utmost hierarchical pomp, and days of penance and much lamentation over
the long days of "sin" now ended, they were duly published. The "will of
God," it appears, had long stood like a rock; the trouble was that
mankind had neglected the "holy scriptures".... But the "will of God"
had already been revealed to Moses.... What happened? Simply this: the
priest had formulated, once and for all time and with the strictest
meticulousness, what tithes were to be paid to him, from the largest to
the smallest (--not forgetting the most appetizing cuts of meat, for
the priest is a great consumer of beefsteaks); in brief, he let it be
known just _what he wanted_, what "the will of God" was.... From this
time forward things were so arranged that the priest became
_indispensable everywhere_; at all the great natural events of life, at
birth, at marriage, in sickness, at death, not to say at the
"_sacrifice_" (that is, at meal-times), the holy parasite put in his
appearance, and proceeded to _denaturize_ it--in his own phrase, to
"sanctify" it.... For this should be noted: that every natural habit,
every natural institution (the state, the administration of justice,
marriage, the care of the sick and of the poor), everything demanded by
the life-instinct, in short, everything that has any value _in itself_,
is reduced to absolute worthlessness and even made the _reverse_ of
valuable by the parasitism of priests (or, if you chose, by the "moral
order of the world"). The fact requires a sanction--a power to _grant
values_ becomes necessary, and the only way it can create such values is
by denying nature.... The priest depreciates and desecrates nature: it
is only at this price that he can exist at all.--Disobedience to God,
which actually means to the priest, to "the law," now gets the name of
"sin"; the means prescribed for "reconciliation with God" are, of
course, precisely the means which bring one most effectively under the
thumb of the priest; he alone can "save".... Psychologically considered,
"sins" are indispensable to every society organized on an ecclesiastical
basis; they are the only reliable weapons of power; the priest _lives_
upon sins; it is necessary to him that there be "sinning".... Prime
axiom: "God forgiveth him that repenteth"--in plain English, _him that
submitteth to the priest_.


27.

Christianity sprang from a soil so corrupt that on it everything
natural, every natural value, every _reality_ was opposed by the deepest
instincts of the ruling class--it grew up as a sort of war to the death
upon reality, and as such it has never been surpassed. The "holy
people," who had adopted priestly values and priestly names for all
things, and who, with a terrible logical consistency, had rejected
everything of the earth as "unholy," "worldly," "sinful"--this people
put its instinct into a final formula that was logical to the point of
self-annihilation: as _Christianity_ it actually denied even the last
form of reality, the "holy people," the "chosen people," _Jewish_
reality itself. The phenomenon is of the first order of importance: the
small insurrectionary movement which took the name of Jesus of Nazareth
is simply the Jewish instinct _redivivus_--in other words, it is the
priestly instinct come to such a pass that it can no longer endure the
priest as a fact; it is the discovery of a state of existence even more
fantastic than any before it, of a vision of life even more _unreal_
than that necessary to an ecclesiastical organization. Christianity
actually _denies_ the church....

I am unable to determine what was the target of the insurrection said to
have been led (whether rightly or _wrongly_) by Jesus, if it was not the
Jewish church--"church" being here used in exactly the same sense that
the word has today. It was an insurrection against the "good and just,"
against the "prophets of Israel," against the whole hierarchy of
society--_not_ against corruption, but against caste, privilege, order,
formalism. It was _unbelief_ in "superior men," a Nay flung at
everything that priests and theologians stood for. But the hierarchy
that was called into question, if only for an instant, by this movement
was the structure of piles which, above everything, was necessary to the
safety of the Jewish people in the midst of the "waters"--it represented
their _last_ possibility of survival; it was the final _residuum_ of
their independent political existence; an attack upon it was an attack
upon the most profound national instinct, the most powerful national
will to live, that has ever appeared on earth. This saintly anarchist,
who aroused the people of the abyss, the outcasts and "sinners," the
Chandala of Judaism, to rise in revolt against the established order of
things--and in language which, if the Gospels are to be credited, would
get him sent to Siberia today--this man was certainly a political
criminal, at least in so far as it was possible to be one in so
_absurdly unpolitical_ a community. This is what brought him to the
cross: the proof thereof is to be found in the inscription that was put
upon the cross. He died for his _own_ sins--there is not the slightest
ground for believing, no matter how often it is asserted, that he died
for the sins of others.--


28.

As to whether he himself was conscious of this contradiction--whether,
in fact, this was the only contradiction he was cognizant of--that is
quite another question. Here, for the first time, I touch upon the
problem of the _psychology of the Saviour_.--I confess, to begin with,
that there are very few books which offer me harder reading than the
Gospels. My difficulties are quite different from those which enabled
the learned curiosity of the German mind to achieve one of its most
unforgettable triumphs. It is a long while since I, like all other young
scholars, enjoyed with all the sapient laboriousness of a fastidious
philologist the work of the incomparable Strauss.[5] At that time I was
twenty years old: now I am too serious for that sort of thing. What do I
care for the contradictions of "tradition"? How can any one call pious
legends "traditions"? The histories of saints present the most dubious
variety of literature in existence; to examine them by the scientific
method, _in the entire absence of corroborative documents_, seems to me
to condemn the whole inquiry from the start--it is simply learned
idling....

[5] David Friedrich Strauss (1808-74), author of "Das Leben Jesu"
(1835-6), a very famous work in its day. Nietzsche here refers to it.


29.

What concerns _me_ is the psychological type of the Saviour. This type
might be depicted in the Gospels, in however mutilated a form and
however much overladen with extraneous characters--that is, in _spite_
of the Gospels; just as the figure of Francis of Assisi shows itself in
his legends in spite of his legends. It is _not_ a question of mere
truthful evidence as to what he did, what he said and how he actually
died; the question is, whether his type is still conceivable, whether it
has been handed down to us.--All the attempts that I know of to read the
_history_ of a "soul" in the Gospels seem to me to reveal only a
lamentable psychological levity. M. Renan, that mountebank _in
psychologicus_, has contributed the two most _unseemly_ notions to this
business of explaining the type of Jesus: the notion of the _genius_ and
that of the _hero_ ("_heros_"). But if there is anything essentially
unevangelical, it is surely the concept of the hero. What the Gospels
make instinctive is precisely the reverse of all heroic struggle, of
all taste for conflict: the very incapacity for resistance is here
converted into something moral: ("resist not evil!"--the most profound
sentence in the Gospels, perhaps the true key to them), to wit, the
blessedness of peace, of gentleness, the _inability_ to be an enemy.
What is the meaning of "glad tidings"?--The true life, the life eternal
has been found--it is not merely promised, it is here, it is in _you_;
it is the life that lies in love free from all retreats and exclusions,
from all keeping of distances. Every one is the child of God--Jesus
claims nothing for himself alone--as the child of God each man is the
equal of every other man.... Imagine making Jesus a _hero_!--And what a
tremendous misunderstanding appears in the word "genius"! Our whole
conception of the "spiritual," the whole conception of our civilization,
could have had no meaning in the world that Jesus lived in. In the
strict sense of the physiologist, a quite different word ought to be
used here.... We all know that there is a morbid sensibility of the
tactile nerves which causes those suffering from it to recoil from every
touch, and from every effort to grasp a solid object. Brought to its
logical conclusion, such a physiological _habitus_ becomes an
instinctive hatred of all reality, a flight into the "intangible," into
the "incomprehensible"; a distaste for all formulae, for all conceptions
of time and space, for everything established--customs, institutions,
the church--; a feeling of being at home in a world in which no sort of
reality survives, a merely "inner" world, a "true" world, an "eternal"
world.... "The Kingdom of God is within _you_"....


30.

_The instinctive hatred of reality_: the consequence of an extreme
susceptibility to pain and irritation--so great that merely to be
"touched" becomes unendurable, for every sensation is too profound.

_The instinctive exclusion of all aversion, all hostility, all bounds
and distances in feeling_: the consequence of an extreme susceptibility
to pain and irritation--so great that it senses all resistance, all
compulsion to resistance, as unbearable _anguish_ (--that is to say, as
_harmful_, as _prohibited_ by the instinct of self-preservation), and
regards blessedness (joy) as possible only when it is no longer
necessary to offer resistance to anybody or anything, however evil or
dangerous--love, as the only, as the _ultimate_ possibility of life....

These are the two _physiological realities_ upon and out of which the
doctrine of salvation has sprung. I call them a sublime
super-development of hedonism upon a thoroughly unsalubrious soil. What
stands most closely related to them, though with a large admixture of
Greek vitality and nerve-force, is epicureanism, the theory of salvation
of paganism. Epicurus was a _typical decadent_: I was the first to
recognize him.--The fear of pain, even of infinitely slight pain--the
end of this _can_ be nothing save a _religion of love_....


31.

I have already given my answer to the problem. The prerequisite to it is
the assumption that the type of the Saviour has reached us only in a
greatly distorted form. This distortion is very probable: there are many
reasons why a type of that sort should not be handed down in a pure
form, complete and free of additions. The milieu in which this strange
figure moved must have left marks upon him, and more must have been
imprinted by the history, the _destiny_, of the early Christian
communities; the latter indeed, must have embellished the type
retrospectively with characters which can be understood only as serving
the purposes of war and of propaganda. That strange and sickly world
into which the Gospels lead us--a world apparently out of a Russian
novel, in which the scum of society, nervous maladies and "childish"
idiocy keep a tryst--must, in any case, have _coarsened_ the type: the
first disciples, in particular, must have been forced to translate an
existence visible only in symbols and incomprehensibilities into their
own crudity, in order to understand it at all--in their sight the type
could take on reality only after it had been recast in a familiar
mould.... The prophet, the messiah, the future judge, the teacher of
morals, the worker of wonders, John the Baptist--all these merely
presented chances to misunderstand it.... Finally, let us not underrate
the _proprium_ of all great, and especially all sectarian veneration: it
tends to erase from the venerated objects all its original traits and
idiosyncrasies, often so painfully strange--_it does not even see
them_. It is greatly to be regretted that no Dostoyevsky lived in the
neighbourhood of this most interesting _decadent_--I mean some one who
would have felt the poignant charm of such a compound of the sublime,
the morbid and the childish. In the last analysis, the type, as a type
of the _decadence_, may actually have been peculiarly complex and
contradictory: such a possibility is not to be lost sight of.
Nevertheless, the probabilities seem to be against it, for in that case
tradition would have been particularly accurate and objective, whereas
we have reasons for assuming the contrary. Meanwhile, there is a
contradiction between the peaceful preacher of the mount, the sea-shore
and the fields, who appears like a new Buddha on a soil very unlike
India's, and the aggressive fanatic, the mortal enemy of theologians and
ecclesiastics, who stands glorified by Renan's malice as "_le grand
maitre en ironie_." I myself haven't any doubt that the greater part of
this venom (and no less of _esprit_) got itself into the concept of the
Master only as a result of the excited nature of Christian propaganda:
we all know the unscrupulousness of sectarians when they set out to turn
their leader into an _apologia_ for themselves. When the early
Christians had need of an adroit, contentious, pugnacious and
maliciously subtle theologian to tackle other theologians, they
_created_ a "god" that met that need, just as they put into his mouth
without hesitation certain ideas that were necessary to them but that
were utterly at odds with the Gospels--"the second coming," "the last
judgment," all sorts of expectations and promises, current at the
time.--


32.

I can only repeat that I set myself against all efforts to intrude the
fanatic into the figure of the Saviour: the very word _imperieux_, used
by Renan, is alone enough to _annul_ the type. What the "glad tidings"
tell us is simply that there are no more contradictions; the kingdom of
heaven belongs to _children_; the faith that is voiced here is no more
an embattled faith--it is at hand, it has been from the beginning, it is
a sort of recrudescent childishness of the spirit. The physiologists, at
all events, are familiar with such a delayed and incomplete puberty in
the living organism, the result of degeneration. A faith of this sort is
not furious, it does not denounce, it does not defend itself: it does
not come with "the sword"--it does not realize how it will one day set
man against man. It does not manifest itself either by miracles, or by
rewards and promises, or by "scriptures": it is itself, first and last,
its own miracle, its own reward, its own promise, its own "kingdom of
God." This faith does not formulate itself--it simply _lives_, and so
guards itself against formulae. To be sure, the accident of environment,
of educational background gives prominence to concepts of a certain
sort: in primitive Christianity one finds _only_ concepts of a
Judaeo-Semitic character (--that of eating and drinking at the last
supper belongs to this category--an idea which, like everything else
Jewish, has been badly mauled by the church). But let us be careful not
to see in all this anything more than symbolical language, semantics[6]
an opportunity to speak in parables. It is only on the theory that no
work is to be taken literally that this anti-realist is able to speak at
all. Set down among Hindus he would have made use of the concepts of
Sankhya,[7] and among Chinese he would have employed those of
Lao-tse[8]--and in neither case would it have made any difference to
him.--With a little freedom in the use of words, one might actually call
Jesus a "free spirit"[9]--he cares nothing for what is established: the
word _killeth_,[10] whatever is established _killeth_. The idea of
"life" as an _experience_, as he alone conceives it, stands opposed to
his mind to every sort of word, formula, law, belief and dogma. He
speaks only of inner things: "life" or "truth" or "light" is his word
for the innermost--in his sight everything else, the whole of reality,
all nature, even language, has significance only as sign, as
allegory.--Here it is of paramount importance to be led into no error by
the temptations lying in Christian, or rather _ecclesiastical_
prejudices: such a symbolism _par excellence_ stands outside all
religion, all notions of worship, all history, all natural science, all
worldly experience, all knowledge, all politics, all psychology, all
books, all art--his "wisdom" is precisely a _pure ignorance_[11] of all
such things. He has never heard of _culture_; he doesn't have to make
war on it--he doesn't even deny it.... The same thing may be said of the
_state_, of the whole bourgeoise social order, of labour, of war--he has
no ground for denying "the world," for he knows nothing of the
ecclesiastical concept of "the world".... _Denial_ is precisely the
thing that is impossible to him.--In the same way he lacks argumentative
capacity, and has no belief that an article of faith, a "truth," may be
established by proofs (--_his_ proofs are inner "lights," subjective
sensations of happiness and self-approval, simple "proofs of power"--).
Such a doctrine _cannot_ contradict: it doesn't know that other
doctrines exist, or _can_ exist, and is wholly incapable of imagining
anything opposed to it.... If anything of the sort is ever encountered,
it laments the "blindness" with sincere sympathy--for it alone has
"light"--but it does not offer objections....

[6] The word _Semiotik_ is in the text, but it is probable that
_Semantik_ is what Nietzsche had in mind.

[7] One of the six great systems of Hindu philosophy.

[8] The reputed founder of Taoism.

[9] Nietzsche's name for one accepting his own philosophy.

[10] That is, the strict letter of the law--the chief target of Jesus's
early preaching.

[11] A reference to the "pure ignorance" (_reine Thorheit_) of Parsifal.


33.

In the whole psychology of the "Gospels" the concepts of guilt and
punishment are lacking, and so is that of reward. "Sin," which means
anything that puts a distance between God and man, is abolished--_this
is precisely the "glad tidings."_ Eternal bliss is not merely promised,
nor is it bound up with conditions: it is conceived as the _only_
reality--what remains consists merely of signs useful in speaking of it.

The _results_ of such a point of view project themselves into a new _way
of life_, the special evangelical way of life. It is not a "belief" that
marks off the Christian; he is distinguished by a different mode of
action; he acts _differently_. He offers no resistance, either by word
or in his heart, to those who stand against him. He draws no distinction
between strangers and countrymen, Jews and Gentiles ("neighbour," of
course, means fellow-believer, Jew). He is angry with no one, and he
despises no one. He neither appeals to the courts of justice nor heeds
their mandates ("Swear not at all").[12] He never under any
circumstances divorces his wife, even when he has proofs of her
infidelity.--And under all of this is one principle; all of it arises
from one instinct.--

[12] Matthew v, 34.

The life of the Saviour was simply a carrying out of this way of
life--and so was his death.... He no longer needed any formula or ritual
in his relations with God--not even prayer. He had rejected the whole of
the Jewish doctrine of repentance and atonement; he _knew_ that it was
only by a _way_ of life that one could feel one's self "divine,"
"blessed," "evangelical," a "child of God." _Not_ by "repentance," _not_
by "prayer and forgiveness" is the way to God: _only the Gospel way_
leads to God--it is _itself_ "God!"--What the Gospels _abolished_ was
the Judaism in the concepts of "sin," "forgiveness of sin," "faith,"
"salvation through faith"--the whole _ecclesiastical_ dogma of the Jews
was denied by the "glad tidings."

The deep instinct which prompts the Christian how to _live_ so that he
will feel that he is "in heaven" and is "immortal," despite many reasons
for feeling that he is _not_ "in heaven": this is the only psychological
reality in "salvation."--A new way of life, _not_ a new faith....


34.

If I understand anything at all about this great symbolist, it is this:
that he regarded only _subjective_ realities as realities, as
"truths"--that he saw everything else, everything natural, temporal,
spatial and historical, merely as signs, as materials for parables. The
concept of "the Son of God" does not connote a concrete person in
history, an isolated and definite individual, but an "eternal" fact, a
psychological symbol set free from the concept of time. The same thing
is true, and in the highest sense, of the _God_ of this typical
symbolist, of the "kingdom of God," and of the "sonship of God." Nothing
could be more un-Christian than the _crude ecclesiastical_ notions of
God as a _person_, of a "kingdom of God" that is to come, of a "kingdom
of heaven" beyond, and of a "son of God" as the _second person_ of the
Trinity. All this--if I may be forgiven the phrase--is like thrusting
one's fist into the eye (and what an eye!) of the Gospels: a disrespect
for symbols amounting to _world-historical cynicism_.... But it is
nevertheless obvious enough what is meant by the symbols "Father" and
"Son"--not, of course, to every one--: the word "Son" expresses
_entrance_ into the feeling that there is a general transformation of
all things (beatitude), and "Father" expresses _that feeling
itself_--the sensation of eternity and of perfection.--I am ashamed to
remind you of what the church has made of this symbolism: has it not set
an Amphitryon story[13] at the threshold of the Christian "faith"? And a
dogma of "immaculate conception" for good measure?... _And thereby it
has robbed conception of its immaculateness_--

[13] Amphitryon was the son of Alcaeus, King of Tiryns.
His wife was Alcmene. During his absence she was visited by Zeus, and
bore Heracles.

The "kingdom of heaven" is a state of the heart--not something to come
"beyond the world" or "after death." The whole idea of natural death is
_absent_ from the Gospels: death is not a bridge, not a passing; it is
absent because it belongs to a quite different, a merely apparent world,
useful only as a symbol. The "hour of death" is _not_ a Christian
idea--"hours," time, the physical life and its crises have no existence
for the bearer of "glad tidings."... The "kingdom of God" is not
something that men wait for: it had no yesterday and no day after
tomorrow, it is not going to come at a "millennium"--it is an experience
of the heart, it is everywhere and it is nowhere....


35.

This "bearer of glad tidings" died as he lived and _taught_--_not_ to
"save mankind," but to show mankind how to live. It was a _way of life_
that he bequeathed to man: his demeanour before the judges, before the
officers, before his accusers--his demeanour on the _cross_. He does not
resist; he does not defend his rights; he makes no effort to ward off
the most extreme penalty--more, _he invites it_.... And he prays,
suffers and loves _with_ those, _in_ those, who do him evil.... _Not_ to
defend one's self, _not_ to show anger, _not_ to lay blames.... On the
contrary, to submit even to the Evil One--to _love_ him....


36.

--We free spirits--we are the first to have the necessary prerequisite
to understanding what nineteen centuries have misunderstood--that
instinct and passion for integrity which makes war upon the "holy lie"
even more than upon all other lies.... Mankind was unspeakably far from
our benevolent and cautious neutrality, from that discipline of the
spirit which alone makes possible the solution of such strange and
subtle things: what men always sought, with shameless egoism, was their
_own_ advantage therein; they created the _church_ out of denial of the
Gospels....

Whoever sought for signs of an ironical divinity's hand in the great
drama of existence would find no small indication thereof in the
_stupendous question-mark_ that is called Christianity. That mankind
should be on its knees before the very antithesis of what was the
origin, the meaning and the _law_ of the Gospels--that in the concept of
the "church" the very things should be pronounced holy that the "bearer
of glad tidings" regards as _beneath_ him and _behind_ him--it would be
impossible to surpass this as a grand example of _world-historical
irony_--


37.

--Our age is proud of its historical sense: how, then, could it delude
itself into believing that the _crude fable of the wonder-worker and
Saviour_ constituted the beginnings of Christianity--and that everything
spiritual and symbolical in it only came later? Quite to the contrary,
the whole history of Christianity--from the death on the cross
onward--is the history of a progressively clumsier misunderstanding of
an _original_ symbolism. With every extension of Christianity among
larger and ruder masses, even less capable of grasping the principles
that gave birth to it, the need arose to make it more and more _vulgar_
and _barbarous_--it absorbed the teachings and rites of all the
_subterranean_ cults of the _imperium Romanum_, and the absurdities
engendered by all sorts of sickly reasoning. It was the fate of
Christianity that its faith had to become as sickly, as low and as
vulgar as the needs were sickly, low and vulgar to which it had to
administer. A _sickly barbarism_ finally lifts itself to power as the
church--the church, that incarnation of deadly hostility to all honesty,
to all loftiness of soul, to all discipline of the spirit, to all
spontaneous and kindly humanity.--_Christian_ values--_noble_ values: it
is only we, we _free_ spirits, who have re-established this greatest of
all antitheses in values!...


38.

--I cannot, at this place, avoid a sigh. There are days when I am
visited by a feeling blacker than the blackest melancholy--_contempt of
man_. Let me leave no doubt as to _what_ I despise, _whom_ I despise:
it is the man of today, the man with whom I am unhappily
contemporaneous. The man of today--I am suffocated by his foul
breath!... Toward the past, like all who understand, I am full of
tolerance, which is to say, _generous_ self-control: with gloomy caution
I pass through whole millenniums of this madhouse of a world, call it
"Christianity," "Christian faith" or the "Christian church," as you
will--I take care not to hold mankind responsible for its lunacies. But
my feeling changes and breaks out irresistibly the moment I enter modern
times, _our_ times. Our age _knows better_.... What was formerly merely
sickly now becomes indecent--it is indecent to be a Christian today.
_And here my disgust begins._--I look about me: not a word survives of
what was once called "truth"; we can no longer bear to hear a priest
pronounce the word. Even a man who makes the most modest pretensions to
integrity _must_ know that a theologian, a priest, a pope of today not
only errs when he speaks, but actually _lies_--and that he no longer
escapes blame for his lie through "innocence" or "ignorance." The priest
knows, as every one knows, that there is no longer any "God," or any
"sinner," or any "Saviour"--that "free will" and the "moral order of the
world" are lies--: serious reflection, the profound self-conquest of the
spirit, _allow_ no man to pretend that he does _not_ know it.... _All_
the ideas of the church are now recognized for what they are--as the
worst counterfeits in existence, invented to debase nature and all
natural values; the priest himself is seen as he actually is--as the
most dangerous form of parasite, as the venomous spider of creation....
We know, our _conscience_ now knows--just _what_ the real value of all
those sinister inventions of priest and church has been and _what ends
they have served_, with their debasement of humanity to a state of
self-pollution, the very sight of which excites loathing,--the concepts
"the other world," "the last judgment," "the immortality of the soul,"
the "soul" itself: they are all merely so many instruments of torture,
systems of cruelty, whereby the priest becomes master and remains
master.... Every one knows this, _but nevertheless things remain as
before_. What has become of the last trace of decent feeling, of
self-respect, when our statesmen, otherwise an unconventional class of
men and thoroughly anti-Christian in their acts, now call themselves
Christians and go to the communion-table?... A prince at the head of his
armies, magnificent as the expression of the egoism and arrogance of his
people--and yet acknowledging, _without_ any shame, that he is a
Christian!... Whom, then, does Christianity deny? _what_ does it call
"the world"? To be a _soldier_, to be a judge, to be a patriot; to
defend one's self; to be careful of one's honour; to desire one's own
advantage; to be _proud_ ... every act of everyday, every instinct,
every valuation that shows itself in a _deed_, is now anti-Christian:
what a _monster of falsehood_ the modern man must be to call himself
nevertheless, and _without_ shame, a Christian!--


39.

--I shall go back a bit, and tell you the _authentic_ history of
Christianity.--The very word "Christianity" is a misunderstanding--at
bottom there was only one Christian, and he died on the cross. The
"Gospels" _died_ on the cross. What, from that moment onward, was called
the "Gospels" was the very reverse of what _he_ had lived: "bad
tidings," a _Dysangelium_.[14] It is an error amounting to
nonsensicality to see in "faith," and particularly in faith in salvation
through Christ, the distinguishing mark of the Christian: only the
Christian _way of life_, the life _lived_ by him who died on the cross,
is Christian.... To this day _such_ a life is still possible, and for
_certain_ men even necessary: genuine, primitive Christianity will
remain possible in all ages.... _Not_ faith, but acts; above all, an
_avoidance_ of acts, a different _state of being_.... States of
consciousness, faith of a sort, the acceptance, for example, of anything
as true--as every psychologist knows, the value of these things is
perfectly indifferent and fifth-rate compared to that of the instincts:
strictly speaking, the whole concept of intellectual causality is false.
To reduce being a Christian, the state of Christianity, to an acceptance
of truth, to a mere phenomenon of consciousness, is to formulate the
negation of Christianity. _In fact, there are no Christians._ The
"Christian"--he who for two thousand years has passed as a Christian--is
simply a psychological self-delusion. Closely examined, it appears
that, _despite_ all his "faith," he has been ruled _only_ by his
instincts--and _what instincts_!--In all ages--for example, in the case
of Luther--"faith" has been no more than a cloak, a pretense, a _curtain_
behind which the instincts have played their game--a shrewd _blindness_
to the domination of _certain_ of the instincts.... I have already
called "faith" the specially Christian form of _shrewdness_--people
always _talk_ of their "faith" and _act_ according to their
instincts.... In the world of ideas of the Christian there is nothing
that so much as touches reality: on the contrary, one recognizes
an instinctive _hatred_ of reality as the motive power, the only motive
power at the bottom of Christianity. What follows therefrom? That even
here, in _psychologicis_, there is a radical error, which is to say one
conditioning fundamentals, which is to say, one in _substance_. Take
away one idea and put a genuine reality in its place--and the whole of
Christianity crumbles to nothingness!--Viewed calmly, this strangest of
all phenomena, a religion not only depending on errors, but inventive
and ingenious _only_ in devising injurious errors, poisonous to life
and to the heart--this remains a _spectacle for the gods_--for those
gods who are also philosophers, and whom I have encountered, for
example, in the celebrated dialogues at Naxos. At the moment when their
_disgust_ leaves them (--and us!) they will be thankful for the
spectacle afforded by the Christians: perhaps because of _this_ curious
exhibition alone the wretched little planet called the earth deserves a
glance from omnipotence, a show of divine interest.... Therefore, let us
not underestimate the Christians: the Christian, false _to the point of
innocence_, is far above the ape--in its application to the Christians a
well-known theory of descent becomes a mere piece of politeness....

[14] So in the text. One of Nietzsche's numerous coinages, obviously
suggested by _Evangelium_, the German for _gospel_.


40.

--The fate of the Gospels was decided by death--it hung on the "cross."...
It was only death, that unexpected and shameful death; it was only
the cross, which was usually reserved for the canaille only--it was only
this appalling paradox which brought the disciples face to face with the
real riddle: "_Who was it? what was it_?"--The feeling of dismay, of
profound affront and injury; the suspicion that such a death might
involve a _refutation_ of their cause; the terrible question, "Why just
in this way?"--this state of mind is only too easy to understand. Here
everything _must_ be accounted for as necessary; everything must have a
meaning, a reason, the highest sort of reason; the love of a disciple
excludes all chance. Only then did the chasm of doubt yawn: "_Who_ put
him to death? who was his natural enemy?"--this question flashed like a
lightning-stroke. Answer: dominant Judaism, its ruling class. From that
moment, one found one's self in revolt _against_ the established order,
and began to understand Jesus as _in revolt against the established
order_. Until then this militant, this nay-saying, nay-doing element in
his character had been lacking; what is more, he had appeared to present
its opposite. Obviously, the little community had _not_ understood what
was precisely the most important thing of all: the example offered by
this way of dying, the freedom from and superiority to every feeling of
_ressentiment_--a plain indication of how little he was understood at
all! All that Jesus could hope to accomplish by his death, in itself,
was to offer the strongest possible proof, or _example_, of his
teachings in the most public manner.... But his disciples were very far
from _forgiving_ his death--though to have done so would have accorded
with the Gospels in the highest degree; and neither were they prepared
to _offer_ themselves, with gentle and serene calmness of heart, for a
similar death.... On the contrary, it was precisely the most
unevangelical of feelings, _revenge_, that now possessed them. It seemed
impossible that the cause should perish with his death: "recompense" and
"judgment" became necessary (--yet what could be less evangelical than
"recompense," "punishment," and "sitting in judgment"!). Once more the
popular belief in the coming of a messiah appeared in the foreground;
attention was rivetted upon an historical moment: the "kingdom of God"
is to come, with judgment upon his enemies.... But in all this there was
a wholesale misunderstanding: imagine the "kingdom of God" as a last
act, as a mere promise! The Gospels had been, in fact, the incarnation,
the fulfilment, the _realization_ of this "kingdom of God." It was only
now that all the familiar contempt for and bitterness against Pharisees
and theologians began to appear in the character of the Master--he was
thereby _turned_ into a Pharisee and theologian himself! On the other
hand, the savage veneration of these completely unbalanced souls could
no longer endure the Gospel doctrine, taught by Jesus, of the equal
right of all men to be children of God: their revenge took the form of
_elevating_ Jesus in an extravagant fashion, and thus separating him
from themselves: just as, in earlier times, the Jews, to revenge
themselves upon their enemies, separated themselves from their God, and
placed him on a great height. The One God and the Only Son of God: both
were products of _ressentiment_....


41.

--And from that time onward an absurd problem offered itself: "how
_could_ God allow it!" To which the deranged reason of the little
community formulated an answer that was terrifying in its absurdity: God
gave his son as a _sacrifice_ for the forgiveness of sins. At once there
was an end of the gospels! Sacrifice for sin, and in its most obnoxious
and barbarous form: sacrifice of the _innocent_ for the sins of the
guilty! What appalling paganism!--Jesus himself had done away with the
very concept of "guilt," he denied that there was any gulf fixed between
God and man; he _lived_ this unity between God and man, and that was
precisely _his_ "glad tidings".... And _not_ as a mere privilege!--From
this time forward the type of the Saviour was corrupted, bit by bit, by
the doctrine of judgment and of the second coming, the doctrine of death
as a sacrifice, the doctrine of the _resurrection_, by means of which
the entire concept of "blessedness," the whole and only reality of the
gospels, is juggled away--in favour of a state of existence _after_
death!... St. Paul, with that rabbinical impudence which shows itself in
all his doings, gave a logical quality to that conception, that
_indecent_ conception, in this way: "_If_ Christ did not rise from the
dead, then all our faith is in vain!"--And at once there sprang from the
Gospels the most contemptible of all unfulfillable promises, the
_shameless_ doctrine of personal immortality.... Paul even preached it
as a _reward_....


42.

One now begins to see just _what_ it was that came to an end with the
death on the cross: a new and thoroughly original effort to found a
Buddhistic peace movement, and so establish _happiness on earth_--real,
_not_ merely promised. For this remains--as I have already pointed
out--the essential difference between the two religions of _decadence_:
Buddhism promises nothing, but actually fulfils; Christianity promises
everything, but _fulfils nothing_.--Hard upon the heels of the "glad
tidings" came the worst imaginable: those of Paul. In Paul is incarnated
the very opposite of the "bearer of glad tidings"; he represents the
genius for hatred, the vision of hatred, the relentless logic of hatred.
_What_, indeed, has not this dysangelist sacrificed to hatred! Above
all, the Saviour: he nailed him to _his own_ cross. The life, the
example, the teaching, the death of Christ, the meaning and the law of
the whole gospels--nothing was left of all this after that counterfeiter
in hatred had reduced it to his uses. Surely _not_ reality; surely _not_
historical truth!... Once more the priestly instinct of the Jew
perpetrated the same old master crime against history--he simply struck
out the yesterday and the day before yesterday of Christianity, and
_invented his own history of Christian beginnings_. Going further, he
treated the history of Israel to another falsification, so that it
became a mere prologue to _his_ achievement: all the prophets, it now
appeared, had referred to _his_ "Saviour."... Later on the church even
falsified the history of man in order to make it a prologue to
Christianity.... The figure of the Saviour, his teaching, his way of
life, his death, the meaning of his death, even the consequences of his
death--nothing remained untouched, nothing remained in even remote
contact with reality. Paul simply shifted the centre of gravity of that
whole life to a place _behind_ this existence--in the _lie_ of the
"risen" Jesus. At bottom, he had no use for the life of the
Saviour--what he needed was the death on the cross, _and_ something
more. To see anything honest in such a man as Paul, whose home was at
the centre of the Stoical enlightenment, when he converts an
hallucination into a _proof_ of the resurrection of the Saviour, or even
to believe his tale that he suffered from this hallucination
himself--this would be a genuine _niaiserie_ in a psychologist. Paul
willed the end; _therefore_ he also willed the means.... What he himself
didn't believe was swallowed readily enough by the idiots among whom he
spread _his_ teaching.--What _he_ wanted was power; in Paul the priest
once more reached out for power--he had use only for such concepts,
teachings and symbols as served the purpose of tyrannizing over the
masses and organizing mobs. _What_ was the only part of Christianity
that Mohammed borrowed later on? Paul's invention, his device for
establishing priestly tyranny and organizing the mob: the belief in the
immortality of the soul--_that is to say, the doctrine of
"judgment"_....


43.

When the centre of gravity of life is placed, _not_ in life itself, but
in "the beyond"--in _nothingness_--then one has taken away its centre of
gravity altogether. The vast lie of personal immortality destroys all
reason, all natural instinct--henceforth, everything in the instincts
that is beneficial, that fosters life and that safeguards the future is
a cause of suspicion. So to live that life no longer has any meaning:
_this_ is now the "meaning" of life.... Why be public-spirited? Why take
any pride in descent and forefathers? Why labour together, trust one
another, or concern one's self about the common welfare, and try to
serve it?... Merely so many "temptations," so many strayings from the
"straight path."--"_One_ thing only is necessary".... That every man,
because he has an "immortal soul," is as good as every other man; that
in an infinite universe of things the "salvation" of _every_ individual
may lay claim to eternal importance; that insignificant bigots and the
three-fourths insane may assume that the laws of nature are constantly
_suspended_ in their behalf--it is impossible to lavish too much
contempt upon such a magnification of every sort of selfishness to
infinity, to _insolence_. And yet Christianity has to thank precisely
_this_ miserable flattery of personal vanity for its _triumph_--it was
thus that it lured all the botched, the dissatisfied, the fallen upon
evil days, the whole refuse and off-scouring of humanity to its side.
The "salvation of the soul"--in plain English: "the world revolves
around _me_."... The poisonous doctrine, "_equal_ rights for all," has
been propagated as a Christian principle: out of the secret nooks and
crannies of bad instinct Christianity has waged a deadly war upon all
feelings of reverence and distance between man and man, which is to
say, upon the first _prerequisite_ to every step upward, to every
development of civilization--out of the _ressentiment_ of the masses it
has forged its chief weapons against _us_, against everything noble,
joyous and high-spirited on earth, against our happiness on earth.... To
allow "immortality" to every Peter and Paul was the greatest, the most
vicious outrage upon _noble_ humanity ever perpetrated.--_And_ let us
not underestimate the fatal influence that Christianity has had, even
upon politics! Nowadays no one has courage any more for special rights,
for the right of dominion, for feelings of honourable pride in himself
and his equals--for the _pathos of distance_.... Our politics is sick
with this lack of courage!--The aristocratic attitude of mind has been
undermined by the lie of the equality of souls; and if belief in the
"privileges of the majority" makes and _will continue to make_
revolutions--it is Christianity, let us not doubt, and _Christian_
valuations, which convert every revolution into a carnival of blood and
crime! Christianity is a revolt of all creatures that creep on the
ground against everything that is _lofty_: the gospel of the "lowly"
_lowers_....


44.

--The gospels are invaluable as evidence of the corruption that was
already persistent _within_ the primitive community. That which Paul,
with the cynical logic of a rabbi, later developed to a conclusion was
at bottom merely a process of decay that had begun with the death of the
Saviour.--These gospels cannot be read too carefully; difficulties lurk
behind every word. I confess--I hope it will not be held against
me--that it is precisely for this reason that they offer first-rate joy
to a psychologist--as the _opposite_ of all merely naive corruption, as
refinement _par excellence_, as an artistic triumph in psychological
corruption. The gospels, in fact, stand alone. The Bible as a whole is
not to be compared to them. Here we are among Jews: this is the _first_
thing to be borne in mind if we are not to lose the thread of the
matter. This positive genius for conjuring up a delusion of personal
"holiness" unmatched anywhere else, either in books or by men; this
elevation of fraud in word and attitude to the level of an _art_--all
this is not an accident due to the chance talents of an individual, or
to any violation of nature. The thing responsible is _race_. The whole
of Judaism appears in Christianity as the art of concocting holy lies,
and there, after many centuries of earnest Jewish training and hard
practice of Jewish technic, the business comes to the stage of mastery.
The Christian, that _ultima ratio_ of lying, is the Jew all over
again--he is _threefold_ the Jew.... The underlying will to make use
only of such concepts, symbols and attitudes as fit into priestly
practice, the instinctive repudiation of every _other_ mode of thought,
and every other method of estimating values and utilities--this is not
only tradition, it is _inheritance_: only as an inheritance is it able
to operate with the force of nature. The whole of mankind, even the best
minds of the best ages (with one exception, perhaps hardly human--),
have permitted themselves to be deceived. The gospels have been read as
a _book of innocence_ ... surely no small indication of the high skill
with which the trick has been done.--Of course, if we could actually
_see_ these astounding bigots and bogus saints, even if only for an
instant, the farce would come to an end,--and it is precisely because
_I_ cannot read a word of theirs without seeing their attitudinizing
that _I have made an end of them_.... I simply cannot endure the way
they have of rolling up their eyes.--For the majority, happily enough,
books are mere _literature_.--Let us not be led astray: they say "judge
not," and yet they condemn to hell whoever stands in their way. In
letting God sit in judgment they judge themselves; in glorifying God
they glorify themselves; in _demanding_ that every one show the virtues
which they themselves happen to be capable of--still more, which they
_must_ have in order to remain on top--they assume the grand air of men
struggling for virtue, of men engaging in a war that virtue may prevail.
"We live, we die, we sacrifice ourselves _for the good_" (--"the truth,"
"the light," "the kingdom of God"): in point of fact, they simply do
what they cannot help doing. Forced, like hypocrites, to be sneaky, to
hide in corners, to slink along in the shadows, they convert their
necessity into a _duty_: it is on grounds of duty that they account for
their lives of humility, and that humility becomes merely one more proof
of their piety.... Ah, that humble, chaste, charitable brand of fraud!
"Virtue itself shall bear witness for us."... One may read the gospels
as books of _moral_ seduction: these petty folks fasten themselves to
morality--they know the uses of morality! Morality is the best of all
devices for leading mankind _by the nose_!--The fact is that the
conscious conceit of the chosen here disguises itself as modesty: it is
in this way that _they_, the "community," the "good and just," range
themselves, once and for always, on one side, the side of "the
truth"--and the rest of mankind, "the world," on the other.... In _that_
we observe the most fatal sort of megalomania that the earth has ever
seen: little abortions of bigots and liars began to claim exclusive
rights in the concepts of "God," "the truth," "the light," "the spirit,"
"love," "wisdom" and "life," as if these things were synonyms of
themselves and thereby they sought to fence themselves off from the
"world"; little super-Jews, ripe for some sort of madhouse, turned
values upside down in order to meet _their_ notions, just as if the
Christian were the meaning, the salt, the standard and even the _last
judgment_ of all the rest.... The whole disaster was only made possible
by the fact that there already existed in the world a similar
megalomania, allied to this one in race, to wit, the _Jewish_: once a
chasm began to yawn between Jews and Judaeo-Christians, the latter had
no choice but to employ the self-preservative measures that the Jewish
instinct had devised, even _against_ the Jews themselves, whereas the
Jews had employed them only against non-Jews. The Christian is simply a
Jew of the "reformed" confession.--


45.

--I offer a few examples of the sort of thing these petty people have
got into their heads--what they have _put into the mouth_ of the Master:
the unalloyed creed of "beautiful souls."--

"And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart
thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against them.
Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha
in the day of judgment, than for that city" (Mark vi, 11)--How
_evangelical_!...

"And whosoever shall offend one of _these_ little ones that believe in
me, it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and he were cast into the sea" (Mark ix, 42).--How _evangelical_!...

"And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for
thee to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes
to be cast into hell fire; Where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not
quenched." (Mark ix, 47.[15])--It is not exactly the eye that is
meant....

[15] To which, without mentioning it, Nietzsche adds verse 48.

"Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here,
which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God
come with power." (Mark ix, 1.)--Well _lied_, lion![16]...

[16] A paraphrase of Demetrius' "Well roar'd, Lion!" in act v, scene 1
of "A Midsummer Night's Dream." The lion, of course, is the familiar
Christian symbol for Mark.

"Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me. _For_..." (_Note of a psychologist._ Christian
morality is refuted by its _fors_: its reasons are against it,--this
makes it Christian.) Mark viii, 34.--

"Judge not, that ye be not judged. With what measure ye mete, it shall
be measured to you again." (Matthew vii, 1.[17])--What a notion of
justice, of a "just" judge!...

[17] Nietzsche also quotes part of verse 2.

"For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even
the publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye
more _than others_? do not even the publicans so?" (Matthew v,
46.[18])--Principle of "Christian love": it insists upon being well
_paid_ in the end....

[18] The quotation also includes verse 47.

"But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses." (Matthew vi, 15.)--Very compromising for the
said "father."...

"But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you." (Matthew vi, 33.)--All these
things: namely, food, clothing, all the necessities of life. An _error_,
to put it mildly.... A bit before this God appears as a tailor, at least
in certain cases....

"Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward _is_
great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto the
prophets." (Luke vi, 23.)--_Impudent_ rabble! It compares itself to the
prophets....

"Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and _that_ the spirit of God
dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, _him shall God
destroy_; for the temple of God is holy, _which temple ye are_." (Paul,
1 Corinthians iii, 16.[19])--For that sort of thing one cannot have
enough contempt....

[19] And 17.

"Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world
shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?"
(Paul, 1 Corinthians vi, 2.)--Unfortunately, not merely the speech of
a lunatic.... This _frightful impostor_ then proceeds: "Know ye not
that we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to this
life?"...

"Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that in
the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by
the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.... Not many wise
men after the flesh, not men mighty, not many noble _are called_: But
God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise;
and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things
which are mighty; And base things of the world, and things which are
despised, hath God chosen, _yea_, and things which are not, to bring to
nought things that are: That no flesh should glory in his presence."
(Paul, 1 Corinthians i, 20ff.[20])--In order to _understand_ this
passage, a first-rate example of the psychology underlying every
Chandala-morality, one should read the first part of my "Genealogy of
Morals": there, for the first time, the antagonism between a _noble_
morality and a morality born of _ressentiment_ and impotent vengefulness
is exhibited. Paul was the greatest of all apostles of revenge....

[20] Verses 20, 21, 26, 27, 28, 29.


46.

--_What follows, then?_ That one had better put on gloves before reading
the New Testament. The presence of so much filth makes it very
advisable. One would as little choose "early Christians" for companions
as Polish Jews: not that one need seek out an objection to them....
Neither has a pleasant smell.--I have searched the New Testament in vain
for a single sympathetic touch; nothing is there that is free, kindly,
open-hearted or upright. In it humanity does not even make the first
step upward--the instinct for _cleanliness_ is lacking.... Only _evil_
instincts are there, and there is not even the courage of these evil
instincts. It is all cowardice; it is all a shutting of the eyes, a
self-deception. Every other book becomes clean, once one has read the
New Testament: for example, immediately after reading Paul I took up
with delight that most charming and wanton of scoffers, Petronius, of
whom one may say what Domenico Boccaccio wrote of Caesar Borgia to the
Duke of Parma: "_e tutto festo_"--immortally healthy, immortally
cheerful and sound.... These petty bigots make a capital miscalculation.
They attack, but everything they attack is thereby _distinguished_.
Whoever is attacked by an "early Christian" is surely _not_ befouled....
On the contrary, it is an honour to have an "early Christian" as an
opponent. One cannot read the New Testament without acquired admiration
for whatever it abuses--not to speak of the "wisdom of this world,"
which an impudent wind-bag tries to dispose of "by the foolishness of
preaching."... Even the scribes and pharisees are benefitted by such
opposition: they must certainly have been worth something to have been
hated in such an indecent manner. Hypocrisy--as if this were a charge
that the "early Christians" _dared_ to make!--After all, they were the
_privileged_, and that was enough: the hatred of the Chandala needed no
other excuse. The "early Christian"--and also, I fear, the "last
Christian," _whom I may perhaps live to see_--is a rebel against all
privilege by profound instinct--he lives and makes war for ever for
"equal rights."... Strictly speaking, he has no alternative. When a man
proposes to represent, in his own person, the "chosen of God"--or to be
a "temple of God," or a "judge of the angels"--then every _other_
criterion, whether based upon honesty, upon intellect, upon manliness
and pride, or upon beauty and freedom of the heart, becomes simply
"worldly"--_evil in itself_.... Moral: every word that comes from the
lips of an "early Christian" is a lie, and his every act is
instinctively dishonest--all his values, all his aims are noxious, but
_whoever_ he hates, _whatever_ he hates, has real _value_.... The
Christian, and particularly the Christian priest, is thus a _criterion
of values_.

--Must I add that, in the whole New Testament, there appears but a
_solitary_ figure worthy of honour? Pilate, the Roman viceroy. To regard
a Jewish imbroglio _seriously_--that was quite beyond him. One Jew more
or less--what did it matter?... The noble scorn of a Roman, before whom
the word "truth" was shamelessly mishandled, enriched the New Testament
with the only saying _that has any value_--and that is at once its
criticism and its _destruction_: "What is truth?..."


47.

--The thing that sets us apart is not that we are unable to find God,
either in history, or in nature, or behind nature--but that we regard
what has been honoured as God, not as "divine," but as pitiable, as
absurd, as injurious; not as a mere error, but as a _crime against
life_.... We deny that God is God.... If any one were to _show_ us this
Christian God, we'd be still less inclined to believe in him.--In a
formula: _deus, qualem Paulus creavit, dei negatio_.--Such a religion as
Christianity, which does not touch reality at a single point and which
goes to pieces the moment reality asserts its rights at any point, must
be inevitably the deadly enemy of the "wisdom of this world," which is
to say, of _science_--and it will give the name of good to whatever
means serve to poison, calumniate and _cry down_ all intellectual
discipline, all lucidity and strictness in matters of intellectual
conscience, and all noble coolness and freedom of the mind. "Faith," as
an imperative, vetoes science--_in praxi_, lying at any price.... Paul
_well knew_ that lying--that "faith"--was necessary; later on the church
borrowed the fact from Paul.--The God that Paul invented for himself, a
God who "reduced to absurdity" "the wisdom of this world" (especially
the two great enemies of superstition, philology and medicine), is in
truth only an indication of Paul's resolute _determination_ to
accomplish that very thing himself: to give one's own will the name of
God, _thora_--that is essentially Jewish. Paul _wants_ to dispose of the
"wisdom of this world": his enemies are the _good_ philologians and
physicians of the Alexandrine school--on them he makes his war. As a
matter of fact no man can be a _philologian_ or a physician without
being also _Antichrist_. That is to say, as a philologian a man sees
_behind_ the "holy books," and as a physician he sees _behind_ the
physiological degeneration of the typical Christian. The physician says
"incurable"; the philologian says "fraud."...


48.

--Has any one ever clearly understood the celebrated story at the
beginning of the Bible--of God's mortal terror of _science_?... No one,
in fact, has understood it. This priest-book _par excellence_ opens, as
is fitting, with the great inner difficulty of the priest: _he_ faces
only one great danger; _ergo_, "God" faces only one great danger.--

The old God, wholly "spirit," wholly the high-priest, wholly perfect, is
promenading his garden: he is bored and trying to kill time. Against
boredom even gods struggle in vain.[21] What does he do? He creates
man--man is entertaining.... But then he notices that man is also bored.
God's pity for the only form of distress that invades all paradises
knows no bounds: so he forthwith creates other animals. God's first
mistake: to man these other animals were not entertaining--he sought
dominion over them; he did not want to be an "animal" himself.--So God
created woman. In the act he brought boredom to an end--and also many
other things! Woman was the _second_ mistake of God.--"Woman, at bottom,
is a serpent, Heva"--every priest knows that; "from woman comes every
evil in the world"--every priest knows that, too. _Ergo_, she is also to
blame for _science_.... It was through woman that man learned to taste
of the tree of knowledge.--What happened? The old God was seized by
mortal terror. Man himself had been his _greatest_ blunder; he had
created a rival to himself; science makes men _godlike_--it is all up
with priests and gods when man becomes scientific!--_Moral_: science is
the forbidden _per se_; it alone is forbidden. Science is the _first_ of
sins, the germ of all sins, the _original_ sin. _This is all there is of
morality._--"Thou shall _not_ know":--the rest follows from that.--God's
mortal terror, however, did not hinder him from being shrewd. How is one
to _protect_ one's self against science? For a long while this was the
capital problem. Answer: Out of paradise with man! Happiness, leisure,
foster thought--and all thoughts are bad thoughts!--Man _must_ not
think.--And so the priest invents distress, death, the mortal dangers of
childbirth, all sorts of misery, old age, decrepitude, above all,
_sickness_--nothing but devices for making war on science! The troubles
of man don't _allow_ him to think.... Nevertheless--how terrible!--, the
edifice of knowledge begins to tower aloft, invading heaven, shadowing
the gods--what is to be done?--The old God invents _war_; he separates
the peoples; he makes men destroy one another (--the priests have always
had need of war....). War--among other things, a great disturber of
science!--Incredible! Knowledge, _deliverance from the priests_,
prospers in spite of war.--So the old God comes to his final resolution:
"Man has become scientific--_there is no help for it: he must be
drowned!_"...

[21] A paraphrase of Schiller's "Against stupidity even gods struggle in
vain."


49.

--I have been understood. At the opening of the Bible there is the
_whole_ psychology of the priest.--The priest knows of only one great
danger: that is science--the sound comprehension of cause and effect.
But science flourishes, on the whole, only under favourable
conditions--a man must have time, he must have an _overflowing_
intellect, in order to "know."... "_Therefore_, man must be made
unhappy,"--this has been, in all ages, the logic of the priest.--It is
easy to see just _what_, by this logic, was the first thing to come into
the world:--"_sin_."... The concept of guilt and punishment, the whole
"moral order of the world," was set up _against_ science--_against_ the
deliverance of man from priests.... Man must _not_ look outward; he must
look inward. He must _not_ look at things shrewdly and cautiously, to
learn about them; he must not look at all; he must _suffer_.... And he
must suffer so much that he is always in need of the priest.--Away with
physicians! _What is needed is a Saviour._--The concept of guilt and
punishment, including the doctrines of "grace," of "salvation," of
"forgiveness"--_lies_ through and through, and absolutely without
psychological reality--were devised to destroy man's _sense of
causality_: they are an attack upon the concept of cause and
effect!--And _not_ an attack with the fist, with the knife, with honesty
in hate and love! On the contrary, one inspired by the most cowardly,
the most crafty, the most ignoble of instincts! An attack of _priests_!
An attack of _parasites_! The vampirism of pale, subterranean
leeches!... When the natural consequences of an act are no longer
"natural," but are regarded as produced by the ghostly creations of
superstition--by "God," by "spirits," by "souls"--and reckoned as merely
"moral" consequences, as rewards, as punishments, as hints, as lessons,
then the whole ground-work of knowledge is destroyed--_then the greatest
of crimes against humanity has been perpetrated_.--I repeat that sin,
man's self-desecration _par excellence_, was invented in order to make
science, culture, and every elevation and ennobling of man impossible;
the priest _rules_ through the invention of sin.--


50.

--In this place I can't permit myself to omit a psychology of "belief,"
of the "believer," for the special benefit of "believers." If there
remain any today who do not yet know how _indecent_ it is to be
"believing"--_or_ how much a sign of _decadence_, of a broken will to
live--then they will know it well enough tomorrow. My voice reaches even
the deaf.--It appears, unless I have been incorrectly informed, that
there prevails among Christians a sort of criterion of truth that is
called "proof by power." "Faith makes blessed: _therefore_ it is
true."--It might be objected right here that blessedness is not
demonstrated, it is merely _promised_: it hangs upon "faith" as a
condition--one _shall_ be blessed _because_ one believes.... But what of
the thing that the priest promises to the believer, the wholly
transcendental "beyond"--how is _that_ to be demonstrated?--The "proof
by power," thus assumed, is actually no more at bottom than a belief
that the effects which faith promises will not fail to appear. In a
formula: "I believe that faith makes for blessedness--_therefore_, it is
true."... But this is as far as we may go. This "therefore" would be
_absurdum_ itself as a criterion of truth.--But let us admit, for the
sake of politeness, that blessedness by faith may be demonstrated
(--_not_ merely hoped for, and _not_ merely promised by the suspicious
lips of a priest): even so, _could_ blessedness--in a technical term,
_pleasure_--ever be a proof of truth? So little is this true that it is
almost a proof against truth when sensations of pleasure influence the
answer to the question "What is true?" or, at all events, it is enough
to make that "truth" highly suspicious. The proof by "pleasure" is a
proof _of_ "pleasure"--nothing more; why in the world should it be
assumed that _true_ judgments give more pleasure than false ones, and
that, in conformity to some pre-established harmony, they necessarily
bring agreeable feelings in their train?--The experience of all
disciplined and profound minds teaches _the contrary_. Man has had to
fight for every atom of the truth, and has had to pay for it almost
everything that the heart, that human love, that human trust cling to.
Greatness of soul is needed for this business: the service of truth is
the hardest of all services.--What, then, is the meaning of _integrity_
in things intellectual? It means that a man must be severe with his own
heart, that he must scorn "beautiful feelings," and that he makes every
Yea and Nay a matter of conscience!--Faith makes blessed: _therefore_,
it lies....


51.

The fact that faith, under certain circumstances, may work for
blessedness, but that this blessedness produced by an _idee fixe_ by no
means makes the idea itself true, and the fact that faith actually moves
no mountains, but instead _raises them up_ where there were none before:
all this is made sufficiently clear by a walk through a _lunatic
asylum_. _Not_, of course, to a priest: for his instincts prompt him to
the lie that sickness is not sickness and lunatic asylums not lunatic
asylums. Christianity finds sickness _necessary_, just as the Greek
spirit had need of a superabundance of health--the actual ulterior
purpose of the whole system of salvation of the church is to _make_
people ill. And the church itself--doesn't it set up a Catholic lunatic
asylum as the ultimate ideal?--The whole earth as a madhouse?--The sort
of religious man that the church _wants_ is a typical _decadent_; the
moment at which a religious crisis dominates a people is always marked
by epidemics of nervous disorder; the "inner world" of the religious man
is so much like the "inner world" of the overstrung and exhausted that
it is difficult to distinguish between them; the "highest" states of
mind, held up before mankind by Christianity as of supreme worth, are
actually epileptoid in form--the church has granted the name of holy
only to lunatics or to gigantic frauds _in majorem dei honorem_.... Once
I ventured to designate the whole Christian system of _training_[22] in
penance and salvation (now best studied in England) as a method of
producing a _folie circulaire_ upon a soil already prepared for it,
which is to say, a soil thoroughly unhealthy. Not every one may be a
Christian: one is not "converted" to Christianity--one must first
be sick enough for it.... We others, who have the _courage_ for health
_and_ likewise for contempt,--we may well despise a religion that
teaches misunderstanding of the body! that refuses to rid itself of the
superstition about the soul! that makes a "virtue" of insufficient
nourishment! that combats health as a sort of enemy, devil, temptation!
that persuades itself that it is possible to carry about a "perfect
soul" in a cadaver of a body, and that, to this end, had to devise for
itself a new concept of "perfection," a pale, sickly, idiotically
ecstatic state of existence, so-called "holiness"--a holiness that is
itself merely a series of symptoms of an impoverished, enervated and
incurably disordered body!... The Christian movement, as a European
movement, was from the start no more than a general uprising of all
sorts of outcast and refuse elements (--who now, under cover of
Christianity, aspire to power). It does _not_ represent the decay of a
race; it represents, on the contrary, a conglomeration of _decadence_
products from all directions, crowding together and seeking one another
out. It was _not_, as has been thought, the corruption of antiquity, of
_noble_ antiquity, which made Christianity possible; one cannot too
sharply challenge the learned imbecility which today maintains that
theory. At the time when the sick and rotten Chandala classes in the
whole _imperium_ were Christianized, the _contrary type_, the nobility,
reached its finest and ripest development. The majority became master;
democracy, with its Christian instincts, _triumphed_.... Christianity
was not "national," it was not based on race--it appealed to all the
varieties of men disinherited by life, it had its allies everywhere.
Christianity has the rancour of the sick at its very core--the instinct
against the _healthy_, against _health_. Everything that is
well-constituted, proud, gallant and, above all, beautiful gives offence
to its ears and eyes. Again I remind you of Paul's priceless saying:
"And God hath chosen the _weak_ things of the world, the _foolish_
things of the world, the _base_ things of the world, and things which
are _despised_":[23] _this_ was the formula; _in hoc signo_ the
_decadence_ triumphed.--_God on the cross_--is man always to miss the
frightful inner significance of this symbol?--Everything that suffers,
everything that hangs on the cross, is _divine_.... We all hang on the
cross, consequently _we_ are divine.... We alone are divine....
Christianity was thus a victory: a nobler attitude of mind was destroyed
by it--Christianity remains to this day the greatest misfortune of
humanity.--

[22] The word _training_ is in English in the text.

[23] 1 Corinthians i, 27, 28.


52.

Christianity also stands in opposition to all _intellectual_
well-being,--sick reasoning is the only sort that it _can_ use as
Christian reasoning; it takes the side of everything that is idiotic; it
pronounces a curse upon "intellect," upon the _superbia_ of the healthy
intellect. Since sickness is inherent in Christianity, it follows that
the typically Christian state of "faith" _must_ be a form of sickness
too, and that all straight, straightforward and scientific paths to
knowledge _must_ be banned by the church as _forbidden_ ways. Doubt is
thus a sin from the start.... The complete lack of psychological
cleanliness in the priest--revealed by a glance at him--is a phenomenon
_resulting_ from _decadence_,--one may observe in hysterical women and
in rachitic children how regularly the falsification of instincts,
delight in lying for the mere sake of lying, and incapacity for looking
straight and walking straight are symptoms of _decadence_. "Faith"
means the will to avoid knowing what is true. The pietist, the priest of
either sex, is a fraud _because_ he is sick: his instinct _demands_ that
the truth shall never be allowed its rights on any point. "Whatever
makes for illness is _good_; whatever issues from abundance, from
superabundance, from power, is _evil_": so argues the believer. The
_impulse to lie_--it is by this that I recognize every foreordained
theologian.--Another characteristic of the theologian is his _unfitness
for philology_. What I here mean by philology is, in a general sense,
the art of reading with profit--the capacity for absorbing facts
_without_ interpreting them falsely, and _without_ losing caution,
patience and subtlety in the effort to understand them. Philology as
_ephexis_[24] in interpretation: whether one be dealing with books, with
newspaper reports, with the most fateful events or with weather
statistics--not to mention the "salvation of the soul."... The way in
which a theologian, whether in Berlin or in Rome, is ready to explain,
say, a "passage of Scripture," or an experience, or a victory by the
national army, by turning upon it the high illumination of the Psalms of
David, is always so _daring_ that it is enough to make a philologian run
up a wall. But what shall he do when pietists and other such cows from
Suabia[25] use the "finger of God" to convert their miserably
commonplace and huggermugger existence into a miracle of "grace," a
"providence" and an "experience of salvation"? The most modest exercise
of the intellect, not to say of decency, should certainly be enough to
convince these interpreters of the perfect childishness and unworthiness
of such a misuse of the divine digital dexterity. However small our
piety, if we ever encountered a god who always cured us of a cold in the
head at just the right time, or got us into our carriage at the very
instant heavy rain began to fall, he would seem so absurd a god that
he'd have to be abolished even if he existed. God as a domestic servant,
as a letter carrier, as an almanac-man--at bottom, he is a mere name for
the stupidest sort of chance.... "Divine Providence," which every third
man in "educated Germany" still believes in, is so strong an argument
against God that it would be impossible to think of a stronger. And in
any case it is an argument against Germans!...

[24] That is, to say, scepticism. Among the Greeks scepticism was also
occasionally called ephecticism.

[25] A reference to the University of Tuebingen and its famous school of
Biblical criticism. The leader of this school was F. C. Baur, and one of
the men greatly influenced by it was Nietzsche's pet abomination, David
F. Strauss, himself a Suabian. _Vide_ Sec. 10 and Sec. 28.


53.

--It is so little true that _martyrs_ offer any support to the truth of
a cause that I am inclined to deny that any martyr has ever had anything
to do with the truth at all. In the very tone in which a martyr flings
what he fancies to be true at the head of the world there appears so low
a grade of intellectual honesty and such _insensibility_ to the problem
of "truth," that it is never necessary to refute him. Truth is not
something that one man has and another man has not: at best, only
peasants, or peasant-apostles like Luther, can think of truth in any
such way. One may rest assured that the greater the degree of a man's
intellectual conscience the greater will be his modesty, his
_discretion_, on this point. To _know_ in five cases, and to refuse,
with delicacy, to know anything _further_.... "Truth," as the word is
understood by every prophet, every sectarian, every free-thinker, every
Socialist and every churchman, is simply a complete proof that not even
a beginning has been made in the intellectual discipline and
self-control that are necessary to the unearthing of even the smallest
truth.--The deaths of the martyrs, it may be said in passing, have been
misfortunes of history: they have _misled_.... The conclusion that all
idiots, women and plebeians come to, that there must be something in a
cause for which any one goes to his death (or which, as under primitive
Christianity, sets off epidemics of death-seeking)--this conclusion has
been an unspeakable drag upon the testing of facts, upon the whole
spirit of inquiry and investigation. The martyrs have _damaged_ the
truth.... Even to this day the crude fact of persecution is enough to
give an honourable name to the most empty sort of sectarianism.--But
why? Is the worth of a cause altered by the fact that some one had laid
down his life for it?--An error that becomes honourable is simply an
error that has acquired one seductive charm the more: do you suppose,
Messrs. Theologians, that we shall give you the chance to be martyred
for your lies?--One best disposes of a cause by respectfully putting it
on ice--that is also the best way to dispose of theologians.... This was
precisely the world-historical stupidity of all the persecutors: that
they gave the appearance of honour to the cause they opposed--that they
made it a present of the fascination of martyrdom.... Women are still on
their knees before an error because they have been told that some one
died on the cross for it. _Is the cross, then, an argument?_--But about
all these things there is one, and one only, who has said what has been
needed for thousands of years--_Zarathustra_.

     They made signs in blood along the way that they went, and their
     folly taught them that the truth is proved by blood.

     But blood is the worst of all testimonies to the truth; blood
     poisoneth even the purest teaching and turneth it into madness and
     hatred in the heart.

     And when one goeth through fire for his teaching--what doth that
     prove? Verily, it is more when one's teaching cometh out of one's
     own burning![26]

[26] The quotations are from "Also sprach Zarathustra" ii, 24: "Of
Priests."


54.

Do not let yourself be deceived: great intellects are sceptical.
Zarathustra is a sceptic. The strength, the _freedom_ which proceed from
intellectual power, from a superabundance of intellectual power,
_manifest_ themselves as scepticism. Men of fixed convictions do not
count when it comes to determining what is fundamental in values and
lack of values. Men of convictions are prisoners. They do not see far
enough, they do not see what is _below_ them: whereas a man who would
talk to any purpose about value and non-value must be able to see five
hundred convictions _beneath_ him--and _behind_ him.... A mind that
aspires to great things, and that wills the means thereto, is
necessarily sceptical. Freedom from any sort of conviction _belongs_ to
strength, and to an independent point of view.... That grand passion
which is at once the foundation and the power of a sceptic's existence,
and is both more enlightened and more despotic than he is himself,
drafts the whole of his intellect into its service; it makes him
unscrupulous; it gives him courage to employ unholy means; under certain
circumstances it does not _begrudge_ him even convictions. Conviction as
a means: one may achieve a good deal by means of a conviction. A grand
passion makes use of and uses up convictions; it does not yield to
them--it knows itself to be sovereign.--On the contrary, the need of
faith, of something unconditioned by yea or nay, of Carlylism, if I may
be allowed the word, is a need of _weakness_. The man of faith, the
"believer" of any sort, is necessarily a dependent man--such a man
cannot posit _himself_ as a goal, nor can he find goals within himself.
The "believer" does not belong to himself; he can only be a means to an
end; he must be _used up_; he needs some one to use him up. His instinct
gives the highest honours to an ethic of self-effacement; he is prompted
to embrace it by everything: his prudence, his experience, his vanity.
Every sort of faith is in itself an evidence of self-effacement, of
self-estrangement.... When one reflects how necessary it is to the great
majority that there be regulations to restrain them from without and
hold them fast, and to what extent control, or, in a higher sense,
_slavery_, is the one and only condition which makes for the well-being
of the weak-willed man, and especially woman, then one at once
understands conviction and "faith." To the man with convictions they are
his backbone. To _avoid_ seeing many things, to be impartial about
nothing, to be a party man through and through, to estimate all values
strictly and infallibly--these are conditions necessary to the existence
of such a man. But by the same token they are _antagonists_ of the
truthful man--of the truth.... The believer is not free to answer the
question, "true" or "not true," according to the dictates of his own
conscience: integrity on _this_ point would work his instant downfall.
The pathological limitations of his vision turn the man of convictions
into a fanatic--Savonarola, Luther, Rousseau, Robespierre,
Saint-Simon--these types stand in opposition to the strong,
_emancipated_ spirit. But the grandiose attitudes of these _sick_
intellects, these intellectual epileptics, are of influence upon the
great masses--fanatics are picturesque, and mankind prefers observing
poses to listening to _reasons_....


55.

--One step further in the psychology of conviction, of "faith." It is
now a good while since I first proposed for consideration the question
whether convictions are not even more dangerous enemies to truth than
lies. ("Human, All-Too-Human," I, aphorism 483.)[27] This time I desire
to put the question definitely: is there any actual difference between
a lie and a conviction?--All the world believes that there is; but what
is not believed by all the world!--Every conviction has its history, its
primitive forms, its stage of tentativeness and error: it _becomes_ a
conviction only after having been, for a long time, _not_ one, and then,
for an even longer time, _hardly_ one. What if falsehood be also one of
these embryonic forms of conviction?--Sometimes all that is needed is a
change in persons: what was a lie in the father becomes a conviction in
the son.--I call it lying to refuse to see what one sees, or to refuse
to see it _as_ it is: whether the lie be uttered before witnesses or not
before witnesses is of no consequence. The most common sort of lie is
that by which a man deceives himself: the deception of others is a
relatively rare offence.--Now, this will _not_ to see what one sees,
this will _not_ to see it as it is, is almost the first requisite for
all who belong to a party of whatever sort: the party man becomes
inevitably a liar. For example, the German historians are convinced that
Rome was synonymous with despotism and that the Germanic peoples brought
the spirit of liberty into the world: what is the difference between
this conviction and a lie? Is it to be wondered at that all partisans,
including the German historians, instinctively roll the fine phrases of
morality upon their tongues--that morality almost owes its very
_survival_ to the fact that the party man of every sort has need of it
every moment?--"This is _our_ conviction: we publish it to the whole
world; we live and die for it--let us respect all who have
convictions!"--I have actually heard such sentiments from the mouths of
anti-Semites. On the contrary, gentlemen! An anti-Semite surely does not
become more respectable because he lies on principle.... The priests,
who have more finesse in such matters, and who well understand the
objection that lies against the notion of a conviction, which is to say,
of a falsehood that becomes a matter of principle _because_ it serves a
purpose, have borrowed from the Jews the shrewd device of sneaking in
the concepts, "God," "the will of God" and "the revelation of God" at
this place. Kant, too, with his categorical imperative, was on the same
road: this was his _practical_ reason.[28] There are questions regarding
the truth or untruth of which it is _not_ for man to decide; all the
capital questions, all the capital problems of valuation, are beyond
human reason.... To know the limits of reason--_that_ alone is genuine
philosophy.... Why did God make a revelation to man? Would God have done
anything superfluous? Man _could_ not find out for himself what was good
and what was evil, so God taught him His will.... Moral: the priest does
_not_ lie--the question, "true" or "untrue," has nothing to do with such
things as the priest discusses; it is impossible to lie about these
things. In order to lie here it would be necessary to know _what_ is
true. But this is more than man _can_ know; therefore, the priest is
simply the mouthpiece of God.--Such a priestly syllogism
is by no means merely Jewish and Christian; the right to lie and the
_shrewd dodge_ of "revelation" belong to the general priestly type--to
the priest of the _decadence_ as well as to the priest of pagan times
(--Pagans are all those who say yes to life, and to whom "God" is a word
signifying acquiescence in all things).--The "law," the "will of God,"
the "holy book," and "inspiration"--all these things are merely words
for the conditions _under_ which the priest comes to power and _with_
which he maintains his power,--these concepts are to be found at the
bottom of all priestly organizations, and of all priestly or
priestly-philosophical schemes of governments. The "holy lie"--common
alike to Confucius, to the Code of Manu, to Mohammed and to the
Christian church--is not even wanting in Plato. "Truth is here": this
means, no matter where it is heard, _the priest lies_....

[27] The aphorism, which is headed "The Enemies of Truth," makes the
direct statement: "Convictions are more dangerous enemies of truth than
lies."

[28] A reference, of course, to Kant's "Kritik der praktischen Vernunft"
(Critique of Practical Reason).


56.

--In the last analysis it comes to this: what is the _end_ of lying? The
fact that, in Christianity, "holy" ends are not visible is _my_
objection to the means it employs. Only _bad_ ends appear: the
poisoning, the calumniation, the denial of life, the despising of the
body, the degradation and self-contamination of man by the concept of
sin--_therefore_, its means are also bad.--I have a contrary feeling
when I read the Code of Manu, an incomparably more intellectual and
superior work, which it would be a sin against the _intelligence_ to so
much as _name_ in the same breath with the Bible. It is easy to see why:
there is a genuine philosophy behind it, _in_ it, not merely an
evil-smelling mess of Jewish rabbinism and superstition,--it gives even
the most fastidious psychologist something to sink his teeth into. And,
_not_ to forget what is most important, it differs fundamentally from
every kind of Bible: by means of it the _nobles_, the philosophers and
the warriors keep the whip-hand over the majority; it is full of noble
valuations, it shows a feeling of perfection, an acceptance of life, and
triumphant feeling toward self and life--the _sun_ shines upon the whole
book.--All the things on which Christianity vents its fathomless
vulgarity--for example, procreation, women and marriage--are here
handled earnestly, with reverence and with love and confidence. How can
any one really put into the hands of children and ladies a book which
contains such vile things as this: "to avoid fornication, let every man
have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband; ... it is
better to marry than to burn"?[29] And is it _possible_ to be a
Christian so long as the origin of man is Christianized, which is to
say, _befouled_, by the doctrine of the _immaculata conceptio_?... I
know of no book in which so many delicate and kindly things are said of
women as in the Code of Manu; these old grey-beards and saints have a
way of being gallant to women that it would be impossible, perhaps, to
surpass. "The mouth of a woman," it says in one place, "the breasts of a
maiden, the prayer of a child and the smoke of sacrifice are always
pure." In another place: "there is nothing purer than the light of the
sun, the shadow cast by a cow, air, water, fire and the breath of a
maiden." Finally, in still another place--perhaps this is also a holy
lie--: "all the orifices of the body above the navel are pure, and all
below are impure. Only in the maiden is the whole body pure."

[29] 1 Corinthians vii, 2, 9.


57.

One catches the _unholiness_ of Christian means _in flagranti_ by the
simple process of putting the ends sought by Christianity beside the
ends sought by the Code of Manu--by putting these enormously
antithetical ends under a strong light. The critic of Christianity
cannot evade the necessity of making Christianity _contemptible_.--A
book of laws such as the Code of Manu has the same origin as every other
good law-book: it epitomizes the experience, the sagacity and the
ethical experimentation of long centuries; it brings things to a
conclusion; it no longer creates. The prerequisite to a codification of
this sort is recognition of the fact that the means which establish the
authority of a slowly and painfully attained _truth_ are fundamentally
different from those which one would make use of to prove it. A law-book
never recites the utility, the grounds, the casuistical antecedents of a
law: for if it did so it would lose the imperative tone, the "thou
shall," on which obedience is based. The problem lies exactly here.--At
a certain point in the evolution of a people, the class within it of the
greatest insight, which is to say, the greatest hindsight and foresight,
declares that the series of experiences determining how all shall
live--or _can_ live--has come to an end. The object now is to reap as
rich and as complete a harvest as possible from the days of experiment
and _hard_ experience. In consequence, the thing that is to be avoided
above everything is further experimentation--the continuation of the
state in which values are fluent, and are tested, chosen and criticized
_ad infinitum_. Against this a double wall is set up: on the one hand,
_revelation_, which is the assumption that the reasons lying behind the
laws are _not_ of human origin, that they were _not_ sought out and
found by a slow process and after many errors, but that they are of
divine ancestry, and came into being complete, perfect, without a
history, as a free gift, a miracle...; and on the other hand,
_tradition_, which is the assumption that the law has stood unchanged
from time immemorial, and that it is impious and a crime against one's
forefathers to bring it into question. The authority of the law is thus
grounded on the thesis: God gave it, and the fathers _lived_ it.--The
higher motive of such procedure lies in the design to distract
consciousness, step by step, from its concern with notions of right
living (that is to say, those that have been _proved_ to be right by
wide and carefully considered experience), so that instinct attains to a
perfect automatism--a primary necessity to every sort of mastery, to
every sort of perfection in the art of life. To draw up such a law-book
as Manu's means to lay before a people the possibility of future
mastery, of attainable perfection--it permits them to aspire to the
highest reaches of the art of life. _To that end the thing must be made
unconscious_: that is the aim of every holy lie.--The _order of castes_,
the highest, the dominating law, is merely the ratification of an _order
of nature_, of a natural law of the first rank, over which no arbitrary
fiat, no "modern idea," can exert any influence. In every healthy
society there are three physiological types, gravitating toward
differentiation but mutually conditioning one another, and each of these
has its own hygiene, its own sphere of work, its own special mastery and
feeling of perfection. It is _not_ Manu but nature that sets off in one
class those who are chiefly intellectual, in another those who are
marked by muscular strength and temperament, and in a third those who
are distinguished in neither one way or the other, but show only
mediocrity--the last-named represents the great majority, and the first
two the select. The superior caste--I call it the _fewest_--has, as the
most perfect, the privileges of the few: it stands for happiness, for
beauty, for everything good upon earth. Only the most intellectual of
men have any right to beauty, to the beautiful; only in them can
goodness escape being weakness. _Pulchrum est paucorum hominum_:[30]
goodness is a privilege. Nothing could be more unbecoming to them than
uncouth manners or a pessimistic look, or an eye that sees
_ugliness_--or indignation against the general aspect of things.
Indignation is the privilege of the Chandala; so is pessimism. "_The
world is perfect_"--so prompts the instinct of the intellectual, the
instinct of the man who says yes to life. "Imperfection, whatever is
_inferior_ to us, distance, the pathos of distance, even the Chandala
themselves are parts of this perfection." The most intelligent men, like
the _strongest_, find their happiness where others would find only
disaster: in the labyrinth, in being hard with themselves and with
others, in effort; their delight is in self-mastery; in them asceticism
becomes second nature, a necessity, an instinct. They regard a difficult
task as a privilege; it is to them a _recreation_ to play with burdens
that would crush all others.... Knowledge--a form of asceticism.--They
are the most honourable kind of men: but that does not prevent them
being the most cheerful and most amiable. They rule, not because they
want to, but because they _are_; they are not at liberty to play
second.--The _second caste_: to this belong the guardians of the law,
the keepers of order and security, the more noble warriors, above all,
the king as the highest form of warrior, judge and preserver of the law.
The second in rank constitute the executive arm of the intellectuals,
the next to them in rank, taking from them all that is _rough_ in the
business of ruling--their followers, their right hand, their most apt
disciples.--In all this, I repeat, there is nothing arbitrary, nothing
"made up"; whatever is to the _contrary_ is made up--by it nature is
brought to shame.... The order of castes, the _order of rank_, simply
formulates the supreme law of life itself; the separation of the three
types is necessary to the maintenance of society, and to the evolution
of higher types, and the highest types--the _inequality_ of rights is
essential to the existence of any rights at all.--A right is a
privilege. Every one enjoys the privileges that accord with his state of
existence. Let us not underestimate the privileges of the _mediocre_.
Life is always harder as one mounts the _heights_--the cold increases,
responsibility increases. A high civilization is a pyramid: it can stand
only on a broad base; its primary prerequisite is a strong and soundly
consolidated mediocrity. The handicrafts, commerce, agriculture,
_science_, the greater part of art, in brief, the whole range of
_occupational_ activities, are compatible only with mediocre ability and
aspiration; such callings would be out of place for exceptional men; the
instincts which belong to them stand as much opposed to aristocracy as
to anarchism. The fact that a man is publicly useful, that he is a
wheel, a function, is evidence of a natural predisposition; it is not
_society_, but the only sort of happiness that the majority are capable
of, that makes them intelligent machines. To the mediocre mediocrity is
a form of happiness; they have a natural instinct for mastering one
thing, for specialization. It would be altogether unworthy of a profound
intellect to see anything objectionable in mediocrity in itself. It is,
in fact, the _first_ prerequisite to the appearance of the exceptional:
it is a necessary condition to a high degree of civilization. When the
exceptional man handles the mediocre man with more delicate fingers than
he applies to himself or to his equals, this is not merely kindness of
heart--it is simply his _duty_.... Whom do I hate most heartily among
the rabbles of today? The rabble of Socialists, the apostles to the
Chandala, who undermine the workingman's instincts, his pleasure, his
feeling of contentment with his petty existence--who make him envious
and teach him revenge.... Wrong never lies in unequal rights; it lies in
the assertion of "equal" rights.... What is _bad_? But I have already
answered: all that proceeds from weakness, from envy, from
_revenge_.--The anarchist and the Christian have the same ancestry....

[30] Few men are noble.


58.

In point of fact, the end for which one lies makes a great difference:
whether one preserves thereby or destroys. There is a perfect likeness
between Christian and anarchist: their object, their instinct, points
only toward destruction. One need only turn to history for a proof of
this: there it appears with appalling distinctness. We have just studied
a code of religious legislation whose object it was to convert the
conditions which cause life to _flourish_ into an "eternal" social
organization,--Christianity found its mission in putting an end to such
an organization, _because life flourished under it_. There the benefits
that reason had produced during long ages of experiment and insecurity
were applied to the most remote uses, and an effort was made to bring in
a harvest that should be as large, as rich and as complete as possible;
here, on the contrary, the harvest is _blighted_ overnight.... That
which stood there _aere perennis_, the _imperium Romanum_, the most
magnificent form of organization under difficult conditions that has
ever been achieved, and compared to which everything before it and after
it appears as patchwork, bungling, _dilletantism_--those holy anarchists
made it a matter of "piety" to destroy "the world," _which is to say_,
the _imperium Romanum_, so that in the end not a stone stood upon
another--and even Germans and other such louts were able to become its
masters.... The Christian and the anarchist: both are _decadents_; both
are incapable of any act that is not disintegrating, poisonous,
degenerating, _blood-sucking_; both have an instinct of _mortal hatred_
of everything that stands up, and is great, and has durability, and
promises life a future.... Christianity was the vampire of the _imperium
Romanum_,--overnight it destroyed the vast achievement of the Romans:
the conquest of the soil for a great culture _that could await its
time_. Can it be that this fact is not yet understood? The _imperium
Romanum_ that we know, and that the history of the Roman provinces
teaches us to know better and better,--this most admirable of all works
of art in the grand manner was merely the beginning, and the structure
to follow was not to _prove_ its worth for thousands of years. To this
day, nothing on a like scale _sub specie aeterni_ has been brought into
being, or even dreamed of!--This organization was strong enough to
withstand bad emperors: the accident of personality has nothing to do
with such things--the _first_ principle of all genuinely great
architecture. But it was not strong enough to stand up against the
_corruptest_ of all forms of corruption--against Christians.... These
stealthy worms, which under the cover of night, mist and duplicity,
crept upon every individual, sucking him dry of all earnest interest in
_real_ things, of all instinct for _reality_--this cowardly, effeminate
and sugar-coated gang gradually alienated all "souls," step by step,
from that colossal edifice, turning against it all the meritorious,
manly and noble natures that had found in the cause of Rome their own
cause, their own serious purpose, their own _pride_. The sneakishness of
hypocrisy, the secrecy of the conventicle, concepts as black as hell,
such as the sacrifice of the innocent, the _unio mystica_ in the
drinking of blood, above all, the slowly rekindled fire of revenge, of
Chandala revenge--all _that_ sort of thing became master of Rome: the
same kind of religion which, in a pre-existent form, Epicurus had
combatted. One has but to read Lucretius to know _what_ Epicurus made
war upon--_not_ paganism, but "Christianity," which is to say, the
corruption of souls by means of the concepts of guilt, punishment and
immortality.--He combatted the _subterranean_ cults, the whole of latent
Christianity--to deny immortality was already a form of genuine
_salvation_.--Epicurus had triumphed, and every respectable intellect in
Rome was Epicurean--_when Paul appeared_ ... Paul, the Chandala hatred
of Rome, of "the world," in the flesh and inspired by genius--the Jew,
the _eternal_ Jew _par excellence_.... What he saw was how, with the aid
of the small sectarian Christian movement that stood apart from Judaism,
a "world conflagration" might be kindled; how, with the symbol of "God
on the cross," all secret seditions, all the fruits of anarchistic
intrigues in the empire, might be amalgamated into one immense power.
"Salvation is of the Jews."--Christianity is the formula for exceeding
_and_ summing up the subterranean cults of all varieties, that of
Osiris, that of the Great Mother, that of Mithras, for instance: in his
discernment of this fact the genius of Paul showed itself. His instinct
was here so sure that, with reckless violence to the truth, he put the
ideas which lent fascination to every sort of Chandala religion into the
mouth of the "Saviour" as his own inventions, and not only into the
mouth--he _made_ out of him something that even a priest of Mithras
could understand.... This was his revelation at Damascus: he grasped the
fact that he _needed_ the belief in immortality in order to rob "the
world" of its value, that the concept of "hell" would master Rome--that
the notion of a "beyond" is the _death of life_.... Nihilist and
Christian: they rhyme in German, and they do more than rhyme....


59.

The whole labour of the ancient world gone for _naught_: I have no word
to describe the feelings that such an enormity arouses in me.--And,
considering the fact that its labour was merely preparatory, that with
adamantine self-consciousness it laid only the foundations for a work to
go on for thousands of years, the whole _meaning_ of antiquity
disappears!... To what end the Greeks? to what end the Romans?--All the
prerequisites to a learned culture, all the _methods_ of science, were
already there; man had already perfected the great and incomparable art
of reading profitably--that first necessity to the tradition of
culture, the unity of the sciences; the natural sciences, in alliance
with mathematics and mechanics, were on the right road,--_the sense of
fact_, the last and more valuable of all the senses, had its schools,
and its traditions were already centuries old! Is all this properly
understood? Every _essential_ to the beginning of the work was
ready:--and the _most_ essential, it cannot be said too often, are
methods, and also the most difficult to develop, and the longest opposed
by habit and laziness. What we have today reconquered, with unspeakable
self-discipline, for ourselves--for certain bad instincts, certain
Christian instincts, still lurk in our bodies--that is to say, the keen
eye for reality, the cautious hand, patience and seriousness in the
smallest things, the whole _integrity_ of knowledge--all these things
were already there, and had been there for two thousand years! _More_,
there was also a refined and excellent tact and taste! _Not_ as mere
brain-drilling! _Not_ as "German" culture, with its loutish manners! But
as body, as bearing, as instinct--in short, as reality.... _All gone for
naught!_ Overnight it became merely a memory!--The Greeks! The Romans!
Instinctive nobility, taste, methodical inquiry, genius for organization
and administration, faith in and the _will_ to secure the future of man,
a great yes to everything entering into the _imperium Romanum_ and
palpable to all the senses, a grand style that was beyond mere art, but
had become reality, truth, _life_....--All overwhelmed in a night, but
not by a convulsion of nature! Not trampled to death by Teutons and
others of heavy hoof! But brought to shame by crafty, sneaking,
invisible, anaemic vampires! Not conquered,--only sucked dry!... Hidden
vengefulness, petty envy, became _master_! Everything wretched,
intrinsically ailing, and invaded by bad feelings, the whole
_ghetto-world_ of the soul, was at once _on top_!--One needs but read
any of the Christian agitators, for example, St. Augustine, in order to
realize, in order to smell, what filthy fellows came to the top. It
would be an error, however, to assume that there was any lack of
understanding in the leaders of the Christian movement:--ah, but they
were clever, clever to the point of holiness, these fathers of the
church! What they lacked was something quite different. Nature
neglected--perhaps forgot--to give them even the most modest endowment
of respectable, of upright, of _cleanly_ instincts.... Between
ourselves, they are not even men.... If Islam despises Christianity, it
has a thousandfold right to do so: Islam at least assumes that it is
dealing with _men_....


60.

Christianity destroyed for us the whole harvest of ancient civilization,
and later it also destroyed for us the whole harvest of _Mohammedan_
civilization. The wonderful culture of the Moors in Spain, which was
fundamentally nearer to _us_ and appealed more to our senses and tastes
than that of Rome and Greece, was _trampled down_ (--I do not say by
what sort of feet--) Why? Because it had to thank noble and manly
instincts for its origin--because it said yes to life, even to the rare
and refined luxuriousness of Moorish life!... The crusaders later made
war on something before which it would have been more fitting for them
to have grovelled in the dust--a civilization beside which even that of
our nineteenth century seems very poor and very "senile."--What they
wanted, of course, was booty: the orient was rich.... Let us put aside
our prejudices! The crusades were a higher form of piracy, nothing more!
The German nobility, which is fundamentally a Viking nobility, was in
its element there: the church knew only too well how the German nobility
was to be _won_.... The German noble, always the "Swiss guard" of the
church, always in the service of every bad instinct of the church--_but
well paid_.... Consider the fact that it is precisely the aid of German
swords and German blood and valour that has enabled the church to carry
through its war to the death upon everything noble on earth! At this
point a host of painful questions suggest themselves. The German
nobility stands _outside_ the history of the higher civilization: the
reason is obvious.... Christianity, alcohol--the two _great_ means of
corruption.... Intrinsically there should be no more choice between
Islam and Christianity than there is between an Arab and a Jew. The
decision is already reached; nobody remains at liberty to choose here.
Either a man is a Chandala or he is not.... "War to the knife with Rome!
Peace and friendship with Islam!": this was the feeling, this was the
_act_, of that great free spirit, that genius among German emperors,
Frederick II. What! must a German first be a genius, a free spirit,
before he can feel _decently_? I can't make out how a German could ever
feel _Christian_....


61.

Here it becomes necessary to call up a memory that must be a hundred
times more painful to Germans. The Germans have destroyed for Europe the
last great harvest of civilization that Europe was ever to reap--the
_Renaissance_. Is it understood at last, _will_ it ever be understood,
_what_ the Renaissance was? _The transvaluation of Christian
values_,--an attempt with all available means, all instincts and all the
resources of genius to bring about a triumph of the _opposite_ values,
the more _noble_ values.... This has been the one great war of the past;
there has never been a more critical question than that of the
Renaissance--it is _my_ question too--; there has never been a form of
_attack_ more fundamental, more direct, or more violently delivered by a
whole front upon the center of the enemy! To attack at the critical
place, at the very seat of Christianity, and there enthrone the more
noble values--that is to say, to _insinuate_ them into the instincts,
into the most fundamental needs and appetites of those sitting there ...
I see before me the _possibility_ of a perfectly heavenly enchantment
and spectacle:--it seems to me to scintillate with all the vibrations of
a fine and delicate beauty, and within it there is an art so divine, so
infernally divine, that one might search in vain for thousands of years
for another such possibility; I see a spectacle so rich in significance
and at the same time so wonderfully full of paradox that it should
arouse all the gods on Olympus to immortal laughter--_Caesar Borgia as
pope!_... Am I understood?... Well then, _that_ would have been the
sort of triumph that _I_ alone am longing for today--: by it
Christianity would have been _swept away_!--What happened? A German
monk, Luther, came to Rome. This monk, with all the vengeful instincts
of an unsuccessful priest in him, raised a rebellion _against_ the
Renaissance in Rome.... Instead of grasping, with profound thanksgiving,
the miracle that had taken place: the conquest of Christianity at its
_capital_--instead of this, his hatred was stimulated by the spectacle.
A religious man thinks only of himself.--Luther saw only the _depravity_
of the papacy at the very moment when the opposite was becoming
apparent: the old corruption, the _peccatum originale_, Christianity
itself, no longer occupied the papal chair! Instead there was life!
Instead there was the triumph of life! Instead there was a great yea to
all lofty, beautiful and daring things!... And Luther _restored the
church_: he attacked it.... The Renaissance--an event without meaning, a
great futility!--Ah, these Germans, what they have not cost us!
_Futility_--that has always been the work of the Germans.--The
Reformation; Leibnitz; Kant and so-called German philosophy; the war
of "liberation"; the empire--every time a futile substitute for
something that once existed, for something _irrecoverable_.... These
Germans, I confess, are my enemies: I despise all their uncleanliness
in concept and valuation, their cowardice before every honest yea
and nay. For nearly a thousand years they have tangled and confused
everything their fingers have touched; they have on their conscience
all the half-way measures, all the three-eighths-way measures, that
Europe is sick of,--they also have on their conscience the uncleanest
variety of Christianity that exists, and the most incurable and
indestructible--Protestantism.... If mankind never manages to get rid
of Christianity the _Germans_ will be to blame....


62.

--With this I come to a conclusion and pronounce my judgment. I
_condemn_ Christianity; I bring against the Christian church the most
terrible of all the accusations that an accuser has ever had in his
mouth. It is, to me, the greatest of all imaginable corruptions; it
seeks to work the ultimate corruption, the worst possible corruption.
The Christian church has left nothing untouched by its depravity; it has
turned every value into worthlessness, and every truth into a lie, and
every integrity into baseness of soul. Let any one dare to speak to me
of its "humanitarian" blessings! Its deepest necessities range it
against any effort to abolish distress; it lives by distress; it
_creates_ distress to make _itself_ immortal.... For example, the worm
of sin: it was the church that first enriched mankind with this
misery!--The "equality of souls before God"--this fraud, this _pretext_
for the _rancunes_ of all the base-minded--this explosive concept,
ending in revolution, the modern idea, and the notion of overthrowing
the whole social order--this is _Christian_ dynamite.... The
"humanitarian" blessings of Christianity forsooth! To breed out of
_humanitas_ a self-contradiction, an art of self-pollution, a will to
lie at any price, an aversion and contempt for all good and honest
instincts! All this, to me, is the "humanitarianism" of
Christianity!--Parasitism as the _only_ practice of the church; with its
anaemic and "holy" ideals, sucking all the blood, all the love, all the
hope out of life; the beyond as the will to deny all reality; the cross
as the distinguishing mark of the most subterranean conspiracy ever
heard of,--against health, beauty, well-being, intellect, _kindness_ of
soul--_against life itself_....

This eternal accusation against Christianity I shall write upon all
walls, wherever walls are to be found--I have letters that even the
blind will be able to see.... I call Christianity the one great curse,
the one great intrinsic depravity, the one great instinct of revenge,
for which no means are venomous enough, or secret, subterranean and
_small_ enough,--I call it the one immortal blemish upon the human
race....

And mankind reckons _time_ from the _dies nefastus_ when this fatality
befell--from the _first_ day of Christianity!--_Why not rather from its
last?_--_From today?_--The transvaluation of all values!...


THE END


================================================================================
[Human, All Too Human (인간적인 너무나 인간적인)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Human, All Too Human: A Book for Free Spirits
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Human, All Too Human: A Book for Free Spirits

Author: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

Translator: Alexander Harvey


        
Release date: November 26, 2011 [eBook #38145]
                Most recently updated: January 8, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/38145

Credits: Produced by Gary Rees, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
        book was produced from scanned images of public domain
        material from the Google Print project.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN: A BOOK FOR FREE SPIRITS ***




Produced by Gary Rees, Matthew Wheaton and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)









    HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN

    A BOOK FOR FREE SPIRITS

    BY FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE


    TRANSLATED BY ALEXANDER HARVEY

    CHICAGO
    CHARLES H. KERR & COMPANY
    1908


    Copyright 1908
    By Charles H. Kerr & Company




    CONTENTS


    AUTHOR'S PREFACE

    OF THE FIRST AND LAST THINGS

    HISTORY OF THE MORAL FEELINGS

    THE RELIGIOUS LIFE




PREFACE.


1

It is often enough, and always with great surprise, intimated to me that
there is something both ordinary and unusual in all my writings, from
the "Birth of Tragedy" to the recently published "Prelude to a
Philosophy of the Future": they all contain, I have been told, snares
and nets for short sighted birds, and something that is almost a
constant, subtle, incitement to an overturning of habitual opinions and
of approved customs. What!? Everything is merely--human--all too human?
With this exclamation my writings are gone through, not without a
certain dread and mistrust of ethic itself and not without a disposition
to ask the exponent of evil things if those things be not simply
misrepresented. My writings have been termed a school of distrust, still
more of disdain: also, and more happily, of courage, audacity even. And
in fact, I myself do not believe that anybody ever looked into the world
with a distrust as deep as mine, seeming, as I do, not simply the timely
advocate of the devil, but, to employ theological terms, an enemy and
challenger of God; and whosoever has experienced any of the consequences
of such deep distrust, anything of the chills and the agonies of
isolation to which such an unqualified difference of standpoint condemns
him endowed with it, will also understand how often I must have sought
relief and self-forgetfulness from any source--through any object of
veneration or enmity, of scientific seriousness or wanton lightness;
also why I, when I could not find what I was in need of, had to fashion
it for myself, counterfeiting it or imagining it (and what poet or
writer has ever done anything else, and what other purpose can all the
art in the world possibly have?) That which I always stood most in need
of in order to effect my cure and self-recovery was faith, faith enough
not to be thus isolated, not to look at life from so singular a point of
view--a magic apprehension (in eye and mind) of relationship and
equality, a calm confidence in friendship, a blindness, free from
suspicion and questioning, to two sidedness; a pleasure in externals,
superficialities, the near, the accessible, in all things possessed of
color, skin and seeming. Perhaps I could be fairly reproached with much
"art" in this regard, many fine counterfeitings; for example, that,
wisely or wilfully, I had shut my eyes to Schopenhauer's blind will
towards ethic, at a time when I was already clear sighted enough on the
subject of ethic; likewise that I had deceived myself concerning Richard
Wagner's incurable romanticism, as if it were a beginning and not an
end; likewise concerning the Greeks, likewise concerning the Germans and
their future--and there may be, perhaps, a long list of such likewises.
Granted, however, that all this were true, and with justice urged
against me, what does it signify, what can it signify in regard to how
much of the self-sustaining capacity, how much of reason and higher
protection are embraced in such self-deception?--and how much more
falsity is still necessary to me that I may therewith always reassure
myself regarding the luxury of my truth. Enough, I still live; and life
is not considered now apart from ethic; it _will_ [have] deception; it
thrives (lebt) on deception ... but am I not beginning to do all over
again what I have always done, I, the old immoralist, and bird
snarer--talk unmorally, ultramorally, "beyond good and evil"?


2

Thus, then, have I evolved for myself the "free spirits" to whom this
discouraging-encouraging work, under the general title "Human, All Too
Human," is dedicated. Such "free spirits" do not really exist and never
did exist. But I stood in need of them, as I have pointed out, in order
that some good might be mixed with my evils (illness, loneliness,
strangeness, _acedia_, incapacity): to serve as gay spirits and
comrades, with whom one may talk and laugh when one is disposed to talk
and laugh, and whom one may send to the devil when they grow wearisome.
They are some compensation for the lack of friends. That such free
spirits can possibly exist, that our Europe will yet number among her
sons of to-morrow or of the day after to-morrow, such a brilliant and
enthusiastic company, alive and palpable and not merely, as in my case,
fantasms and imaginary shades, I, myself, can by no means doubt. I see
them already coming, slowly, slowly. May it not be that I am doing a
little something to expedite their coming when I describe in advance the
influences under which I see them evolving and the ways along which they
travel?


3

It may be conjectured that a soul in which the type of "free spirit" can
attain maturity and completeness had its decisive and deciding event in
the form of a great emancipation or unbinding, and that prior to that
event it seemed only the more firmly and forever chained to its place
and pillar. What binds strongest? What cords seem almost unbreakable? In
the case of mortals of a choice and lofty nature they will be those of
duty: that reverence, which in youth is most typical, that timidity and
tenderness in the presence of the traditionally honored and the worthy,
that gratitude to the soil from which we sprung, for the hand that
guided us, for the relic before which we were taught to pray--their
sublimest moments will themselves bind these souls most strongly. The
great liberation comes suddenly to such prisoners, like an earthquake:
the young soul is all at once shaken, torn apart, cast forth--it
comprehends not itself what is taking place. An involuntary onward
impulse rules them with the mastery of command; a will, a wish are
developed to go forward, anywhere, at any price; a strong, dangerous
curiosity regarding an undiscovered world flames and flashes in all
their being. "Better to die than live _here_"--so sounds the tempting
voice: and this "here," this "at home" constitutes all they have
hitherto loved. A sudden dread and distrust of that which they loved, a
flash of contempt for that which is called their "duty," a mutinous,
wilful, volcanic-like longing for a far away journey, strange scenes and
people, annihilation, petrifaction, a hatred surmounting love, perhaps a
sacrilegious impulse and look backwards, to where they so long prayed
and loved, perhaps a flush of shame for what they did and at the same
time an exultation at having done it, an inner, intoxicating,
delightful tremor in which is betrayed the sense of victory--a victory?
over what? over whom? a riddle-like victory, fruitful in questioning and
well worth questioning, but the _first_ victory, for all--such things of
pain and ill belong to the history of the great liberation. And it is at
the same time a malady that can destroy a man, this first outbreak of
strength and will for self-destination, self-valuation, this will for
free will: and how much illness is forced to the surface in the frantic
strivings and singularities with which the freedman, the liberated seeks
henceforth to attest his mastery over things! He roves fiercely around,
with an unsatisfied longing and whatever objects he may encounter must
suffer from the perilous expectancy of his pride; he tears to pieces
whatever attracts him. With a sardonic laugh he overturns whatever he
finds veiled or protected by any reverential awe: he would see what
these things look like when they are overturned. It is wilfulness and
delight in the wilfulness of it, if he now, perhaps, gives his approval
to that which has heretofore been in ill repute--if, in curiosity and
experiment, he penetrates stealthily to the most forbidden things. In
the background during all his plunging and roaming--for he is as
restless and aimless in his course as if lost in a wilderness--is the
interrogation mark of a curiosity growing ever more dangerous. "Can we
not upset every standard? and is good perhaps evil? and God only an
invention and a subtlety of the devil? Is everything, in the last
resort, false? And if we are dupes are we not on that very account
dupers also? _must_ we not be dupers also?" Such reflections lead and
mislead him, ever further on, ever further away. Solitude, that dread
goddess and mater saeva cupidinum, encircles and besets him, ever more
threatening, more violent, more heart breaking--but who to-day knows
what solitude is?


4

From this morbid solitude, from the deserts of such trial years, the way
is yet far to that great, overflowing certainty and healthiness which
cannot dispense even with sickness as a means and a grappling hook of
knowledge; to that matured freedom of the spirit which is, in an equal
degree, self mastery and discipline of the heart, and gives access to
the path of much and various reflection--to that inner comprehensiveness
and self satisfaction of over-richness which precludes all danger that
the spirit has gone astray even in its own path and is sitting
intoxicated in some corner or other; to that overplus of plastic,
healing, imitative and restorative power which is the very sign of
vigorous health, that overplus which confers upon the free spirit the
perilous prerogative of spending a life in experiment and of running
adventurous risks: the past-master-privilege of the free spirit. In the
interval there may be long years of convalescence, years filled with
many hued painfully-bewitching transformations, dominated and led to the
goal by a tenacious will for health that is often emboldened to assume
the guise and the disguise of health. There is a middle ground to this,
which a man of such destiny can not subsequently recall without emotion;
he basks in a special fine sun of his own, with a feeling of birdlike
freedom, birdlike visual power, birdlike irrepressibleness, a something
extraneous (Drittes) in which curiosity and delicate disdain have
united. A "free spirit"--this refreshing term is grateful in any mood,
it almost sets one aglow. One lives--no longer in the bonds of love and
hate, without a yes or no, here or there indifferently, best pleased to
evade, to avoid, to beat about, neither advancing nor retreating. One is
habituated to the bad, like a person who all at once sees a fearful
hurly-burly _beneath_ him--and one was the counterpart of him who
bothers himself with things that do not concern him. As a matter of fact
the free spirit is bothered with mere things--and how many
things--which no longer _concern_ him.


5

A step further in recovery: and the free spirit draws near to life
again, slowly indeed, almost refractorily, almost distrustfully. There
is again warmth and mellowness: feeling and fellow feeling acquire
depth, lambent airs stir all about him. He almost feels: it seems as if
now for the first time his eyes are open to things _near_. He is in
amaze and sits hushed: for where had he been? These near and immediate
things: how changed they seem to him! He looks gratefully back--grateful
for his wandering, his self exile and severity, his lookings afar and
his bird flights in the cold heights. How fortunate that he has not,
like a sensitive, dull home body, remained always "in the house" and "at
home!" He had been beside himself, beyond a doubt. Now for the first
time he really sees himself--and what surprises in the process. What
hitherto unfelt tremors! Yet what joy in the exhaustion, the old
sickness, the relapses of the convalescent! How it delights him,
suffering, to sit still, to exercise patience, to lie in the sun! Who so
well as he appreciates the fact that there comes balmy weather even in
winter, who delights more in the sunshine athwart the wall? They are
the most appreciative creatures in the world, and also the most humble,
these convalescents and lizards, crawling back towards life: there are
some among them who can let no day slip past them without addressing
some song of praise to its retreating light. And speaking seriously, it
is a fundamental cure for all pessimism (the cankerous vice, as is well
known, of all idealists and humbugs), to become ill in the manner of
these free spirits, to remain ill quite a while and then bit by bit grow
healthy--I mean healthier. It is wisdom, worldly wisdom, to administer
even health to oneself for a long time in small doses.


6

About this time it becomes at last possible, amid the flash lights of a
still unestablished, still precarious health, for the free, the ever
freer spirit to begin to read the riddle of that great liberation, a
riddle which has hitherto lingered, obscure, well worth questioning,
almost impalpable, in his memory. If once he hardly dared to ask "why so
apart? so alone? renouncing all I loved? renouncing respect itself? why
this coldness, this suspicion, this hate for one's very virtues?"--now
he dares, and asks it loudly, already hearing the answer, "you had to
become master over yourself, master of your own good qualities. Formerly
they were your masters: but they should be merely your tools along with
other tools. You had to acquire power over your aye and no and learn to
hold and withhold them in accordance with your higher aims. You had to
grasp the perspective of every representation (Werthschaetzung)--the
dislocation, distortion and the apparent end or teleology of the
horizon, besides whatever else appertains to the perspective: also the
element of demerit in its relation to opposing merit, and the whole
intellectual cost of every affirmative, every negative. You had to find
out the _inevitable_ error[1] in every Yes and in every No, error as
inseparable from life, life itself as conditioned by the perspective and
its inaccuracy.[1] Above all, you had to see with your own eyes where
the error[1] is always greatest: there, namely, where life is littlest,
narrowest, meanest, least developed and yet cannot help looking upon
itself as the goal and standard of things, and smugly and ignobly and
incessantly tearing to tatters all that is highest and greatest and
richest, and putting the shreds into the form of questions from the
standpoint of its own well being. You had to see with your own eyes the
problem of classification, (Rangordnung, regulation concerning rank and
station) and how strength and sweep and reach of perspective wax upward
together: You had"--enough, the free spirit knows henceforward which
"you had" it has obeyed and also what it now can do and what it now, for
the first time, _dare_.

[1] Ungerechtigkeit, literally wrongfulness, injustice, unrighteousness.


7

Accordingly, the free spirit works out for itself an answer to that
riddle of its liberation and concludes by generalizing upon its
experience in the following fashion: "What I went through everyone must
go through" in whom any problem is germinated and strives to body itself
forth. The inner power and inevitability of this problem will assert
themselves in due course, as in the case of any unsuspected
pregnancy--long before the spirit has seen this problem in its true
aspect and learned to call it by its right name. Our destiny exercises
its influence over us even when, as yet, we have not learned its nature:
it is our future that lays down the law to our to-day. Granted, that it
is the problem of classification[2] of which we free spirits may say,
this is _our_ problem, yet it is only now, in the midday of our life,
that we fully appreciate what preparations, shifts, trials, ordeals,
stages, were essential to that problem before it could emerge to our
view, and why we had to go through the various and contradictory
longings and satisfactions of body and soul, as circumnavigators and
adventurers of that inner world called "man"; as surveyors of that
"higher" and of that "progression"[3] that is also called
"man"--crowding in everywhere, almost without fear, disdaining nothing,
missing nothing, testing everything, sifting everything and eliminating
the chance impurities--until at last we could say, we free spirits:
"Here--a _new_ problem! Here, a long ladder on the rungs of which we
ourselves have rested and risen, which we have actually been at times.
Here is a something higher, a something deeper, a something below us, a
vastly extensive order, (Ordnung) a comparative classification
(Rangordnung), that we perceive: here--_our_ problem!"

[2] Rangordnung: the meaning is "the problem of grasping the relative
importance of things."

[3] Uebereinander: one over another.


8

To what stage in the development just outlined the present book belongs
(or is assigned) is something that will be hidden from no augur or
psychologist for an instant. But where are there psychologists to-day?
In France, certainly; in Russia, perhaps; certainly not in Germany.
Grounds are not wanting, to be sure, upon which the Germans of to-day
may adduce this fact to their credit: unhappily for one who in this
matter is fashioned and mentored in an un-German school! This _German_
book, which has found its readers in a wide circle of lands and
peoples--it has been some ten years on its rounds--and which must make
its way by means of any musical art and tune that will captivate the
foreign ear as well as the native--this book has been read most
indifferently in Germany itself and little heeded there: to what is that
due? "It requires too much," I have been told, "it addresses itself to
men free from the press of petty obligations, it demands fine and
trained perceptions, it requires a surplus, a surplus of time, of the
lightness of heaven and of the heart, of otium in the most unrestricted
sense: mere good things that we Germans of to-day have not got and
therefore cannot give." After so graceful a retort, my philosophy bids
me be silent and ask no more questions: at times, as the proverb says,
one remains a philosopher only because one says--nothing!

Nice, Spring, 1886.




OF THE FIRST AND LAST THINGS.


1

=Chemistry of the Notions and the Feelings.=--Philosophical problems, in
almost all their aspects, present themselves in the same interrogative
formula now that they did two thousand years ago: how can a thing
develop out of its antithesis? for example, the reasonable from the
non-reasonable, the animate from the inanimate, the logical from the
illogical, altruism from egoism, disinterestedness from greed, truth
from error? The metaphysical philosophy formerly steered itself clear of
this difficulty to such extent as to repudiate the evolution of one
thing from another and to assign a miraculous origin to what it deemed
highest and best, due to the very nature and being of the
"thing-in-itself." The historical philosophy, on the other hand, which
can no longer be viewed apart from physical science, the youngest of all
philosophical methods, discovered experimentally (and its results will
probably always be the same) that there is no antithesis whatever,
except in the usual exaggerations of popular or metaphysical
comprehension, and that an error of the reason is at the bottom of such
contradiction. According to its explanation, there is, strictly
speaking, neither unselfish conduct, nor a wholly disinterested point of
view. Both are simply sublimations in which the basic element seems
almost evaporated and betrays its presence only to the keenest
observation. All that we need and that could possibly be given us in the
present state of development of the sciences, is a chemistry of the
moral, religious, aesthetic conceptions and feeling, as well as of those
emotions which we experience in the affairs, great and small, of society
and civilization, and which we are sensible of even in solitude. But
what if this chemistry established the fact that, even in _its_ domain,
the most magnificent results were attained with the basest and most
despised ingredients? Would many feel disposed to continue such
investigations? Mankind loves to put by the questions of its origin and
beginning: must one not be almost inhuman in order to follow the
opposite course?


2

=The Traditional Error of Philosophers.=--All philosophers make the
common mistake of taking contemporary man as their starting point and of
trying, through an analysis of him, to reach a conclusion. "Man"
involuntarily presents himself to them as an aeterna veritas as a
passive element in every hurly-burly, as a fixed standard of things. Yet
everything uttered by the philosopher on the subject of man is, in the
last resort, nothing more than a piece of testimony concerning man
during a very limited period of time. Lack of the historical sense is
the traditional defect in all philosophers. Many innocently take man in
his most childish state as fashioned through the influence of certain
religious and even of certain political developments, as the permanent
form under which man must be viewed. They will not learn that man has
evolved,[4] that the intellectual faculty itself is an evolution,
whereas some philosophers make the whole cosmos out of this intellectual
faculty. But everything essential in human evolution took place aeons
ago, long before the four thousand years or so of which we know
anything: during these man may not have changed very much. However, the
philosopher ascribes "instinct" to contemporary man and assumes that
this is one of the unalterable facts regarding man himself, and hence
affords a clue to the understanding of the universe in general. The
whole teleology is so planned that man during the last four thousand
years shall be spoken of as a being existing from all eternity, and
with reference to whom everything in the cosmos from its very inception
is naturally ordered. Yet everything evolved: there are no eternal facts
as there are no absolute truths. Accordingly, historical philosophising
is henceforth indispensable, and with it honesty of judgment.

[4] geworden.


3

=Appreciation of Simple Truths.=--It is the characteristic of an
advanced civilization to set a higher value upon little, simple truths,
ascertained by scientific method, than upon the pleasing and magnificent
errors originating in metaphysical and aesthetical epochs and peoples. To
begin with, the former are spoken of with contempt as if there could be
no question of comparison respecting them, so rigid, homely, prosaic and
even discouraging is the aspect of the first, while so beautiful,
decorative, intoxicating and perhaps beatific appear the last named.
Nevertheless, the hardwon, the certain, the lasting and, therefore, the
fertile in new knowledge, is the higher; to hold fast to it is manly and
evinces courage, directness, endurance. And not only individual men but
all mankind will by degrees be uplifted to this manliness when they are
finally habituated to the proper appreciation of tenable, enduring
knowledge and have lost all faith in inspiration and in the miraculous
revelation of truth. The reverers of forms, indeed, with their standards
of beauty and taste, may have good reason to laugh when the appreciation
of little truths and the scientific spirit begin to prevail, but that
will be only because their eyes are not yet opened to the charm of the
utmost simplicity of form or because men though reared in the rightly
appreciative spirit, will still not be fully permeated by it, so that
they continue unwittingly imitating ancient forms (and that ill enough,
as anybody does who no longer feels any interest in a thing). Formerly
the mind was not brought into play through the medium of exact thought.
Its serious business lay in the working out of forms and symbols. That
has now changed. Any seriousness in symbolism is at present the
indication of a deficient education. As our very acts become more
intellectual, our tendencies more rational, and our judgment, for
example, as to what seems reasonable, is very different from what it was
a hundred years ago: so the forms of our lives grow ever more
intellectual and, to the old fashioned eye, perhaps, uglier, but only
because it cannot see that the richness of inner, rational beauty always
spreads and deepens, and that the inner, rational aspect of all things
should now be of more consequence to us than the most beautiful
externality and the most exquisite limning.


4

=Astrology and the Like.=--It is presumable that the objects of the
religious, moral, aesthetic and logical notions pertain simply to the
superficialities of things, although man flatters himself with the
thought that here at least he is getting to the heart of the cosmos. He
deceives himself because these things have power to make him so happy
and so wretched, and so he evinces, in this respect, the same conceit
that characterises astrology. Astrology presupposes that the heavenly
bodies are regulated in their movements in harmony with the destiny of
mortals: the moral man presupposes that that which concerns himself most
nearly must also be the heart and soul of things.


5

=Misconception of Dreams.=--In the dream, mankind, in epochs of crude
primitive civilization, thought they were introduced to a second,
substantial world: here we have the source of all metaphysic. Without
the dream, men would never have been incited to an analysis of the
world. Even the distinction between soul and body is wholly due to the
primitive conception of the dream, as also the hypothesis of the
embodied soul, whence the development of all superstition, and also,
probably, the belief in god. "The dead still live: for they appear to
the living in dreams." So reasoned mankind at one time, and through many
thousands of years.


6

=The Scientific Spirit Prevails only Partially, not Wholly.=--The
specialized, minutest departments of science are dealt with purely
objectively. But the general universal sciences, considered as a great,
basic unity, posit the question--truly a very living question--: to what
purpose? what is the use? Because of this reference to utility they are,
as a whole, less impersonal than when looked at in their specialized
aspects. Now in the case of philosophy, as forming the apex of the
scientific pyramid, this question of the utility of knowledge is
necessarily brought very conspicuously forward, so that every philosophy
has, unconsciously, the air of ascribing the highest utility to itself.
It is for this reason that all philosophies contain such a great amount
of high flying metaphysic, and such a shrinking from the seeming
insignificance of the deliverances of physical science: for the
significance of knowledge in relation to life must be made to appear as
great as possible. This constitutes the antagonism between the
specialties of science and philosophy. The latter aims, as art aims, at
imparting to life and conduct the utmost depth and significance: in the
former mere knowledge is sought and nothing else--whatever else be
incidentally obtained. Heretofore there has never been a philosophical
system in which philosophy itself was not made the apologist of
knowledge [in the abstract]. On this point, at least, each is optimistic
and insists that to knowledge the highest utility must be ascribed. They
are all under the tyranny of logic, which is, from its very nature,
optimism.


7

=The Discordant Element in Science.=--Philosophy severed itself from
science when it put the question: what is that knowledge of the world
and of life through which mankind may be made happiest? This happened
when the Socratic school arose: with the standpoint of _happiness_ the
arteries of investigating science were compressed too tightly to permit
of any circulation of the blood--and are so compressed to-day.


8

=Pneumatic Explanation of Nature.=[5]--Metaphysic reads the message of
nature as if it were written purely pneumatically, as the church and its
learned ones formerly did where the bible was concerned. It requires a
great deal of expertness to apply to nature the same strict science of
interpretation that the philologists have devised for all literature,
and to apply it for the purpose of a simple, direct interpretation of
the message, and at the same time, not bring out a double meaning. But,
as in the case of books and literature, errors of exposition are far
from being completely eliminated, and vestiges of allegorical and
mystical interpretations are still to be met with in the most cultivated
circles, so where nature is concerned the case is--actually much worse.

[5] Pneumatic is here used in the sense of spiritual. Pneuma being the
Greek word in the New Testament for the Holy Spirit.--Ed.


9

=Metaphysical World.=--It is true, there may be a metaphysical world;
the absolute possibility of it can scarcely be disputed. We see all
things through the medium of the human head and we cannot well cut off
this head: although there remains the question what part of the world
would be left after it had been cut off. But that is a purely abstract
scientific problem and one not much calculated to give men uneasiness:
yet everything that has heretofore made metaphysical assumptions
valuable, fearful or delightful to men, all that gave rise to them is
passion, error and self deception: the worst systems of knowledge, not
the best, pin their tenets of belief thereto. When such methods are once
brought to view as the basis of all existing religions and metaphysics,
they are already discredited. There always remains, however, the
possibility already conceded: but nothing at all can be made out of
that, to say not a word about letting happiness, salvation and life hang
upon the threads spun from such a possibility. Accordingly, nothing
could be predicated of the metaphysical world beyond the fact that it is
an elsewhere,[6] another sphere, inaccessible and incomprehensible to
us: it would become a thing of negative properties. Even were the
existence of such a world absolutely established, it would nevertheless
remain incontrovertible that of all kinds of knowledge, knowledge of
such a world would be of least consequence--of even less consequence
than knowledge of the chemical analysis of water would be to a storm
tossed mariner.

[6] Anderssein.


10

=The Harmlessness of Metaphysic in the Future.=--As soon as religion,
art and ethics are so understood that a full comprehension of them can
be gained without taking refuge in the postulates of metaphysical
claptrap at any point in the line of reasoning, there will be a complete
cessation of interest in the purely theoretical problem of the "thing in
itself" and the "phenomenon." For here, too, the same truth applies: in
religion, art and ethics we are not concerned with the "essence of the
cosmos".[7] We are in the sphere of pure conception. No presentiment [or
intuition] can carry us any further. With perfect tranquility the
question of how our conception of the world could differ so sharply from
the actual world as it is manifest to us, will be relegated to the
physiological sciences and to the history of the evolution of ideas and
organisms.

[7] "Wesen der Welt an sich."


11

=Language as a Presumptive Science.=--The importance of language in the
development of civilization consists in the fact that by means of it
man placed one world, his own, alongside another, a place of leverage
that he thought so firm as to admit of his turning the rest of the
cosmos on a pivot that he might master it. In so far as man for ages
looked upon mere ideas and names of things as upon aeternae veritates,
he evinced the very pride with which he raised himself above the brute.
He really supposed that in language he possessed a knowledge of the
cosmos. The language builder was not so modest as to believe that he was
only giving names to things. On the contrary he thought he embodied the
highest wisdom concerning things in [mere] words; and, in truth,
language is the first movement in all strivings for wisdom. Here, too,
it is _faith in ascertained truth_[8] from which the mightiest fountains
of strength have flowed. Very tardily--only now--it dawns upon men that
they have propagated a monstrous error in their belief in language.
Fortunately, it is too late now to arrest and turn back the evolutionary
process of the reason, which had its inception in this belief. Logic
itself rests upon assumptions to which nothing in the world of reality
corresponds. For example, the correspondence of certain things to one
another and the identity of those things at different periods of time
are assumptions pure and simple, but the science of logic originated in
the positive belief that they were not assumptions at all but
established facts. It is the same with the science of mathematics which
certainly would never have come into existence if mankind had known from
the beginning that in all nature there is no perfectly straight line, no
true circle, no standard of measurement.

[8] Glaube an die gefundene Wahrheit, as distinguished from faith in
what is taken on trust as truth.


12

=Dream and Civilization.=--The function of the brain which is most
encroached upon in slumber is the memory; not that it is wholly
suspended, but it is reduced to a state of imperfection as, in primitive
ages of mankind, was probably the case with everyone, whether waking or
sleeping. Uncontrolled and entangled as it is, it perpetually confuses
things as a result of the most trifling similarities, yet in the same
mental confusion and lack of control the nations invented their
mythologies, while nowadays travelers habitually observe how prone the
savage is to forgetfulness, how his mind, after the least exertion of
memory, begins to wander and lose itself until finally he utters
falsehood and nonsense from sheer exhaustion. Yet, in dreams, we all
resemble this savage. Inadequacy of distinction and error of comparison
are the basis of the preposterous things we do and say in dreams, so
that when we clearly recall a dream we are startled that so much idiocy
lurks within us. The absolute distinctness of all dream-images, due to
implicit faith in their substantial reality, recalls the conditions in
which earlier mankind were placed, for whom hallucinations had
extraordinary vividness, entire communities and even entire nations
laboring simultaneously under them. Therefore: in sleep and in dream we
make the pilgrimage of early mankind over again.


13

=Logic of the Dream.=--During sleep the nervous system, through various
inner provocatives, is in constant agitation. Almost all the organs act
independently and vigorously. The blood circulates rapidly. The posture
of the sleeper compresses some portions of the body. The coverlets
influence the sensations in different ways. The stomach carries on the
digestive process and acts upon other organs thereby. The intestines are
in motion. The position of the head induces unaccustomed action. The
feet, shoeless, no longer pressing the ground, are the occasion of other
sensations of novelty, as is, indeed, the changed garb of the entire
body. All these things, following the bustle and change of the day,
result, through their novelty, in a movement throughout the entire
system that extends even to the brain functions. Thus there are a
hundred circumstances to induce perplexity in the mind, a questioning as
to the cause of this excitation. Now, the dream is a _seeking and
presenting of reasons_ for these excitations of feeling, of the supposed
reasons, that is to say. Thus, for example, whoever has his feet bound
with two threads will probably dream that a pair of serpents are coiled
about his feet. This is at first a hypothesis, then a belief with an
accompanying imaginative picture and the argument: "these snakes must be
the _causa_ of those sensations which I, the sleeper, now have." So
reasons the mind of the sleeper. The conditions precedent, as thus
conjectured, become, owing to the excitation of the fancy, present
realities. Everyone knows from experience how a dreamer will transform
one piercing sound, for example, that of a bell, into another of quite a
different nature, say, the report of cannon. In his dream he becomes
aware first of the effects, which he explains by a subsequent hypothesis
and becomes persuaded of the purely conjectural nature of the sound. But
how comes it that the mind of the dreamer goes so far astray when the
same mind, awake, is habitually cautious, careful, and so conservative
in its dealings with hypotheses? why does the first plausible
hypothesis of the cause of a sensation gain credit in the dreaming
state? (For in a dream we look upon that dream as reality, that is, we
accept our hypotheses as fully established). I have no doubt that as men
argue in their dreams to-day, mankind argued, even in their waking
moments, for thousands of years: the first _causa_, that occurred to the
mind with reference to anything that stood in need of explanation, was
accepted as the true explanation and served as such. (Savages show the
same tendency in operation, as the reports of travelers agree). In the
dream this atavistic relic of humanity manifests its existence within
us, for it is the foundation upon which the higher rational faculty
developed itself and still develops itself in every individual. Dreams
carry us back to the earlier stages of human culture and afford us a
means of understanding it more clearly. Dream thought comes so easily to
us now because we are so thoroughly trained to it through the
interminable stages of evolution during which this fanciful and facile
form of theorising has prevailed. To a certain extent the dream is a
restorative for the brain, which, during the day, is called upon to meet
the many demands for trained thought made upon it by the conditions of a
higher civilization.--We may, if we please, become sensible, even in our
waking moments, of a condition that is as a door and vestibule to
dreaming. If we close our eyes the brain immediately conjures up a
medley of impressions of light and color, apparently a sort of imitation
and echo of the impressions forced in upon the brain during its waking
moments. And now the mind, in co-operation with the imagination,
transforms this formless play of light and color into definite figures,
moving groups, landscapes. What really takes place is a sort of
reasoning from effect back to cause. As the brain inquires: whence these
impressions of light and color? it posits as the inducing causes of such
lights and colors, those shapes and figures. They serve the brain as the
occasions of those lights and colors because the brain, when the eyes
are open and the senses awake, is accustomed to perceiving the cause of
every impression of light and color made upon it. Here again the
imagination is continually interposing its images inasmuch as it
participates in the production of the impressions made through the
senses day by day: and the dream-fancy does exactly the same thing--that
is, the presumed cause is determined from the effect and _after_ the
effect: all this, too, with extraordinary rapidity, so that in this
matter, as in a matter of jugglery or sleight-of-hand, a confusion of
the mind is produced and an after effect is made to appear a
simultaneous action, an inverted succession of events, even.--From
these considerations we can see how _late_ strict, logical thought, the
true notion of cause and effect must have been in developing, since our
intellectual and rational faculties to this very day revert to these
primitive processes of deduction, while practically half our lifetime is
spent in the super-inducing conditions.--Even the poet, the artist,
ascribes to his sentimental and emotional states causes which are not
the true ones. To that extent he is a reminder of early mankind and can
aid us in its comprehension.


14

=Association.=[9]--All strong feelings are associated with a variety of
allied sentiments and emotions. They stir up the memory at the same
time. When we are under their influence we are reminded of similar
states and we feel a renewal of them within us. Thus are formed habitual
successions of feelings and notions, which, at last, when they follow
one another with lightning rapidity are no longer felt as complexities
but as unities. In this sense we hear of moral feelings, of religious
feelings, as if they were absolute unities. In reality they are streams
with a hundred sources and tributaries. Here again, the unity of the
word speaks nothing for the unity of the thing.

[9] Miterklingen: to sound simultaneously with.


15

=No Within and Without in the World.=[10]--As Democritus transferred the
notions above and below to limitless space, where they are destitute of
meaning, so the philosophers do generally with the idea "within and
without," as regards the form and substance (Wesen und Erscheinung) of
the world. What they claim is that through the medium of profound
feelings one can penetrate deep into the soul of things (Innre), draw
close to the heart of nature. But these feelings are deep only in so far
as with them are simultaneously aroused, although almost imperceptibly,
certain complicated groups of thoughts (Gedankengruppen) which we call
deep: a feeling is deep because we deem the thoughts accompanying it
deep. But deep thought can nevertheless be very widely sundered from
truth, as for instance every metaphysical thought. Take from deep
feeling the element of thought blended with it and all that remains is
_strength_ of feeling which is no voucher for the validity of
knowledge, as intense faith is evidence only of its own intensity and
not of the truth of that in which the faith is felt.

[10] Kein Innen und Aussen in der Welt: the above translation may seem
too literal but some dispute has arisen concerning the precise idea the
author means to convey.


16

=Phenomenon and Thing-in-Itself.=--The philosophers are in the habit of
placing themselves in front of life and experience--that which they call
the world of phenomena--as if they were standing before a picture that
is unrolled before them in its final completeness. This panorama, they
think, must be studied in every detail in order to reach some conclusion
regarding the object represented by the picture. From effect,
accordingly is deduced cause and from cause is deduced the
unconditioned. This process is generally looked upon as affording the
all sufficient explanation of the world of phenomena. On the other hand
one must, (while putting the conception of the metaphysical distinctly
forward as that of the unconditioned, and consequently of the
unconditioning) absolutely deny any connection between the unconditioned
(of the metaphysical world) and the world known to us: so that
throughout phenomena there is no manifestation of the thing-in-itself,
and getting from one to the other is out of the question. Thus is left
quite ignored the circumstance that the picture--that which we now call
life and experience--is a gradual evolution, is, indeed, still in
process of evolution and for that reason should not be regarded as an
enduring whole from which any conclusion as to its author (the
all-sufficient reason) could be arrived at, or even pronounced out of
the question. It is because we have for thousands of years looked into
the world with moral, aesthetic, religious predispositions, with blind
prejudice, passion or fear, and surfeited ourselves with indulgence in
the follies of illogical thought, that the world has gradually become so
wondrously motley, frightful, significant, soulful: it has taken on
tints, but we have been the colorists: the human intellect, upon the
foundation of human needs, of human passions, has reared all these
"phenomena" and injected its own erroneous fundamental conceptions into
things. Late, very late, the human intellect checks itself: and now the
world of experience and the thing-in-itself seem to it so severed and so
antithetical that it denies the possibility of one's hinging upon the
other--or else summons us to surrender our intellect, our personal will,
to the secret and the awe-inspiring in order that thereby we may attain
certainty of certainty hereafter. Again, there are those who have
combined all the characteristic features of our world of
phenomena--that is, the conception of the world which has been formed
and inherited through a series of intellectual vagaries--and instead of
holding the intellect responsible for it all, have pronounced the very
nature of things accountable for the present very sinister aspect of the
world, and preached annihilation of existence. Through all these views
and opinions the toilsome, steady process of science (which now for the
first time begins to celebrate its greatest triumph in the genesis of
thought) will definitely work itself out, the result, being, perhaps, to
the following effect: That which we now call the world is the result of
a crowd of errors and fancies which gradually developed in the general
evolution of organic nature, have grown together and been transmitted to
us as the accumulated treasure of all the past--as the _treasure_, for
whatever is worth anything in our humanity rests upon it. From this
world of conception it is in the power of science to release us only to
a slight extent--and this is all that could be wished--inasmuch as it
cannot eradicate the influence of hereditary habits of feeling, but it
can light up by degrees the stages of the development of that world of
conception, and lift us, at least for a time, above the whole spectacle.
Perhaps we may then perceive that the thing-in-itself is a meet subject
for Homeric laughter: that it seemed so much, everything, indeed, and
is really a void--void, that is to say, of meaning.


17

=Metaphysical Explanation.=--Man, when he is young, prizes metaphysical
explanations, because they make him see matters of the highest import in
things he found disagreeable or contemptible: and if he is not satisfied
with himself, this feeling of dissatisfaction is soothed when he sees
the most hidden world-problem or world-pain in that which he finds so
displeasing in himself. To feel himself more unresponsible and at the
same time to find things (Dinge) more interesting--that is to him the
double benefit he owes to metaphysics. Later, indeed, he acquires
distrust of the whole metaphysical method of explaining things: he then
perceives, perhaps, that those effects could have been attained just as
well and more scientifically by another method: that physical and
historical explanations would, at least, have given that feeling of
freedom from personal responsibility just as well, while interest in
life and its problems would be stimulated, perhaps, even more.


18

=The Fundamental Problems of Metaphysics.=--If a history of the
development of thought is ever written, the following proposition,
advanced by a distinguished logician, will be illuminated with a new
light: "The universal, primordial law of the apprehending subject
consists in the inner necessity of cognizing every object by itself, as
in its essence a thing unto itself, therefore as self-existing and
unchanging, in short, as a substance." Even this law, which is here
called "primordial," is an evolution: it has yet to be shown how
gradually this evolution takes place in lower organizations: how the
dim, mole eyes of such organizations see, at first, nothing but a blank
sameness: how later, when the various excitations of desire and aversion
manifest themselves, various substances are gradually distinguished, but
each with an attribute, that is, a special relationship to such an
organization. The first step towards the logical is judgment, the
essence of which, according to the best logicians, is belief. At the
foundation of all beliefs lie sensations of pleasure or pain in relation
to the apprehending subject. A third feeling, as the result of two
prior, single, separate feelings, is judgment in its crudest form. We
organic beings are primordially interested by nothing whatever in any
thing (Ding) except its relation to ourselves with reference to pleasure
and pain. Between the moments in which we are conscious of this
relation, (the states of feeling) lie the moments of rest, of
not-feeling: then the world and every thing (Ding) have no interest for
us: we observe no change in them (as at present a person absorbed in
something does not notice anyone passing by). To plants all things are,
as a rule, at rest, eternal, every object like itself. From the period
of lower organisms has been handed down to man the belief that there are
like things (gleiche Dinge): only the trained experience attained
through the most advanced science contradicts this postulate. The
primordial belief of all organisms is, perhaps, that all the rest of the
world is one thing and motionless.--Furthest away from this first step
towards the logical is the notion of causation: even to-day we think
that all our feelings and doings are, at bottom, acts of the free will;
when the sentient individual contemplates himself he deems every
feeling, every change, a something isolated, disconnected, that is to
say, unqualified by any thing; it comes suddenly to the surface,
independent of anything that went before or came after. We are hungry,
but originally we do not know that the organism must be nourished: on
the contrary that feeling seems to manifest itself without reason or
purpose; it stands out by itself and seems quite independent. Therefore:
the belief in the freedom of the will is a primordial error of
everything organic as old as the very earliest inward prompting of the
logical faculty; belief in unconditioned substances and in like things
(gleiche Dinge) is also a primordial and equally ancient error of
everything organic. Inasmuch as all metaphysic has concerned itself
particularly with substance and with freedom of the will, it should be
designated as the science that deals with the fundamental errors of
mankind as if they were fundamental truths.


19

=Number.=--The invention of the laws of number has as its basis the
primordial and prior-prevailing delusion that many like things exist
(although in point of fact there is no such thing is a duplicate), or
that, at least, there are things (but there is no "thing"). The
assumption of plurality always presupposes that _something_ exists which
manifests itself repeatedly, but just here is where the delusion
prevails; in this very matter we feign realities, unities, that have no
existence. Our feelings, notions, of space and time are false for they
lead, when duly tested, to logical contradictions. In all scientific
demonstrations we always unavoidably base our calculation upon some
false standards [of duration or measurement] but as these standards are
at least _constant_, as, for example, our notions of time and space, the
results arrived at by science possess absolute accuracy and certainty in
their relationship to one another: one can keep on building upon
them--until is reached that final limit at which the erroneous
fundamental conceptions, (the invariable breakdown) come into conflict
with the results established--as, for example, in the case of the atomic
theory. Here we always find ourselves obliged to give credence to a
"thing" or material "substratum" that is set in motion, although, at the
same time, the whole scientific programme has had as its aim the
resolving of everything material into motions [themselves]: here again
we distinguish with our feeling [that which does the] moving and [that
which is] moved,[11] and we never get out of this circle, because the
belief in things[12] has been from time immemorial rooted in our
nature.--When Kant says "the intellect does not derive its laws from
nature, but dictates them to her" he states the full truth as regards
the _idea of nature_ which we form (nature = world, as notion, that is,
as error) but which is merely the synthesis of a host of errors of the
intellect. To a world not [the outcome of] our conception, the laws of
number are wholly inapplicable: such laws are valid only in the world of
mankind.

[11] Wir scheiden auch hier noch mit unserer Empfindung Bewegendes und
Bewegtes.

[12] Glaube an Dinge.


20

=Some Backward Steps.=--One very forward step in education is taken when
man emerges from his superstitious and religious ideas and fears and,
for instance, no longer believes in the dear little angels or in
original sin, and has stopped talking about the salvation of the soul:
when he has taken this step to freedom he has, nevertheless, through the
utmost exertion of his mental power, to overcome metaphysics. Then a
backward movement is necessary: he must appreciate the historical
justification, and to an equal extent the psychological considerations,
in such a movement. He must understand that the greatest advances made
by mankind have resulted from such a course and that without this very
backward movement the highest achievements of man hitherto would have
been impossible.--With regard to philosophical metaphysics I see ever
more and more who have arrived at the negative goal (that all positive
metaphysic is a delusion) but as yet very few who go a few steps
backward: one should look out over the last rungs of the ladder, but not
try to stand on them, that is to say. The most advanced as yet go only
far enough to free themselves from metaphysic and look back at it with
an air of superiority: whereas here, no less than in the hippodrome, it
is necessary to turn around in order to reach the end of the course.


21

=Presumable [Nature of the] Victory of Doubt.=--Let us assume for a
moment the validity of the skeptical standpoint: granted that there is
no metaphysical world, and that all the metaphysical explanations of the
only world we know are useless to us, how would we then contemplate men
and things? [Menschen und Dinge]. This can be thought out and it is
worth while doing so, even if the question whether anything metaphysical
has ever been demonstrated by or through Kant and Schopenhauer, be put
altogether aside. For it is, to all appearances, highly probable that
men, on this point, will be, in the mass, skeptical. The question thus
becomes: what sort of a notion will human society, under the influence
of such a state of mind, form of itself? Perhaps the _scientific
demonstration_ of any metaphysical world is now so difficult that
mankind will never be free from a distrust of it. And when there is
formed a feeling of distrust of metaphysics, the results are, in the
mass, the same as if metaphysics were refuted altogether and _could_ no
longer be believed. In both cases the historical question, with regard
to an unmetaphysical disposition in mankind, remains the same.


22

=Disbelief in the "monumentum aere perennius".=[13]--A decided
disadvantage, attending the termination of metaphysical modes of
thought, is that the individual fixes his mind too attentively upon his
own brief lifetime and feels no strong inducement to aid in the
foundation of institutions capable of enduring for centuries: he wishes
himself to gather the fruit from the tree that he plants and
consequently he no longer plants those trees which require centuries of
constant cultivation and are destined to afford shade to generation
after generation in the future. For metaphysical views inspire the
belief that in them is afforded the final sure foundation upon which
henceforth the whole future of mankind may rest and be built up: the
individual promotes his own salvation; when, for example, he builds a
church or a monastery he is of opinion that he is doing something for
the salvation of his immortal soul:--Can science, as well, inspire such
faith in the efficacy of her results? In actual fact, science requires
doubt and distrust as her surest auxiliaries; nevertheless, the sum of
the irresistible (that is all the onslaughts of skepticism, all the
disintegrating effects of surviving truths) can easily become so great
(as, for instance, in the case of hygienic science) as to inspire the
determination to build "eternal" works upon it. At present the contrast
between our excitated ephemeral existence and the tranquil repose of
metaphysical epochs is too great because both are as yet in too close
juxtaposition. The individual man himself now goes through too many
stages of inner and outer evolution for him to venture to make a plan
even for his life time alone. A perfectly modern man, indeed, who wants
to build himself a house feels as if he were walling himself up alive in
a mausoleum.

[13] Monument more enduring than brass: Horace, Odes III:XXX.


23

=Age of Comparison.=--The less men are bound by tradition, the greater
is the inner activity of motives, the greater, correspondingly, the
outer restlessness, the promiscuous flow of humanity, the polyphony of
strivings. Who now feels any great impulse to establish himself and his
posterity in a particular place? For whom, moreover, does there exist,
at present, any strong tie? As all the methods of the arts were copied
from one another, so were all the methods and advancements of moral
codes, of manners, of civilizations.--Such an age derives its
significance from the fact that in it the various ideas, codes, manners
and civilizations can be compared and experienced side by side; which
was impossible at an earlier period in view of the localised nature of
the rule of every civilization, corresponding to the limitation of all
artistic effects by time and place. To-day the growth of the aesthetic
feeling is decided, owing to the great number of [artistic] forms which
offer themselves for comparison. The majority--those that are condemned
by the method of comparison--will be allowed to die out. In the same way
there is to-day taking place a selection of the forms and customs of the
higher morality which can result only in the extinction of the vulgar
moralities. This is the age of comparison! That is its glory--but also
its pain. Let us not, however shrink from this pain. Rather would we
comprehend the nature of the task imposed upon us by our age as
adequately as we can: posterity will bless us for doing so--a posterity
that knows itself to be [developed] through and above the narrow, early
race-civilizations as well as the culture-civilization of comparison,
but yet looks gratefully back upon both as venerable monuments of
antiquity.


24

=Possibility of Progress.=--When a master of the old civilization (den
alten Cultur) vows to hold no more discussion with men who believe in
progress, he is quite right. For the old civilization[14] has its
greatness and its advantages behind it, and historic training forces one
to acknowledge that it can never again acquire vigor: only intolerable
stupidity or equally intolerable fanaticism could fail to perceive this
fact. But men may consciously determine to evolve to a new civilization
where formerly they evolved unconsciously and accidentally. They can now
devise better conditions for the advancement of mankind, for their
nourishment, training and education, they can administer the earth as an
economic power, and, particularly, compare the capacities of men and
select them accordingly. This new, conscious civilization is killing the
other which, on the whole, has led but an unreflective animal and plant
life: it is also destroying the doubt of progress itself--progress is
possible. I mean: it is hasty and almost unreflective to assume that
progress must _necessarily_ take place: but how can it be doubted that
progress is possible? On the other hand, progress in the sense and along
the lines of the old civilization is not even conceivable. If romantic
fantasy employs the word progress in connection with certain aims and
ends identical with those of the circumscribed primitive national
civilizations, the picture presented of progress is always borrowed from
the past. The idea and the image of progress thus formed are quite
without originality.

[14] Cultur, culture, civilisation etc., but there is no exact English
equivalent.


25

=Private Ethics and World Ethics.=--Since the extinction of the belief
that a god guides the general destiny of the world and, notwithstanding
all the contortions and windings of the path of mankind, leads it
gloriously forward, men must shape oecumenical, world-embracing ends for
themselves. The older ethics, namely Kant's, required of the individual
such a course of conduct as he wishes all men to follow. This evinces
much simplicity--as if any individual could determine off hand what
course of conduct would conduce to the welfare of humanity, and what
course of conduct is preeminently desirable! This is a theory like that
of freedom of competition, which takes it for granted that the general
harmony [of things] _must_ prevail of itself in accordance with some
inherent law of betterment or amelioration. It may be that a later
contemplation of the needs of mankind will reveal that it is by no means
desirable that all men should regulate their conduct according to the
same principle; it may be best, from the standpoint of certain ends yet
to be attained, that men, during long periods should regulate their
conduct with reference to special, and even, in certain circumstances,
evil, objects. At any rate, if mankind is not to be led astray by such a
universal rule of conduct, it behooves it to attain a _knowledge of the
condition of culture_ that will serve as a scientific standard of
comparison in connection with cosmical ends. Herein is comprised the
tremendous mission of the great spirits of the next century.


26

=Reaction as Progress.=--Occasionally harsh, powerful, impetuous, yet
nevertheless backward spirits, appear, who try to conjure back some past
era in the history of mankind: they serve as evidence that the new
tendencies which they oppose, are not yet potent enough, that there is
something lacking in them: otherwise they [the tendencies] would better
withstand the effects of this conjuring back process. Thus Luther's
reformation shows that in his century all the impulses to freedom of the
spirit were still uncertain, lacking in vigor, and immature. Science
could not yet rear her head. Indeed the whole Renaissance appears but as
an early spring smothered in snow. But even in the present century
Schopenhauer's metaphysic shows that the scientific spirit is not yet
powerful enough: for the whole mediaeval Christian world-standpoint
(Weltbetrachtung) and conception of man (Mensch-Empfindung)[15] once
again, notwithstanding the slowly wrought destruction of all Christian
dogma, celebrated a resurrection in Schopenhauer's doctrine. There is
much science in his teaching although the science does not dominate,
but, instead of it, the old, trite "metaphysical necessity." It is one
of the greatest and most priceless advantages of Schopenhauer's teaching
that by it our feelings are temporarily forced back to those old human
and cosmical standpoints to which no other path could conduct us so
easily. The gain for history and justice is very great. I believe that
without Schopenhauer's aid it would be no easy matter for anyone now to
do justice to Christianity and its Asiatic relatives--a thing impossible
as regards the christianity that still survives. After according this
great triumph to justice, after we have corrected in so essential a
respect the historical point of view which the age of learning brought
with it, we may begin to bear still farther onward the banner of
enlightenment--a banner bearing the three names: Petrarch, Erasmus,
Voltaire. We have taken a forward step out of reaction.

[15] Literally man-feeling or human outlook.


27

=A Substitute for Religion.=--It is supposed to be a recommendation for
philosophy to say of it that it provides the people with a substitute
for religion. And in fact, the training of the intellect does
necessitate the convenient laying out of the track of thought, since the
transition from religion by way of science entails a powerful, perilous
leap,--something that should be advised against. With this
qualification, the recommendation referred to is a just one. At the same
time, it should be further explained that the needs which religion
satisfies and which science must now satisfy, are not immutable. Even
they can be diminished and uprooted. Think, for instance, of the
christian soul-need, the sighs over one's inner corruption, the anxiety
regarding salvation--all notions that arise simply out of errors of the
reason and require no satisfaction at all, but annihilation. A
philosophy can either so affect these needs as to appease them or else
put them aside altogether, for they are acquired, circumscribed needs,
based upon hypotheses which those of science explode. Here, for the
purpose of affording the means of transition, for the sake of lightening
the spirit overburdened with feeling, art can be employed to far better
purpose, as these hypotheses receive far less support from art than from
a metaphysical philosophy. Then from art it is easier to go over to a
really emancipating philosophical science.


28

=Discredited Words.=--Away with the disgustingly over-used words
optimism and pessimism! For the occasion for using them grows daily
less; only drivelers now find them indispensably necessary. What earthly
reason could anyone have for being an optimist unless he had a god to
defend who _must_ have created the best of all possible worlds, since he
is himself all goodness and perfection?--but what thinking man has now
any need for the hypothesis that there is a god?--There is also no
occasion whatever for a pessimistic confession of faith, unless one has
a personal interest in denouncing the advocate of god, the theologian or
the theological philosopher, and maintaining the counter proposition
that evil reigns, that wretchedness is more potent than joy, that the
world is a piece of botch work, that phenomenon (Erscheinung) is but the
manifestation of some evil spirit. But who bothers his head about the
theologians any more--except the theologians themselves? Apart from all
theology and its antagonism, it is manifest that the world is neither
good nor bad, (to say nothing about its being the best or the worst) and
that these ideas of "good" and "bad" have significance only in relation
to men, indeed, are without significance at all, in view of the sense in
which they are usually employed. The contemptuous and the eulogistic
point of view must, in every case, be repudiated.


29

=Intoxicated by the Perfume of Flowers.=--The ship of humanity, it is
thought, acquires an ever deeper draught the more it is laden. It is
believed that the more profoundly man thinks, the more exquisitely he
feels, the higher the standard he sets for himself, the greater his
distance from the other animals--the more he appears as a genius
(Genie) among animals--the nearer he gets to the true nature of the
world and to comprehension thereof: this, indeed, he really does through
science, but he thinks he does it far more adequately through his
religions and arts. These are, certainly, a blossoming of the world, but
not, therefore, _nearer the roots of the world_ than is the stalk. One
cannot learn best from it the nature of the world, although nearly
everyone thinks so. _Error_ has made men so deep, sensitive and
imaginative in order to bring forth such flowers as religions and arts.
Pure apprehension would be unable to do that. Whoever should disclose to
us the essence of the world would be undeceiving us most cruelly. Not
the world as thing-in-itself but the world as idea[16] (as error) is
rich in portent, deep, wonderful, carrying happiness and unhappiness in
its womb. This result leads to a philosophy of world negation: which, at
any rate, can be as well combined with a practical world affirmation as
with its opposite.

[16] Vorstellung: this word sometimes corresponds to the English word
"idea", at others to "conception" or "notion."


30

=Evil Habits in Reaching Conclusions.=--The most usual erroneous
conclusions of men are these: a thing[17] exists, therefore it is right:
Here from capacity to live is deduced fitness, from fitness, is deduced
justification. So also: an opinion gives happiness, therefore it is the
true one, its effect is good, therefore it is itself good and true. Here
is predicated of the effect that it gives happiness, that it is good in
the sense of utility, and there is likewise predicated of the cause that
it is good, but good in the sense of logical validity. Conversely, the
proposition would run: a thing[17] cannot attain success, cannot
maintain itself, therefore it is evil: a belief troubles [the believer],
occasions pain, therefore it is false. The free spirit, who is sensible
of the defect in this method of reaching conclusions and has had to
suffer its consequences, often succumbs to the temptation to come to the
very opposite conclusions (which, in general, are, of course, equally
erroneous): a thing cannot maintain itself: therefore it is good; a
belief is troublesome, therefore it is true.

[17] Sache, thing but not in the sense of Ding. Sache is of very
indefinite application (res).


31

=The Illogical is Necessary.=--Among the things which can bring a
thinker to distraction is the knowledge that the illogical is necessary
to mankind and that from the illogical springs much that is good. The
illogical is so imbedded in the passions, in language, in art, in
religion and, above all, in everything that imparts value to life that
it cannot be taken away without irreparably injuring those beautiful
things. Only men of the utmost simplicity can believe that the nature
man knows can be changed into a purely logical nature. Yet were there
steps affording approach to this goal, how utterly everything would be
lost on the way! Even the most rational man needs nature again, from
time to time, that is, his illogical fundamental relation
(Grundstellung) to all things.


32

=Being Unjust is Essential.=--All judgments of the value of life are
illogically developed and therefore unjust. The vice of the judgment
consists, first, in the way in which the subject matter comes under
observation, that is, very incompletely; secondly in the way in which
the total is summed up; and, thirdly, in the fact that each single item
in the totality of the subject matter is itself the result of defective
perception, and this from absolute necessity. No practical knowledge of
a man, for example, stood he never so near to us, can be complete--so
that we could have a logical right to form a total estimate of him; all
estimates are summary and must be so. Then the standard by which we
measure, (our being) is not an immutable quantity; we have moods and
variations, and yet we should know ourselves as an invariable standard
before we undertake to establish the nature of the relation of any thing
(Sache) to ourselves. Perhaps it will follow from all this that one
should form no judgments whatever; if one could but merely _live_
without having to form estimates, without aversion and without
partiality!--for everything most abhorred is closely connected with an
estimate, as well as every strongest partiality. An inclination towards
a thing, or from a thing, without an accompanying feeling that the
beneficial is desired and the pernicious contemned, an inclination
without a sort of experiential estimation of the desirability of an end,
does not exist in man. We are primordially illogical and hence unjust
beings _and can recognise this fact_: this is one of the greatest and
most baffling discords of existence.


33

=Error Respecting Living for the Sake of Living Essential.=--Every
belief in the value and worthiness of life rests upon defective
thinking; it is for this reason alone possible that sympathy with the
general life and suffering of mankind is so imperfectly developed in the
individual. Even exceptional men, who can think beyond their own
personalities, do not have this general life in view, but isolated
portions of it. If one is capable of fixing his observation upon
exceptional cases, I mean upon highly endowed individuals and pure
souled beings, if their development is taken as the true end of
world-evolution and if joy be felt in their existence, then it is
possible to believe in the value of life, because in that case the rest
of humanity is overlooked: hence we have here defective thinking. So,
too, it is even if all mankind be taken into consideration, and one
species only of impulses (the less egoistic) brought under review and
those, in consideration of the other impulses, exalted: then something
could still be hoped of mankind in the mass and to that extent there
could exist belief in the value of life: here, again, as a result of
defective thinking. Whatever attitude, thus, one may assume, one is, as
a result of this attitude, an exception among mankind. Now, the great
majority of mankind endure life without any great protest, and believe,
to this extent, in the value of existence, but that is because each
individual decides and determines alone, and never comes out of his own
personality like these exceptions: everything outside of the personal
has no existence for them or at the utmost is observed as but a faint
shadow. Consequently the value of life for the generality of mankind
consists simply in the fact that the individual attaches more importance
to himself than he does to the world. The great lack of imagination from
which he suffers is responsible for his inability to enter into the
feelings of beings other than himself, and hence his sympathy with their
fate and suffering is of the slightest possible description. On the
other hand, whosoever really _could_ sympathise, necessarily doubts the
value of life; were it possible for him to sum up and to feel in himself
the total consciousness of mankind, he would collapse with a malediction
against existence,--for mankind is, in the mass, without a goal, and
hence man cannot find, in the contemplation of his whole course,
anything to serve him as a mainstay and a comfort, but rather a reason
to despair. If he looks beyond the things that immediately engage him to
the final aimlessness of humanity, his own conduct assumes in his eyes
the character of a frittering away. To feel oneself, however, as
humanity (not alone as an individual) frittered away exactly as we see
the stray leaves frittered away by nature, is a feeling transcending all
feeling. But who is capable of it? Only a poet, certainly: and poets
always know how to console themselves.


34

=For Tranquility.=--But will not our philosophy become thus a tragedy?
Will not truth prove the enemy of life, of betterment? A question seems
to weigh upon our tongue and yet will not put itself into words: whether
one _can_ knowingly remain in the domain of the untruthful? or, if one
_must_, whether, then, death would not be preferable? For there is no
longer any ought (Sollen), morality; so far as it is involved "ought,"
is, through our point of view, as utterly annihilated as religion. Our
knowledge can permit only pleasure and pain, benefit and injury, to
subsist as motives. But how can these motives be distinguished from the
desire for truth? Even they rest upon error (in so far, as already
stated, partiality and dislike and their very inaccurate estimates
palpably modify our pleasure and our pain). The whole of human life is
deeply involved in _untruth_. The individual cannot extricate it from
this pit without thereby fundamentally clashing with his whole past,
without finding his present motives of conduct, (as that of honor)
illegitimate, and without opposing scorn and contempt to the ambitions
which prompt one to have regard for the future and for one's happiness
in the future. Is it true, does there, then, remain but one way of
thinking, which, as a personal consequence brings in its train despair,
and as a theoretical [consequence brings in its train] a philosophy of
decay, disintegration, self annihilation? I believe the deciding
influence, as regards the after-effect of knowledge, will be the
_temperament_ of a man; I can, in addition to this after-effect just
mentioned, suppose another, by means of which a much simpler life, and
one freer from disturbances than the present, could be lived; so that at
first the old motives of vehement passion might still have strength,
owing to hereditary habit, but they would gradually grow weaker under
the influence of purifying knowledge. A man would live, at last, both
among men and unto himself, as in the natural state, without praise,
reproach, competition, feasting one's eyes, as if it were a play, upon
much that formerly inspired dread. One would be rid of the strenuous
element, and would no longer feel the goad of the reflection that man is
not even [as much as] nature, nor more than nature. To be sure, this
requires, as already stated, a good temperament, a fortified, gentle and
naturally cheerful soul, a disposition that has no need to be on its
guard against its own eccentricities and sudden outbreaks and that in
its utterances manifests neither sullenness nor a snarling tone--those
familiar, disagreeable characteristics of old dogs and old men that have
been a long time chained up. Rather must a man, from whom the ordinary
bondages of life have fallen away to so great an extent, so do that he
only lives on in order to grow continually in knowledge, and to learn to
resign, without envy and without disappointment, much, yes nearly
everything, that has value in the eyes of men. He must be content with
such a free, fearless soaring above men, manners, laws and traditional
estimates of things, as the most desirable of all situations. He will
freely share the joy of being in such a situation, and he has, perhaps,
nothing else to share--in which renunciation and self-denial really most
consist. But if more is asked of him, he will, with a benevolent shake
of the head, refer to his brother, the free man of fact, and will,
perhaps, not dissemble a little contempt: for, as regards his "freedom,"
thereby hangs a tale.[18]

[18] den mit dessen "Freiheit" hat es eine eigene Bewandtniss.




HISTORY OF THE MORAL FEELINGS.


35

=Advantages of Psychological Observation.=--That reflection regarding
the human, all-too-human--or as the learned jargon is: psychological
observation--is among the means whereby the burden of life can be made
lighter, that practice in this art affords presence of mind in difficult
situations and entertainment amid a wearisome environment, aye, that
maxims may be culled in the thorniest and least pleasing paths of life
and invigoration thereby obtained: this much was believed, was known--in
former centuries. Why was this forgotten in our own century, during
which, at least in Germany, yes in Europe, poverty as regards
psychological observation would have been manifest in many ways had
there been anyone to whom this poverty could have manifested itself. Not
only in the novel, in the romance, in philosophical standpoints--these
are the works of exceptional men; still more in the state of opinion
regarding public events and personages; above all in general society,
which says much about men but nothing whatever about man, there is
totally lacking the art of psychological analysis and synthesis. But why
is the richest and most harmless source of entertainment thus allowed to
run to waste? Why is the greatest master of the psychological maxim no
longer read?--for, with no exaggeration whatever be it said: the
educated person in Europe who has read La Rochefoucauld and his
intellectual and artistic affinities is very hard to find; still harder,
the person who knows them and does not disparage them. Apparently, too,
this unusual reader takes far less pleasure in them than the form
adopted by these artists should afford him: for the subtlest mind cannot
adequately appreciate the art of maxim-making unless it has had training
in it, unless it has competed in it. Without such practical
acquaintance, one is apt to look upon this making and forming as a much
easier thing than it really is; one is not keenly enough alive to the
felicity and the charm of success. Hence present day readers of maxims
have but a moderate, tempered pleasure in them, scarcely, indeed, a true
perception of their merit, so that their experiences are about the same
as those of the average beholder of cameos: people who praise because
they cannot appreciate, and are very ready to admire and still readier
to turn away.


36

=Objection.=--Or is there a counter-proposition to the dictum that
psychological observation is one of the means of consoling, lightening,
charming existence? Have enough of the unpleasant effects of this art
been experienced to justify the person striving for culture in turning
his regard away from it? In all truth, a certain blind faith in the
goodness of human nature, an implanted distaste for any disparagement of
human concerns, a sort of shamefacedness at the nakedness of the soul,
may be far more desirable things in the general happiness of a man, than
this only occasionally advantageous quality of psychological
sharpsightedness; and perhaps belief in the good, in virtuous men and
actions, in a plenitude of disinterested benevolence has been more
productive of good in the world of men in so far as it has made men less
distrustful. If Plutarch's heroes are enthusiastically imitated and a
reluctance is experienced to looking too critically into the motives of
their actions, not the knowledge but the welfare of human society is
promoted thereby: psychological error and above all obtuseness in regard
to it, help human nature forward, whereas knowledge of the truth is more
promoted by means of the stimulating strength of a hypothesis; as La
Rochefoucauld in the first edition of his "Sentences and Moral Maxims"
has expressed it: "What the world calls virtue is ordinarily but a
phantom created by the passions, and to which we give a good name in
order to do whatever we please with impunity." La Rochefoucauld and
those other French masters of soul-searching (to the number of whom has
lately been added a German, the author of "Psychological Observations")
are like expert marksmen who again and again hit the black spot--but it
is the black spot in human nature. Their art inspires amazement, but
finally some spectator, inspired, not by the scientific spirit but by a
humanitarian feeling, execrates an art that seems to implant in the soul
a taste for belittling and impeaching mankind.


37

=Nevertheless.=--The matter therefore, as regards pro and con, stands
thus: in the present state of philosophy an awakening of the moral
observation is essential. The repulsive aspect of psychological
dissection, with the knife and tweezers entailed by the process, can no
longer be spared humanity. Such is the imperative duty of any science
that investigates the origin and history of the so-called moral feelings
and which, in its progress, is called upon to posit and to solve
advanced social problems:--The older philosophy does not recognize the
newer at all and, through paltry evasions, has always gone astray in the
investigation of the origin and history of human estimates
(Werthschaetzungen). With what results may now be very clearly perceived,
since it has been shown by many examples, how the errors of the greatest
philosophers have their origin in a false explanation of certain human
actions and feelings; how upon the foundation of an erroneous analysis
(for example, of the so called disinterested actions), a false ethic is
reared, to support which religion and like mythological monstrosities
are called in, until finally the shades of these troubled spirits
collapse in physics and in the comprehensive world point of view. But if
it be established that superficiality of psychological observation has
heretofore set the most dangerous snares for human judgment and
deduction, and will continue to do so, all the greater need is there of
that steady continuance of labor that never wearies putting stone upon
stone, little stone upon little stone; all the greater need is there of
a courage that is not ashamed of such humble labor and that will oppose
persistence, to all contempt. It is, finally, also true that countless
single observations concerning the human, all-too-human, have been
first made and uttered in circles accustomed, not to furnish matter for
scientific knowledge, but for intellectual pleasure-seeking; and the
original home atmosphere--a very seductive atmosphere--of the moral
maxim has almost inextricably interpenetrated the entire species, so
that the scientific man involuntarily manifests a sort of mistrust of
this species and of its seriousness. But it is sufficient to point to
the consequences: for already it is becoming evident that events of the
most portentous nature are developing in the domain of psychological
observation. What is the leading conclusion arrived at by one of the
subtlest and calmest of thinkers, the author of the work "Concerning the
Origin of the Moral Feelings", as a result of his thorough and incisive
analysis of human conduct? "The moral man," he says, "stands no nearer
the knowable (metaphysical) world than the physical man."[19] This
dictum, grown hard and cutting beneath the hammer-blow of historical
knowledge, can some day, perhaps, in some future or other, serve as the
axe that will be laid to the root of the "metaphysical necessities" of
men--whether more to the blessing than to the banning of universal well
being who can say?--but in any event a dictum fraught with the most
momentous consequences, fruitful and fearful at once, and confronting
the world in the two faced way characteristic of all great facts.

[19] "Der moralische Mensch, sagt er, steht der intelligiblen
(metaphysischen) Welt nicht naeher, als der physische Mensch."


38

=To What Extent Useful.=--Therefore, whether psychological observation
is more an advantage than a disadvantage to mankind may always remain
undetermined: but there is no doubt that it is necessary, because
science can no longer dispense with it. Science, however, recognizes no
considerations of ultimate goals or ends any more than nature does; but
as the latter duly matures things of the highest fitness for certain
ends without any intention of doing it, so will true science, doing with
ideas what nature does with matter,[20] promote the purposes and the
welfare of humanity, (as occasion may afford, and in many ways) and
attain fitness [to ends]--but likewise without having intended it.

[20] als die Nachahmung der Natur in Begriffen, literally: "as the
counterfeit of nature in (regard to) ideas."

He to whom the atmospheric conditions of such a prospect are too wintry,
has too little fire in him: let him look about him, and he will become
sensible of maladies requiring an icy air, and of people who are so
"kneaded together" out of ardor and intellect that they can scarcely
find anywhere an atmosphere too cold and cutting for them. Moreover: as
too serious individuals and nations stand in need of trivial
relaxations; as others, too volatile and excitable require onerous,
weighty ordeals to render them entirely healthy: should not we, the more
intellectual men of this age, which is swept more and more by
conflagrations, catch up every cooling and extinguishing appliance we
can find that we may always remain as self contained, steady and calm as
we are now, and thereby perhaps serve this age as its mirror and self
reflector, when the occasion arises?


39

=The Fable of Discretionary Freedom.=--The history of the feelings, on
the basis of which we make everyone responsible, hence, the so-called
moral feelings, is traceable in the following leading phases. At first
single actions are termed good or bad without any reference to their
motive, but solely because of the utilitarian or prejudicial
consequences they have for the community. In time, however, the origin
of these designations is forgotten [but] it is imagined that action in
itself, without reference to its consequences, contains the property
"good" or "bad": with the same error according to which language
designates the stone itself as hard[ness] the tree itself as
green[ness]--for the reason, therefore, that what is a consequence is
comprehended as a cause. Accordingly, the good[ness] or bad[ness] is
incorporated into the motive and [any] deed by itself is regarded as
morally ambiguous. A step further is taken, and the predication good or
bad is no longer made of the particular motives but of the entire nature
of a man, out of which motive grows as grow the plants out of the soil.
Thus man is successively made responsible for his [particular] acts,
then for his [course of] conduct, then for his motives and finally for
his nature. Now, at last, is it discovered that this nature, even,
cannot be responsible, inasmuch as it is only and wholly a necessary
consequence and is synthesised out of the elements and influence of past
and present things: therefore, that man is to be made responsible for
nothing, neither for his nature, nor his motives, nor his [course of]
conduct nor his [particular] acts. By this [process] is gained the
knowledge that the history of moral estimates is the history of error,
of the error of responsibility: as is whatever rests upon the error of
the freedom of the will. Schopenhauer concluded just the other way,
thus: since certain actions bring depression ("consciousness of guilt")
in their train, there must, then, exist responsibility, for there would
be no basis for this depression at hand if all man's affairs did not
follow their course of necessity--as they do, indeed, according to the
opinion of this philosopher, follow their course--but man himself,
subject to the same necessity, would be just the man that he is--which
Schopenhauer denies. From the fact of such depression Schopenhauer
believes himself able to prove a freedom which man in some way must have
had, not indeed in regard to his actions but in regard to his nature:
freedom, therefore, to be thus and so, not to act thus and so. Out of
the _esse_, the sphere of freedom and responsibility, follows, according
to his opinion, the _operari_, the spheres of invariable causation,
necessity and irresponsibility. This depression, indeed, is due
apparently to the _operari_--in so far as it be delusive--but in truth
to whatever _esse_ be the deed of a free will, the basic cause of the
existence of an individual: [in order to] let man become whatever he
wills to become, his [to] will (Wollen) must precede his
existence.--Here, apart from the absurdity of the statement just made,
there is drawn the wrong inference that the fact of the depression
explains its character, the rational admissibility of it: from such a
wrong inference does Schopenhauer first come to his fantastic consequent
of the so called discretionary freedom (intelligibeln Freiheit). (For
the origin of this fabulous entity Plato and Kant are equally
responsible). But depression after the act does not need to be rational:
indeed, it is certainly not so at all, for it rests upon the erroneous
assumption that the act need not necessarily have come to pass.
Therefore: only because man deems himself free, but not because
he is free, does he experience remorse and the stings of
conscience.--Moreover, this depression is something that can be grown
out of; in many men it is not present at all as a consequence of acts
which inspire it in many other men. It is a very varying thing and one
closely connected with the development of custom and civilization, and
perhaps manifest only during a relatively brief period of the world's
history.--No one is responsible for his acts, no one for his nature; to
judge is tantamount to being unjust. This applies as well when the
individual judges himself. The proposition is as clear as sunlight, and
yet here everyone prefers to go back to darkness and untruth: for fear
of the consequences.


40

=Above Animal.=--The beast in us must be wheedled: ethic is necessary,
that we may not be torn to pieces. Without the errors involved in the
assumptions of ethics, man would have remained an animal. Thus has he
taken himself as something higher and imposed rigid laws upon himself.
He feels hatred, consequently, for states approximating the animal:
whence the former contempt for the slave as a not-yet-man, as a thing,
is to be explained.


41

=Unalterable Character.=--That character is unalterable is not, in the
strict sense, true; rather is this favorite proposition valid only to
the extent that during the brief life period of a man the potent new
motives can not, usually, press down hard enough to obliterate the lines
imprinted by ages. Could we conceive of a man eighty thousand years old,
we should have in him an absolutely alterable character; so that the
maturities of successive, varying individuals would develop in him. The
shortness of human life leads to many erroneous assertions concerning
the qualities of man.


42

=Classification of Enjoyments and Ethic.=--The once accepted comparative
classification of enjoyments, according to which an inferior, higher,
highest egoism may crave one or another enjoyment, now decides as to
ethical status or unethical status. A lower enjoyment (for example,
sensual pleasure) preferred to a more highly esteemed one (for example,
health) rates as unethical, as does welfare preferred to freedom. The
comparative classification of enjoyments is not, however, alike or the
same at all periods; when anyone demands satisfaction of the law, he is,
from the point of view of an earlier civilization, moral, from that of
the present, non-moral. "Unethical" indicates, therefore, that a man is
not sufficiently sensible to the higher, finer impulses which the
present civilization has brought with it, or is not sensible to them at
all; it indicates backwardness, but only from the point of view of the
contemporary degree of distinction.--The comparative classification of
enjoyments itself is not determined according to absolute ethics; but
after each new ethical adjustment, it is then decided whether conduct be
ethical or the reverse.


43

=Inhuman Men as Survivals.=--Men who are now inhuman must serve us as
surviving specimens of earlier civilizations. The mountain height of
humanity here reveals its lower formations, which might otherwise remain
hidden from view. There are surviving specimens of humanity whose brains
through the vicissitudes of heredity, have escaped proper development.
They show us what we all were and thus appal us; but they are as little
responsible on this account as is a piece of granite for being granite.
In our own brains there must be courses and windings corresponding to
such characters, just as in the forms of some human organs there survive
traces of fishhood. But these courses and windings are no longer the bed
in which flows the stream of our feeling.


44

=Gratitude and Revenge.=--The reason the powerful man is grateful is
this. His benefactor has, through his benefaction, invaded the domain of
the powerful man and established himself on an equal footing: the
powerful man in turn invades the domain of the benefactor and gets
satisfaction through the act of gratitude. It is a mild form of revenge.
By not obtaining the satisfaction of gratitude the powerful would have
shown himself powerless and have ranked as such thenceforward. Hence
every society of the good, that is to say, of the powerful originally,
places gratitude among the first of duties.--Swift has added the dictum
that man is grateful in the same degree that he is revengeful.


45

=Two-fold Historical Origin of Good and Evil.=--The notion of good and
bad has a two-fold historical origin: namely, first, in the spirit of
ruling races and castes. Whoever has power to requite good with good and
evil with evil and actually brings requital, (that is, is grateful and
revengeful) acquires the name of being good; whoever is powerless and
cannot requite is called bad. A man belongs, as a good individual, to
the "good" of a community, who have a feeling in common, because all the
individuals are allied with one another through the requiting sentiment.
A man belongs, as a bad individual, to the "bad," to a mass of
subjugated, powerless men who have no feeling in common. The good are a
caste, the bad are a quantity, like dust. Good and bad is, for a
considerable period, tantamount to noble and servile, master and slave.
On the other hand an enemy is not looked upon as bad: he can requite.
The Trojan and the Greek are in Homer both good. Not he, who does no
harm, but he who is despised, is deemed bad. In the community of the
good individuals [the quality of] good[ness] is inherited; it is
impossible for a bad individual to grow from such a rich soil. If,
notwithstanding, one of the good individuals does something unworthy of
his goodness, recourse is had to exorcism; thus the guilt is ascribed to
a deity, the while it is declared that this deity bewitched the good man
into madness and blindness.--Second, in the spirit of the subjugated,
the powerless. Here every other man is, to the individual, hostile,
inconsiderate, greedy, inhuman, avaricious, be he noble or servile; bad
is the characteristic term for man, for every living being, indeed, that
is recognized at all, even for a god: human, divine, these notions are
tantamount to devilish, bad. Manifestations of goodness, sympathy,
helpfulness, are regarded with anxiety as trickiness, preludes to an
evil end, deception, subtlety, in short, as refined badness. With such a
predisposition in individuals, a feeling in common can scarcely arise at
all, at most only the rudest form of it: so that everywhere that this
conception of good and evil prevails, the destruction of the
individuals, their race and nation, is imminent.--Our existing morality
has developed upon the foundation laid by ruling races and castes.


46

=Sympathy Greater than Suffering.=--There are circumstances in which
sympathy is stronger than the suffering itself. We feel more pain, for
instance, when one of our friends becomes guilty of a reprehensible
action than if we had done the deed ourselves. We once, that is, had
more faith in the purity of his character than he had himself. Hence our
love for him, (apparently because of this very faith) is stronger than
is his own love for himself. If, indeed, his egoism really suffers more,
as a result, than our egoism, inasmuch as he must take the consequences
of his fault to a greater extent than ourselves, nevertheless, the
unegoistic--this word is not to be taken too strictly, but simply as a
modified form of expression--in us is more affected by his guilt than
the unegoistic in him.


47

=Hypochondria.=--There are people who, from sympathy and anxiety for
others become hypochondriacal. The resulting form of compassion is
nothing else than sickness. So, also, is there a Christian hypochondria,
from which those singular, religiously agitated people suffer who place
always before their eyes the suffering and death of Christ.


48

=Economy of Blessings.=--The advantageous and the pleasing, as the
healthiest growths and powers in the intercourse of men, are such
precious treasures that it is much to be wished the use made of these
balsamic means were as economical as possible: but this is impossible.
Economy in the use of blessings is the dream of the craziest of
Utopians.


49

=Well-Wishing.=--Among the small, but infinitely plentiful and therefore
very potent things to which science must pay more attention than to the
great, uncommon things, well-wishing[21] must be reckoned; I mean those
manifestations of friendly disposition in intercourse, that laughter of
the eye, every hand pressure, every courtesy from which, in general,
every human act gets its quality. Every teacher, every functionary adds
this element as a gratuity to whatever he does as a duty; it is the
perpetual well spring of humanity, like the waves of light in which
everything grows; thus, in the narrowest circles, within the family,
life blooms and flowers only through this kind feeling. The
cheerfulness, friendliness and kindness of a heart are unfailing
sources of unegoistic impulse and have made far more for civilization
than those other more noised manifestations of it that are styled
sympathy, benevolence and sacrifice. But it is customary to depreciate
these little tokens of kindly feeling, and, indeed, there is not much of
the unegoistic in them. The sum of these little doses is very great,
nevertheless; their combined strength is of the greatest of
strengths.--Thus, too, much more happiness is to be found in the world
than gloomy eyes discover: that is, if the calculation be just, and all
these pleasing moments in which every day, even the meanest human life,
is rich, be not forgotten.

[21] Wohl-wollen, kind feeling. It stands here for benevolence but not
benevolence in the restricted sense of the word now prevailing.


50

=The Desire to Inspire Compassion.=--La Rochefoucauld, in the most
notable part of his self portraiture (first printed 1658) reaches the
vital spot of truth when he warns all those endowed with reason to be on
their guard against compassion, when he advises that this sentiment be
left to men of the masses who stand in need of the promptings of the
emotions (since they are not guided by reason) to induce them to give
aid to the suffering and to be of service in misfortune: whereas
compassion, in his (and Plato's) view, deprives the heart of strength.
To be sure, sympathy should be manifested but men should take care not
to feel it; for the unfortunate are rendered so dull that the
manifestation of sympathy affords them the greatest happiness in the
world.--Perhaps a more effectual warning against this compassion can be
given if this need of the unfortunate be considered not simply as
stupidity and intellectual weakness, not as a sort of distraction of the
spirit entailed by misfortune itself (and thus, indeed, does La
Rochefoucauld seem to view it) but as something quite different and more
momentous. Let note be taken of children who cry and scream in order to
be compassionated and who, therefore, await the moment when their
condition will be observed; come into contact with the sick and the
oppressed in spirit and try to ascertain if the wailing and sighing, the
posturing and posing of misfortune do not have as end and aim the
causing of pain to the beholder: the sympathy which each beholder
manifests is a consolation to the weak and suffering only in as much as
they are made to perceive that at least they have the power,
notwithstanding all their weakness, to inflict pain. The unfortunate
experiences a species of joy in the sense of superiority which the
manifestation of sympathy entails; his imagination is exalted; he is
always strong enough, then, to cause the world pain. Thus is the thirst
for sympathy a thirst for self enjoyment and at the expense of one's
fellow creatures: it shows man in the whole ruthlessness of his own dear
self: not in his mere "dullness" as La Rochefoucauld thinks.--In social
conversation three fourths of all the questions are asked, and three
fourths of all the replies are made in order to inflict some little
pain; that is why so many people crave social intercourse: it gives them
a sense of their power. In these countless but very small doses in which
the quality of badness is administered it proves a potent stimulant of
life: to the same extent that well wishing--(Wohl-wollen) distributed
through the world in like manner, is one of the ever ready
restoratives.--But will many honorable people be found to admit that
there is any pleasure in administering pain? that entertainment--and
rare entertainment--is not seldom found in causing others, at least in
thought, some pain, and in raking them with the small shot of
wickedness? The majority are too ignoble and a few are too good to know
anything of this pudendum: the latter may, consequently, be prompt to
deny that Prosper Merimee is right when he says: "Know, also, that
nothing is more common than to do wrong for the pleasure of doing it."


51

=How Appearance Becomes Reality.=--The actor cannot, at last, refrain,
even in moments of the deepest pain, from thinking of the effect
produced by his deportment and by his surroundings--for example, even at
the funeral of his own child: he will weep at his own sorrow and its
manifestations as though he were his own audience. The hypocrite who
always plays one and the same part, finally ceases to be a hypocrite; as
in the case of priests who, when young men, are always, either
consciously or unconsciously, hypocrites, and finally become naturally
and then really, without affectation, mere priests: or if the father
does not carry it to this extent, the son, who inherits his father's
calling and gets the advantage of the paternal progress, does. When
anyone, during a long period, and persistently, wishes to appear
something, it will at last prove difficult for him to be anything else.
The calling of almost every man, even of the artist, begins with
hypocrisy, with an imitation of deportment, with a copying of the
effective in manner. He who always wears the mask of a friendly man must
at last gain a power over friendliness of disposition, without which the
expression itself of friendliness is not to be gained--and finally
friendliness of disposition gains the ascendancy over him--he _is_
benevolent.


52

=The Point of Honor in Deception.=--In all great deceivers one
characteristic is prominent, to which they owe their power. In the very
act of deception, amid all the accompaniments, the agitation in the
voice, the expression, the bearing, in the crisis of the scene, there
comes over them a belief in themselves; this it is that acts so
effectively and irresistibly upon the beholders. Founders of religions
differ from such great deceivers in that they never come out of this
state of self deception, or else they have, very rarely, a few moments
of enlightenment in which they are overcome by doubt; generally,
however, they soothe themselves by ascribing such moments of
enlightenment to the evil adversary. Self deception must exist that both
classes of deceivers may attain far reaching results. For men believe in
the truth of all that is manifestly believed with due implicitness by
others.


53

=Presumed Degrees of Truth.=--One of the most usual errors of deduction
is: because someone truly and openly is against us, therefore he speaks
the truth. Hence the child has faith in the judgments of its elders, the
Christian in the assertions of the founder of the church. So, too, it
will not be admitted that all for which men sacrificed life and
happiness in former centuries was nothing but delusion: perhaps it is
alleged these things were degrees of truth. But what is really meant is
that, if a person sincerely believes a thing and has fought and died for
his faith, it would be too _unjust_ if only delusion had inspired him.
Such a state of affairs seems to contradict eternal justice. For that
reason the heart of a sensitive man pronounces against his head the
judgment: between moral conduct and intellectual insight there must
always exist an inherent connection. It is, unfortunately, otherwise:
for there is no eternal justice.


54

=Falsehood.=--Why do men, as a rule, speak the truth in the ordinary
affairs of life? Certainly not for the reason that a god has forbidden
lying. But because first: it is more convenient, as falsehood entails
invention, make-believe and recollection (wherefore Swift says that
whoever invents a lie seldom realises the heavy burden he takes up: he
must, namely, for every lie that he tells, insert twenty more).
Therefore, because in plain ordinary relations of life it is expedient
to say without circumlocution: I want this, I have done this, and the
like; therefore, because the way of freedom and certainty is surer than
that of ruse.--But if it happens that a child is brought up in sinister
domestic circumstances, it will then indulge in falsehood as matter of
course, and involuntarily say anything its own interests may prompt: an
inclination for truth, an aversion to falsehood, is quite foreign and
uncongenial to it, and hence it lies in all innocence.


55

=Ethic Discredited for Faith's Sake.=--No power can sustain itself when
it is represented by mere humbugs: the Catholic Church may possess ever
so many "worldly" sources of strength, but its true might is comprised
in those still numberless priestly natures who make their lives stern
and strenuous and whose looks and emaciated bodies are eloquent of night
vigils, fasts, ardent prayer, perhaps even of whip lashes: these things
make men tremble and cause them anxiety: what, if it be really
imperative to live thus? This is the dreadful question which their
aspect occasions. As they spread this doubt, they lay anew the prop of
their power: even the free thinkers dare not oppose such
disinterestedness with severe truth and cry: "Thou deceived one,
deceive not!"--Only the difference of standpoint separates them from
him: no difference in goodness or badness. But things we cannot
accomplish ourselves, we are apt to criticise unfairly. Thus we are told
of the cunning and perverted acts of the Jesuits, but we overlook the
self mastery that each Jesuit imposes upon himself and also the fact
that the easy life which the Jesuit manuals advocate is for the benefit,
not of the Jesuits but the laity. Indeed, it may be questioned whether
we enlightened ones would become equally competent workers as the result
of similar tactics and organization, and equally worthy of admiration as
the result of self mastery, indefatigable industry and devotion.


56

=Victory of Knowledge over Radical Evil.=--It proves a material gain to
him who would attain knowledge to have had during a considerable period
the idea that mankind is a radically bad and perverted thing: it is a
false idea, as is its opposite, but it long held sway and its roots have
reached down even to ourselves and our present world. In order to
understand _ourselves_ we must understand _it_; but in order to attain a
loftier height we must step above it. We then perceive that there is no
such thing as sin in the metaphysical sense: but also, in the same
sense, no such thing as virtue; that this whole domain of ethical
notions is one of constant variation; that there are higher and deeper
conceptions of good and evil, moral and immoral. Whoever desires no more
of things than knowledge of them attains speedily to peace of mind and
will at most err through lack of knowledge, but scarcely through
eagerness for knowledge (or through sin, as the world calls it). He will
not ask that eagerness for knowledge be interdicted and rooted out; but
his single, all powerful ambition to _know_ as thoroughly and as fully
as possible, will soothe him and moderate all that is strenuous in his
circumstances. Moreover, he is now rid of a number of disturbing
notions; he is no longer beguiled by such words as hell-pain,
sinfulness, unworthiness: he sees in them merely the flitting shadow
pictures of false views of life and of the world.


57

=Ethic as Man's Self-Analysis.=--A good author, whose heart is really in
his work, wishes that someone would arise and wholly refute him if only
thereby his subject be wholly clarified and made plain. The maid in love
wishes that she could attest the fidelity of her own passion through
the faithlessness of her beloved. The soldier wishes to sacrifice his
life on the field of his fatherland's victory: for in the victory of his
fatherland his highest end is attained. The mother gives her child what
she deprives herself of--sleep, the best nourishment and, in certain
circumstances, her health, her self.--But are all these acts unegoistic?
Are these moral deeds miracles because they are, in Schopenhauer's
phrase "impossible and yet accomplished"? Is it not evident that in all
four cases man loves one part of himself, (a thought, a longing, an
experience) more than he loves another part of himself? that he thus
analyses his being and sacrifices one part of it to another part? Is
this essentially different from the behavior of the obstinate man who
says "I would rather be shot than go a step out of my way for this
fellow"?--Preference for something (wish, impulse, longing) is present
in all four instances: to yield to it, with all its consequences, is not
"unegoistic."--In the domain of the ethical man conducts himself not as
individuum but as dividuum.


58

=What Can be Promised.=--Actions can be promised, but not feelings, for
these are involuntary. Whoever promises somebody to love him always, or
to hate him always, or to be ever true to him, promises something that
it is out of his power to bestow. But he really can promise such courses
of conduct as are the ordinary accompaniments of love, of hate, of
fidelity, but which may also have their source in motives quite
different: for various ways and motives lead to the same conduct. The
promise to love someone always, means, consequently: as long as I love
you, I will manifest the deportment of love; but if I cease to love you
my deportment, although from some other motive, will be just the same,
so that to the people about us it will seem as if my love remained
unchanged.--Hence it is the continuance of the deportment of love that
is promised in every instance in which eternal love (provided no element
of self deception be involved) is sworn.


59

=Intellect and Ethic.=--One must have a good memory to be able to keep
the promises one makes. One must have a strong imagination in order to
feel sympathy. So closely is ethics connected with intellectual
capacity.


60

=Desire for Vengeance and Vengeance Itself.=--To meditate revenge and
attain it is tantamount to an attack of fever, that passes away: but to
meditate revenge without possessing the strength or courage to attain it
is tantamount to suffering from a chronic malady, or poisoning of body
and soul. Ethics, which takes only the motive into account, rates both
cases alike: people generally estimate the first case as the worst
(because of the consequences which the deed of vengeance may entail).
Both views are short sighted.


61

=Ability to Wait.=--Ability to wait is so hard to acquire that great
poets have not disdained to make inability to wait the central motive of
their poems. So Shakespeare in Othello, Sophocles in Ajax, whose suicide
would not have seemed to him so imperative had he only been able to cool
his ardor for a day, as the oracle foreboded: apparently he would then
have repulsed somewhat the fearful whispers of distracted thought and
have said to himself: Who has not already, in my situation, mistaken a
sheep for a hero? is it so extraordinary a thing? On the contrary it is
something universally human: Ajax should thus have soothed himself.
Passion will not wait: the tragic element in the lives of great men does
not generally consist in their conflict with time and the inferiority
of their fellowmen but in their inability to put off their work a year
or two: they cannot wait.--In all duels, the friends who advise have but
to ascertain if the principals can wait: if this be not possible, a duel
is rational inasmuch as each of the combatants may say: "either I
continue to live and the other dies instantly, or vice versa." To wait
in such circumstances would be equivalent to the frightful martyrdom of
enduring dishonor in the presence of him responsible for the dishonor:
and this can easily cost more anguish than life is worth.


62

=Glutting Revenge.=--Coarse men, who feel a sense of injury, are in the
habit of rating the extent of their injury as high as possible and of
stating the occasion of it in greatly exaggerated language, in order to
be able to feast themselves on the sentiments of hatred and revenge thus
aroused.


63

=Value of Disparagement.=--Not a few, perhaps the majority of men, find
it necessary, in order to retain their self esteem and a certain
uprightness in conduct, to mentally disparage and belittle all the
people they know. But as the inferior natures are in the majority and as
a great deal depends upon whether they retain or lose this uprightness,
so--


64

=The Man in a Rage.=--We should be on our guard against the man who is
enraged against us, as against one who has attempted our life, for the
fact that we still live consists solely in the inability to kill: were
looks sufficient, it would have been all up with us long since. To
reduce anyone to silence by physical manifestations of savagery or by a
terrorizing process is a relic of under civilization. So, too, that cold
look which great personages cast upon their servitors is a remnant of
the caste distinction between man and man; a specimen of rude antiquity:
women, the conservers of the old, have maintained this survival, too,
more perfectly than men.


65

=Whither Honesty May Lead.=--Someone once had the bad habit of
expressing himself upon occasion, and with perfect honesty, on the
subject of the motives of his conduct, which were as good or as bad as
the motives of all men. He aroused first disfavor, then suspicion,
became gradually of ill repute and was pronounced a person of whom
society should beware, until at last the law took note of such a
perverted being for reasons which usually have no weight with it or to
which it closes its eyes. Lack of taciturnity concerning what is
universally held secret, and an irresponsible predisposition to see what
no one wants to see--oneself--brought him to prison and to early death.


66

=Punishable, not Punished.=--Our crime against criminals consists in the
fact that we treat them as rascals.


67

=Sancta simplicitas of Virtue.=--Every virtue has its privilege: for
example, that of contributing its own little bundle of wood to the
funeral pyre of one condemned.


68

=Morality and Consequence.=--Not alone the beholders of an act generally
estimate the ethical or unethical element in it by the result: no, the
one who performed the act does the same. For the motives and the
intentions are seldom sufficiently apparent, and amid them the memory
itself seems to become clouded by the results of the act, so that a man
often ascribes the wrong motives to his acts or regards the remote
motives as the direct ones. Success often imparts to an action all the
brilliance and honor of good intention, while failure throws the shadow
of conscience over the most estimable deeds. Hence arises the familiar
maxim of the politician: "Give me only success: with it I can win all
the noble souls over to my side--and make myself noble even in my own
eyes."--In like manner will success prove an excellent substitute for a
better argument. To this very day many well educated men think the
triumph of Christianity over Greek philosophy is a proof of the superior
truth of the former--although in this case it was simply the coarser and
more powerful that triumphed over the more delicate and intellectual. As
regards superiority of truth, it is evident that because of it the
reviving sciences have connected themselves, point for point, with the
philosophy of Epicurus, while Christianity has, point for point,
recoiled from it.


69

=Love and Justice.=--Why is love so highly prized at the expense of
justice and why are such beautiful things spoken of the former as if it
were a far higher entity than the latter? Is the former not palpably a
far more stupid thing than the latter?--Certainly, and on that very
account so much the more agreeable to everybody: it is blind and has a
rich horn of plenty out of which it distributes its gifts to everyone,
even when they are unmerited, even when no thanks are returned. It is
impartial like the rain, which according to the bible and experience,
wets not alone the unjust but, in certain circumstances, the just as
well, and to their skins at that.


70

=Execution.=--How comes it that every execution causes us more pain than
a murder? It is the coolness of the executioner, the painful
preparation, the perception that here a man is being used as an
instrument for the intimidation of others. For the guilt is not punished
even if there be any: this is ascribable to the teachers, the parents,
the environment, in ourselves, not in the murderer--I mean the
predisposing circumstances.


71

=Hope.=--Pandora brought the box containing evils and opened it. It was
the gift of the gods to men, a gift of most enticing appearance
externally and called the "box of happiness." Thereupon all the evils,
(living, moving things) flew out: from that time to the present they fly
about and do ill to men by day and night. One evil only did not fly out
of the box: Pandora shut the lid at the behest of Zeus and it remained
inside. Now man has this box of happiness perpetually in the house and
congratulates himself upon the treasure inside of it; it is at his
service: he grasps it whenever he is so disposed, for he knows not that
the box which Pandora brought was a box of evils. Hence he looks upon
the one evil still remaining as the greatest source of happiness--it is
hope.--Zeus intended that man, notwithstanding the evils oppressing him,
should continue to live and not rid himself of life, but keep on making
himself miserable. For this purpose he bestowed hope upon man: it is, in
truth, the greatest of evils for it lengthens the ordeal of man.


72

=Degree of Moral Susceptibility Unknown.=--The fact that one has or has
not had certain profoundly moving impressions and insights into
things--for example, an unjustly executed, slain or martyred father, a
faithless wife, a shattering, serious accident,--is the factor upon
which the excitation of our passions to white heat principally depends,
as well as the course of our whole lives. No one knows to what lengths
circumstances (sympathy, emotion) may lead him. He does not know the
full extent of his own susceptibility. Wretched environment makes him
wretched. It is as a rule not the quality of our experience but its
quantity upon which depends the development of our superiority or
inferiority, from the point of view of good and evil.


73

=The Martyr Against His Will.=--In a certain movement there was a man
who was too cowardly and vacillating ever to contradict his comrades. He
was made use of in each emergency, every sacrifice was demanded of him
because he feared the disfavor of his comrades more than he feared
death: he was a petty, abject spirit. They perceived this and upon the
foundation of the qualities just mentioned they elevated him to the
altitude of a hero, and finally even of a martyr. Although the cowardly
creature always inwardly said No, he always said Yes with his lips, even
upon the scaffold, where he died for the tenets of his party: for beside
him stood one of his old associates who so domineered him with look and
word that he actually went to his death with the utmost fortitude and
has ever since been celebrated as a martyr and exalted character.


74

=General Standard.=--One will rarely err if extreme actions be ascribed
to vanity, ordinary actions to habit and mean actions to fear.


75

=Misunderstanding of Virtue.=--Whoever has obtained his experience of
vice in connection with pleasure as in the case of one with a youth of
wild oats behind him, comes to the conclusion that virtue must be
connected with self denial. Whoever, on the other hand, has been very
much plagued by his passions and vices, longs to find in virtue the rest
and peace of the soul. That is why it is possible for two virtuous
people to misunderstand one another wholly.


76

=The Ascetic.=--The ascetic makes out of virtue a slavery.


77

=Honor Transferred from Persons to Things.=--Actions prompted by love or
by the spirit of self sacrifice for others are universally honored
wherever they are manifest. Hence is magnified the value set upon
whatever things may be loved or whatever things conduce to self
sacrifice: although in themselves they may be worth nothing much. A
valiant army is evidence of the value of the thing it fights for.


78

=Ambition a Substitute for Moral Feeling.=--Moral feeling should never
become extinct in natures that are destitute of ambition. The ambitious
can get along without moral feeling just as well as with it.--Hence the
sons of retired, ambitionless families, generally become by a series of
rapid gradations, when they lose moral feeling, the most absolute
lunkheads.


79

=Vanity Enriches.=--How poor the human mind would be without vanity! As
it is, it resembles a well stacked and ever renewed ware-emporium that
attracts buyers of every class: they can find almost everything, have
almost everything, provided they bring with them the right kind of
money--admiration.


80

=Senility and Death.=--Apart from the demands made by religion, it may
well be asked why it is more honorable in an aged man, who feels the
decline of his powers, to await slow extinction than to fix a term to
his existence himself? Suicide in such a case is a quite natural and due
proceeding that ought to command respect as a triumph of reason: and did
in fact command respect during the times of the masters of Greek
philosophy and the bravest Roman patriots, who usually died by their own
hand. Eagerness, on the other hand, to keep alive from day to day with
the anxious counsel of physicians, without capacity to attain any nearer
to one's ideal of life, is far less worthy of respect.--Religions are
very rich in refuges from the mandate of suicide: hence they ingratiate
themselves with those who cling to life.


81

=Delusions Regarding Victim and Regarding Evil Doer.=--When the rich man
takes a possession away from the poor man (for example, a prince who
deprives a plebeian of his beloved) there arises in the mind of the poor
man a delusion: he thinks the rich man must be wholly perverted to take
from him the little that he has. But the rich man appreciates the value
of a single possession much less because he is accustomed to many
possessions, so that he cannot put himself in the place of the poor man
and does not act by any means as ill as the latter supposes. Both have a
totally false idea of each other. The iniquities of the mighty which
bulk most largely in history are not nearly so monstrous as they seem.
The hereditary consciousness of being a superior being with superior
environment renders one very callous and lulls the conscience to rest.
We all feel, when the difference between ourselves and some other being
is exceedingly great, that no element of injustice can be involved, and
we kill a fly with no qualms of conscience whatever. So, too, it is no
indication of wickedness in Xerxes (whom even the Greeks represent as
exceptionally noble) that he deprived a father of his son and had him
drawn and quartered because the latter had manifested a troublesome,
ominous distrust of an entire expedition: the individual was in this
case brushed aside as a pestiferous insect. He was too low and mean to
justify continued sentiments of compunction in the ruler of the world.
Indeed no cruel man is ever as cruel, in the main, as his victim thinks.
The idea of pain is never the same as the sensation. The rule is
precisely analogous in the case of the unjust judge, and of the
journalist who by means of devious rhetorical methods, leads public
opinion astray. Cause and effect are in all these instances entwined
with totally different series of feeling and thoughts, whereas it is
unconsciously assumed that principal and victim feel and think exactly
alike, and because of this assumption the guilt of the one is based upon
the pain of the other.


82

=The Soul's Skin.=--As the bones, flesh, entrails and blood vessels are
enclosed by a skin that renders the aspect of men endurable, so the
impulses and passions of the soul are enclosed by vanity: it is the skin
of the soul.


83

=Sleep of Virtue.=--If virtue goes to sleep, it will be more vigorous
when it awakes.


84

=Subtlety of Shame.=--Men are not ashamed of obscene thoughts, but they
are ashamed when they suspect that obscene thoughts are attributed to
them.


85

=Naughtiness Is Rare.=--Most people are too much absorbed in themselves
to be bad.


86

=The Mite in the Balance.=--We are praised or blamed, as the one or the
other may be expedient, for displaying to advantage our power of
discernment.


87

=Luke 18:14 Improved.=--He that humbleth himself wisheth to be exalted.


88

=Prevention of Suicide.=--There is a justice according to which we may
deprive a man of life, but none that permits us to deprive him of death:
this is merely cruelty.


89

=Vanity.=--We set store by the good opinion of men, first because it is
of use to us and next because we wish to give them pleasure (children
their parents, pupils their teacher, and well disposed persons all
others generally). Only when the good opinion of men is important to
somebody, apart from personal advantage or the desire to give pleasure,
do we speak of vanity. In this last case, a man wants to give himself
pleasure, but at the expense of his fellow creatures, inasmuch as he
inspires them with a false opinion of himself or else inspires "good
opinion" in such a way that it is a source of pain to others (by
arousing envy). The individual generally seeks, through the opinion of
others, to attest and fortify the opinion he has of himself; but the
potent influence of authority--an influence as old as man himself--leads
many, also, to strengthen their own opinion of themselves by means of
authority, that is, to borrow from others the expedient of relying more
upon the judgment of their fellow men than upon their own.--Interest in
oneself, the wish to please oneself attains, with the vain man, such
proportions that he first misleads others into a false, unduly exalted
estimate of himself and then relies upon the authority of others for his
self estimate; he thus creates the delusion that he pins his faith
to.--It must, however, be admitted that the vain man does not desire to
please others so much as himself and he will often go so far, on this
account, as to overlook his own interests: for he often inspires his
fellow creatures with malicious envy and renders them ill disposed in
order that he may thus increase his own delight in himself.


90

=Limits of the Love of Mankind.=--Every man who has declared that some
other man is an ass or a scoundrel, gets angry when the other man
conclusively shows that the assertion was erroneous.


91

=Weeping Morality.=--How much delight morality occasions! Think of the
ocean of pleasing tears that has flowed from the narration of noble,
great-hearted deeds!--This charm of life would disappear if the belief
in complete irresponsibility gained the upper hand.


92

=Origin of Justice.=--Justice (reasonableness) has its origin among
approximate equals in power, as Thucydides (in the dreadful conferences
of the Athenian and Melian envoys) has rightly conceived. Thus, where
there exists no demonstrable supremacy and a struggle leads but to
mutual, useless damage, the reflection arises that an understanding
would best be arrived at and some compromise entered into. The
reciprocal nature is hence the first nature of justice. Each party makes
the other content inasmuch as each receives what it prizes more highly
than the other. Each surrenders to the other what the other wants and
receives in return its own desire. Justice is therefore reprisal and
exchange upon the basis of an approximate equality of power. Thus
revenge pertains originally to the domain of justice as it is a sort of
reciprocity. Equally so, gratitude.--Justice reverts naturally to the
standpoint of self preservation, therefore to the egoism of this
consideration: "why should I injure myself to no purpose and perhaps
never attain my end?"--So much for the origin of justice. Only because
men, through mental habits, have forgotten the original motive of so
called just and rational acts, and also because for thousands of years
children have been brought to admire and imitate such acts, have they
gradually assumed the appearance of being unegotistical. Upon this
appearance is founded the high estimate of them, which, moreover, like
all estimates, is continually developing, for whatever is highly
esteemed is striven for, imitated, made the object of self sacrifice,
while the merit of the pain and emulation thus expended is, by each
individual, ascribed to the thing esteemed.--How slightly moral would
the world appear without forgetfulness! A poet could say that God had
posted forgetfulness as a sentinel at the portal of the temple of human
merit!


93

=Concerning the Law of the Weaker.=--Whenever any party, for instance, a
besieged city, yields to a stronger party, under stipulated conditions,
the counter stipulation is that there be a reduction to insignificance,
a burning and destruction of the city and thus a great damage inflicted
upon the stronger party. Thus arises a sort of equalization principle
upon the basis of which a law can be established. The enemy has an
advantage to gain by its maintenance.--To this extent there is also a
law between slaves and masters, limited only by the extent to which the
slave may be useful to his master. The law goes originally only so far
as the one party may appear to the other potent, invincible, stable, and
the like. To such an extent, then, the weaker has rights, but very
limited ones. Hence the famous dictum that each has as much law on his
side as his power extends (or more accurately, as his power is believed
to extend).


94

=The Three Phases of Morality Hitherto.=--It is the first evidence that
the animal has become human when his conduct ceases to be based upon the
immediately expedient, but upon the permanently useful; when he has,
therefore, grown utilitarian, capable of purpose. Thus is manifested the
first rule of reason. A still higher stage is attained when he regulates
his conduct upon the basis of honor, by means of which he gains mastery
of himself and surrenders his desires to principles; this lifts him far
above the phase in which he was actuated only by considerations of
personal advantage as he understood it. He respects and wishes to be
respected. This means that he comprehends utility as a thing dependent
upon what his opinion of others is and their opinion of him. Finally he
regulates his conduct (the highest phase of morality hitherto attained)
by his own standard of men and things. He himself decides, for himself
and for others, what is honorable and what is useful. He has become a
law giver to opinion, upon the basis of his ever higher developing
conception of the utilitarian and the honorable. Knowledge makes him
capable of placing the highest utility, (that is, the universal,
enduring utility) before merely personal utility,--of placing ennobling
recognition of the enduring and universal before the merely temporary:
he lives and acts as a collective individuality.


95

=Ethic of the Developed Individual.=--Hitherto the altruistic has been
looked upon as the distinctive characteristic of moral conduct, and it
is manifest that it was the consideration of universal utility that
prompted praise and recognition of altruistic conduct. Must not a
radical departure from this point of view be imminent, now that it is
being ever more clearly perceived that in the most personal
considerations the most general welfare is attained: so that conduct
inspired by the most personal considerations of advantage is just the
sort which has its origin in the present conception of morality (as a
universal utilitarianism)? To contemplate oneself as a complete
personality and bear the welfare of that personality in mind in all that
one does--this is productive of better results than any sympathetic
susceptibility and conduct in behalf of others. Indeed we all suffer
from such disparagement of our own personalities, which are at present
made to deteriorate from neglect. Capacity is, in fact, divorced from
our personality in most cases, and sacrificed to the state, to science,
to the needy, as if it were the bad which deserved to be made a
sacrifice. Now, we are willing to labor for our fellowmen but only to
the extent that we find our own highest advantage in so doing, no more,
no less. The whole matter depends upon what may be understood as one's
advantage: the crude, undeveloped, rough individualities will be the
very ones to estimate it most inadequately.


96

=Usage and Ethic.=--To be moral, virtuous, praiseworthy means to yield
obedience to ancient law and hereditary usage. Whether this obedience be
rendered readily or with difficulty is long immaterial. Enough that it
be rendered. "Good" finally comes to mean him who acts in the
traditional manner, as a result of heredity or natural disposition, that
is to say does what is customary with scarcely an effort, whatever that
may be (for example revenges injuries when revenge, as with the ancient
Greeks, was part of good morals). He is called good because he is good
"to some purpose," and as benevolence, sympathy, considerateness,
moderation and the like come, in the general course of conduct, to be
finally recognized as "good to some purpose" (as utilitarian) the
benevolent man, the helpful man, is duly styled "good". (At first other
and more important kinds of utilitarian qualities stand in the
foreground.) Bad is "not habitual" (unusual), to do things not in
accordance with usage, to oppose the traditional, however rational or
the reverse the traditional may be. To do injury to one's social group
or community (and to one's neighbor as thus understood) is looked upon,
through all the variations of moral laws, in different ages, as the
peculiarly "immoral" act, so that to-day we associate the word "bad"
with deliberate injury to one's neighbor or community. "Egoistic" and
"non-egoistic" do not constitute the fundamental opposites that have
brought mankind to make a distinction between moral and immoral, good
and bad; but adherence to traditional custom, and emancipation from it.
How the traditional had its origin is quite immaterial; in any event it
had no reference to good and bad or any categorical imperative but to
the all important end of maintaining and sustaining the community, the
race, the confederation, the nation. Every superstitious custom that
originated in a misinterpreted event or casualty entailed some
tradition, to adhere to which is moral. To break loose from it is
dangerous, more prejudicial to the community than to the individual
(because divinity visits the consequences of impiety and sacrilege upon
the community rather than upon the individual). Now every tradition
grows ever more venerable--the more remote is its origin, the more
confused that origin is. The reverence due to it increases from
generation to generation. The tradition finally becomes holy and
inspires awe. Thus it is that the precept of piety is a far loftier
morality than that inculcated by altruistic conduct.


97

=Delight in the Moral.=--A potent species of joy (and thereby the source
of morality) is custom. The customary is done more easily, better,
therefore preferably. A pleasure is felt in it and experience thus shows
that since this practice has held its own it must be good. A manner or
moral that lives and lets live is thus demonstrated advantageous,
necessary, in contradistinction to all new and not yet adopted
practices. The custom is therefore the blending of the agreeable and the
useful. Moreover it does not require deliberation. As soon as man can
exercise compulsion, he exercises it to enforce and establish his
customs, for they are to him attested lifewisdom. So, too, a community
of individuals constrains each one of their number to adopt the same
moral or custom. The error herein is this: Because a certain custom has
been agreeable to the feelings or at least because it proves a means of
maintenance, this custom must be imperative, for it is regarded as the
only thing that can possibly be consistent with well being. The well
being of life seems to spring from it alone. This conception of the
customary as a condition of existence is carried into the slightest
detail of morality. Inasmuch as insight into true causation is quite
restricted in all inferior peoples, a superstitious anxiety is felt that
everything be done in due routine. Even when a custom is exceedingly
burdensome it is preserved because of its supposed vital utility. It is
not known that the same degree of satisfaction can be experienced
through some other custom and even higher degrees of satisfaction, too.
But it is fully appreciated that all customs do become more agreeable
with the lapse of time, no matter how difficult they may have been found
in the beginning, and that even the severest way of life may be rendered
a matter of habit and therefore a pleasure.


98

=Pleasure and Social Instinct.=--Through his relations with other men,
man derives a new species of delight in those pleasurable emotions which
his own personality affords him; whereby the domain of pleasurable
emotions is made infinitely more comprehensive. No doubt he has
inherited many of these feelings from the brutes, which palpably feel
delight when they sport with one another, as mothers with their young.
So, too, the sexual relations must be taken into account: they make
every young woman interesting to every young man from the standpoint of
pleasure, and conversely. The feeling of pleasure originating in human
relationships makes men in general better. The delight in common, the
pleasures enjoyed together heighten one another. The individual feels a
sense of security. He becomes better natured. Distrust and malice
dissolve. For the man feels the sense of benefit and observes the same
feeling in others. Mutual manifestations of pleasure inspire mutual
sympathy, the sentiment of homogeneity. The same effect is felt also at
mutual sufferings, in a common danger, in stormy weather. Upon such a
foundation are built the earliest alliances: the object of which is the
mutual protection and safety from threatening misfortunes, and the
welfare of each individual. And thus the social instinct develops from
pleasure.


99

=The Guiltless Nature of So-Called Bad Acts.=--All "bad" acts are
inspired by the impulse to self preservation or, more accurately, by
the desire for pleasure and for the avoidance of pain in the individual.
Thus are they occasioned, but they are not, therefore, bad. "Pain self
prepared" does not exist, except in the brains of the philosophers, any
more than "pleasure self prepared" (sympathy in the Schopenhauer sense).
In the condition anterior to the state we kill the creature, be it man
or ape, that attempts to pluck the fruit of a tree before we pluck it
ourselves should we happen to be hungry at the time and making for that
tree: as we would do to-day, so far as the brute is concerned, if we
were wandering in savage regions.--The bad acts which most disturb us at
present do so because of the erroneous supposition that the one who is
guilty of them towards us has a free will in the matter and that it was
within his discretion not to have done these evil things. This belief in
discretionary power inspires hate, thirst for revenge, malice, the
entire perversion of the mental processes, whereas we would feel in no
way incensed against the brute, as we hold it irresponsible. To inflict
pain not from the instinct of self preservation but in requital--this is
the consequence of false judgment and is equally a guiltless course of
conduct. The individual can, in that condition which is anterior to the
state, act with fierceness and violence for the intimidation of another
creature, in order to render his own power more secure as a result of
such acts of intimidation. Thus acts the powerful, the superior, the
original state founder, who subjugates the weaker. He has the right to
do so, as the state nowadays assumes the same right, or, to be more
accurate, there is no right that can conflict with this. A foundation
for all morality can first be laid only when a stronger individuality or
a collective individuality, for example society, the state, subjects the
single personalities, hence builds upon their unification and
establishes a bond of union. Morality results from compulsion, it is
indeed itself one long compulsion to which obedience is rendered in
order that pain may be avoided. At first it is but custom, later free
obedience and finally almost instinct. At last it is (like everything
habitual and natural) associated with pleasure--and is then called
virtue.


100

=Shame.=--Shame exists wherever a "mystery" exists: but this is a
religious notion which in the earlier period of human civilization had
great vogue. Everywhere there were circumscribed spots to which access
was denied on account of some divine law, except in special
circumstances. At first these spots were quite extensive, inasmuch as
stipulated areas could not be trod by the uninitiated, who, when near
them, felt tremors and anxieties. This sentiment was frequently
transferred to other relationships, for example to sexual relations,
which, as the privilege and gateway of mature age, must be withdrawn
from the contemplation of youth for its own advantage: relations which
many divinities were busy in preserving and sanctifying, images of which
divinities were duly placed in marital chambers as guardians. (In
Turkish such an apartment is termed a harem or holy thing, the same word
also designating the vestibule of a mosque). So, too, Kingship is
regarded as a centre from which power and brilliance stream forth, as a
mystery to the subjects, impregnated with secrecy and shame, sentiments
still quite operative among peoples who in other respects are without
any shame at all. So, too, is the whole world of inward states, the
so-called "soul," even now, for all non-philosophical persons, a
"mystery," and during countless ages it was looked upon as a something
of divine origin, in direct communion with deity. It is, therefore, an
adytum and occasions shame.


101

=Judge Not.=--Care must be taken, in the contemplation of earlier ages,
that there be no falling into unjust scornfulness. The injustice in
slavery, the cruelty in the subjugation of persons and peoples must not
be estimated by our standard. For in that period the instinct of justice
was not so highly developed. Who dare reproach the Genoese Calvin for
burning the physician Servetus at the stake? It was a proceeding growing
out of his convictions. And the Inquisition, too, had its justification.
The only thing is that the prevailing views were false and led to those
proceedings which seem so cruel to us, simply because such views have
become foreign to us. Besides, what is the burning alive of one
individual compared with eternal hell pains for everybody else? And yet
this idea then had hold of all the world without in the least vitiating,
with its frightfulness, the other idea of a god. Even we nowadays are
hard and merciless to political revolutionists, but that is because we
are in the habit of believing the state a necessity, and hence the
cruelty of the proceeding is not so much understood as in the other
cases where the points of view are repudiated. The cruelty to animals
shown by children and Italians is due to the same misunderstanding. The
animal, owing to the exigencies of the church catechism, is placed too
far below the level of mankind.--Much, too, that is frightful and
inhuman in history, and which is almost incredible, is rendered less
atrocious by the reflection that the one who commands and the one who
executes are different persons. The former does not witness the
performance and hence it makes no strong impression on him. The latter
obeys a superior and hence feels no responsibility. Most princes and
military chieftains appear, through lack of true perception, cruel and
hard without really being so.--Egoism is not bad because the idea of the
"neighbor"--the word is of Christian origin and does not correspond to
truth--is very weak in us, and we feel ourselves, in regard to him, as
free from responsibility as if plants and stones were involved. That
another is in suffering must be learned and it can never be wholly
learned.


102

"=Man Always Does Right.="--We do not blame nature when she sends a
thunder storm and makes us wet: why then do we term the man who inflicts
injury immoral? Because in the latter case we assume a voluntary,
ruling, free will, and in the former necessity. But this distinction is
a delusion. Moreover, even the intentional infliction of injury is not,
in all circumstances termed immoral. Thus, we kill a fly intentionally
without thinking very much about it, simply because its buzzing about is
disagreeable; and we punish a criminal and inflict pain upon him in
order to protect ourselves and society. In the first case it is the
individual who, for the sake of preserving himself or in order to spare
himself pain, does injury with design: in the second case, it is the
state. All ethic deems intentional infliction of injury justified by
necessity; that is when it is a matter of self preservation. But these
two points of view are sufficient to explain all bad acts done by man to
men. It is desired to obtain pleasure or avoid pain. In any sense, it is
a question, always, of self preservation. Socrates and Plato are right:
whatever man does he always does right: that is, does what seems to him
good (advantageous) according to the degree of advancement his intellect
has attained, which is always the measure of his rational capacity.


103

=The Inoffensive in Badness.=--Badness has not for its object the
infliction of pain upon others but simply our own satisfaction as, for
instance, in the case of thirst for vengeance or of nerve excitation.
Every act of teasing shows what pleasure is caused by the display of
our power over others and what feelings of delight are experienced in
the sense of domination. Is there, then, anything immoral in feeling
pleasure in the pain of others? Is malicious joy devilish, as
Schopenhauer says? In the realm of nature we feel joy in breaking
boughs, shattering rocks, fighting with wild beasts, simply to attest
our strength thereby. Should not the knowledge that another suffers on
our account here, in this case, make the same kind of act, (which, by
the way, arouses no qualms of conscience in us) immoral also? But if we
had not this knowledge there would be no pleasure in one's own
superiority or power, for this pleasure is experienced only in the
suffering of another, as in the case of teasing. All pleasure is, in
itself, neither good nor bad. Whence comes the conviction that one
should not cause pain in others in order to feel pleasure oneself?
Simply from the standpoint of utility, that is, in consideration of the
consequences, of ultimate pain, since the injured party or state will
demand satisfaction and revenge. This consideration alone can have led
to the determination to renounce such pleasure.--Sympathy has the
satisfaction of others in view no more than, as already stated, badness
has the pain of others in view. For there are at least two (perhaps many
more) elementary ingredients in personal gratification which enter
largely into our self satisfaction: one of them being the pleasure of
the emotion, of which species is sympathy with tragedy, and another,
when the impulse is to action, being the pleasure of exercising one's
power. Should a sufferer be very dear to us, we divest ourselves of pain
by the performance of acts of sympathy.--With the exception of some few
philosophers, men have placed sympathy very low in the rank of moral
feelings: and rightly.


104

=Self Defence.=--If self defence is in general held a valid
justification, then nearly every manifestation of so called immoral
egoism must be justified, too. Pain is inflicted, robbery or killing
done in order to maintain life or to protect oneself and ward off harm.
A man lies when cunning and delusion are valid means of self
preservation. To injure intentionally when our safety and our existence
are involved, or the continuance of our well being, is conceded to be
moral. The state itself injures from this motive when it hangs
criminals. In unintentional injury the immoral, of course, can not be
present, as accident alone is involved. But is there any sort of
intentional injury in which our existence and the maintenance of our
well being be not involved? Is there such a thing as injuring from
absolute badness, for example, in the case of cruelty? If a man does not
know what pain an act occasions, that act is not one of wickedness. Thus
the child is not bad to the animal, not evil. It disturbs and rends it
as if it were one of its playthings. Does a man ever fully know how much
pain an act may cause another? As far as our nervous system extends, we
shield ourselves from pain. If it extended further, that is, to our
fellow men, we would never cause anyone else any pain (except in such
cases as we cause it to ourselves, when we cut ourselves, surgically, to
heal our ills, or strive and trouble ourselves to gain health). We
conclude from analogy that something pains somebody and can in
consequence, through recollection and the power of imagination, feel
pain also. But what a difference there always is between the tooth ache
and the pain (sympathy) that the spectacle of tooth ache occasions!
Therefore when injury is inflicted from so called badness the degree of
pain thereby experienced is always unknown to us: in so far, however, as
pleasure is felt in the act (a sense of one's own power, of one's own
excitation) the act is committed to maintain the well being of the
individual and hence comes under the purview of self defence and lying
for self preservation. Without pleasure, there is no life; the struggle
for pleasure is the struggle for life. Whether the individual shall
carry on this struggle in such a way that he be called good or in such a
way that he be called bad is something that the standard and the
capacity of his own intellect must determine for him.


105

=Justice that Rewards.=--Whoever has fully understood the doctrine of
absolute irresponsibility can no longer include the so called rewarding
and punishing justice in the idea of justice, if the latter be taken to
mean that to each be given his due. For he who is punished does not
deserve the punishment. He is used simply as a means to intimidate
others from certain acts. Equally, he who is rewarded does not merit the
reward. He could not act any differently than he did act. Hence the
reward has only the significance of an encouragement to him and others
as a motive for subsequent acts. The praise is called out only to him
who is running in the race and not to him who has arrived at the goal.
Something that comes to someone as his own is neither a punishment nor a
reward. It is given to him from utiliarian considerations, without his
having any claim to it in justice. Hence one must say "the wise man
praises not because a good act has been done" precisely as was once
said: "the wise man punishes not because a bad act has been done but in
order that a bad act may not be done." If punishment and reward ceased,
there would cease with them the most powerful incentives to certain acts
and away from other acts. The purposes of men demand their continuance
[of punishment and reward] and inasmuch as punishment and reward, blame
and praise operate most potently upon vanity, these same purposes of men
imperatively require the continuance of vanity.


106

=The Water Fall.=--At the sight of a water fall we may opine that in the
countless curves, spirations and dashes of the waves we behold freedom
of the will and of the impulses. But everything is compulsory,
everything can be mathematically calculated. Thus it is, too, with human
acts. We would be able to calculate in advance every single action if we
were all knowing, as well as every advance in knowledge, every delusion,
every bad deed. The acting individual himself is held fast in the
illusion of volition. If, on a sudden, the entire movement of the world
stopped short, and an all knowing and reasoning intelligence were there
to take advantage of this pause, he could foretell the future of every
being to the remotest ages and indicate the path that would be taken in
the world's further course. The deception of the acting individual as
regards himself, the assumption of the freedom of the will, is a part of
this computable mechanism.


107

=Non-Responsibility and Non-Guilt.=--The absolute irresponsibility of
man for his acts and his nature is the bitterest drop in the cup of him
who has knowledge, if he be accustomed to behold in responsibility and
duty the patent of nobility of his human nature. All his estimates,
preferences, dislikes are thus made worthless and false. His deepest
sentiment, with which he honored the sufferer, the hero, sprang from an
error. He may no longer praise, no longer blame, for it is irrational to
blame and praise nature and necessity. Just as he cherishes the
beautiful work of art, but does not praise it (as it is incapable of
doing anything for itself), just as he stands in the presence of plants,
he must stand in the presence of human conduct, his own included. He may
admire strength, beauty, capacity, therein, but he can discern no merit.
The chemical process and the conflict of the elements, the ordeal of
the invalid who strives for convalescence, are no more merits than the
soul-struggles and extremities in which one is torn this way and that by
contending motives until one finally decides in favor of the
strongest--as the phrase has it, although, in fact, it is the strongest
motive that decides for us. All these motives, however, whatever fine
names we may give them, have grown from the same roots in which we
believe the baneful poisons lurk. Between good and bad actions there is
no difference in kind but, at most, in degree. Good acts are sublimated
evil. Bad acts are degraded, imbruted good. The very longing of the
individual for self gratification (together with the fear of being
deprived of it) obtains satisfaction in all circumstances, let the
individual act as he may, that is, as he must: be it in deeds of vanity,
revenge, pleasure, utility, badness, cunning, be it in deeds of self
sacrifice, sympathy or knowledge. The degrees of rational capacity
determine the direction in which this longing impels: every society,
every individual has constantly present a comparative classification of
benefits in accordance with which conduct is determined and others are
judged. But this standard perpetually changes. Many acts are called bad
that are only stupid, because the degree of intelligence that decided
for them was low. Indeed, in a certain sense, all acts now are stupid,
for the highest degree of human intelligence that has yet been attained
will in time most certainly be surpassed and then, in retrospection, all
our present conduct and opinion will appear as narrow and petty as we
now deem the conduct and opinion of savage peoples and ages.--To
perceive all these things may occasion profound pain but there is,
nevertheless, a consolation. Such pains are birth pains. The butterfly
insists upon breaking through the cocoon, he presses through it, tears
it to pieces, only to be blinded and confused by the strange light, by
the realm of liberty. By such men as are capable of this sadness--how
few there are!--will the first attempt be made to see if humanity may
convert itself from a thing of morality to a thing of wisdom. The sun of
a new gospel sheds its first ray upon the loftiest height in the souls
of those few: but the clouds are massed there, too, thicker than ever,
and not far apart are the brightest sunlight and the deepest gloom.
Everything is necessity--so says the new knowledge: and this knowledge
is itself necessity. All is guiltlessness, and knowledge is the way to
insight into this guiltlessness. If pleasure, egoism, vanity be
necessary to attest the moral phenomena and their richest blooms, the
instinct for truth and accuracy of knowledge; if delusion and confusion
of the imagination were the only means whereby mankind could gradually
lift itself up to this degree of self enlightenment and self
emancipation--who would venture to disparage the means? Who would have
the right to feel sad if made aware of the goal to which those paths
lead? Everything in the domain of ethic is evolved, changeable,
tottering; all things flow, it is true--but all things are also in the
stream: to their goal. Though within us the hereditary habit of
erroneous judgment, love, hate, may be ever dominant, yet under the
influence of awaking knowledge it will ever become weaker: a new habit,
that of understanding, not-loving, not-hating, looking from above, grows
up within us gradually and in the same soil, and may, perhaps, in
thousands of years be powerful enough to endow mankind with capacity to
develop the wise, guiltless man (conscious of guiltlessness) as
unfailingly as it now developes the unwise, irrational, guilt-conscious
man--that is to say, the necessary higher step, not the opposite of it.




THE RELIGIOUS LIFE.


108

=The Double Contest Against Evil.=--If an evil afflicts us we can either
so deal with it as to remove its cause or else so deal with it that its
effect upon our feeling is changed: hence look upon the evil as a
benefit of which the uses will perhaps first become evident in some
subsequent period. Religion and art (and also the metaphysical
philosophy) strive to effect an alteration of the feeling, partly by an
alteration of our judgment respecting the experience (for example, with
the aid of the dictum "whom God loves, he chastizes") partly by the
awakening of a joy in pain, in emotion especially (whence the art of
tragedy had its origin). The more one is disposed to interpret away and
justify, the less likely he is to look directly at the causes of evil
and eliminate them. An instant alleviation and narcotizing of pain, as
is usual in the case of tooth ache, is sufficient for him even in the
severest suffering. The more the domination of religions and of all
narcotic arts declines, the more searchingly do men look to the
elimination of evil itself, which is a rather bad thing for the tragic
poets--for there is ever less and less material for tragedy, since the
domain of unsparing, immutable destiny grows constantly more
circumscribed--and a still worse thing for the priests, for these last
have lived heretofore upon the narcoticizing of human ill.


109

=Sorrow is Knowledge.=--How willingly would not one exchange the false
assertions of the homines religiosi that there is a god who commands us
to be good, who is the sentinel and witness of every act, every moment,
every thought, who loves us, who plans our welfare in every
misfortune--how willingly would not one exchange these for truths as
healing, beneficial and grateful as those delusions! But there are no
such truths. Philosophy can at most set up in opposition to them other
metaphysical plausibilities (fundamental untruths as well). The tragedy
of it all is that, although one cannot believe these dogmas of religion
and metaphysics if one adopts in heart and head the potent methods of
truth, one has yet become, through human evolution, so tender,
susceptible, sensitive, as to stand in need of the most effective means
of rest and consolation. From this state of things arises the danger
that, through the perception of truth or, more accurately, seeing
through delusion, one may bleed to death. Byron has put this into
deathless verse:

     "Sorrow is knowledge: they who know the most
     Must mourn the deepest o'er the fatal truth,
     The tree of knowledge is not that of life."

Against such cares there is no better protective than the light fancy of
Horace, (at any rate during the darkest hours and sun eclipses of the
soul) expressed in the words

     "quid aeternis minorem
     consiliis animum fatigas?
     cur non sub alta vel platano vel hac
     pinu jacentes."[22]

[22] Then wherefore should you, who are mortal, outwear
     Your soul with a profitless burden of care
     Say, why should we not, flung at ease neath this pine,
     Or a plane-tree's broad umbrage, quaff gaily our wine?
                      (Translation of Sir Theodore Martin.)

At any rate, light fancy or heavy heartedness of any degree must be
better than a romantic retrogression and desertion of one's flag, an
approach to Christianity in any form: for with it, in the present state
of knowledge, one can have nothing to do without hopelessly defiling
one's intellectual integrity and surrendering it unconditionally. These
woes may be painful enough, but without pain one cannot become a leader
and guide of humanity: and woe to him who would be such and lacks this
pure integrity of the intellect!


110

=The Truth in Religion.=--In the ages of enlightenment justice was not
done to the importance of religion, of this there can be no doubt. It is
also equally certain that in the ensuing reaction of enlightenment, the
demands of justice were far exceeded inasmuch as religion was treated
with love, even with infatuation and proclaimed as a profound, indeed
the most profound knowledge of the world, which science had but to
divest of its dogmatic garb in order to possess "truth" in its
unmythical form. Religions must therefore--this was the contention of
all foes of enlightenment--sensu allegorico, with regard for the
comprehension of the masses, give expression to that ancient truth which
is wisdom in itself, inasmuch as all science of modern times has led up
to it instead of away from it. So that between the most ancient wisdom
of man and all later wisdom there prevails harmony, even similarity of
viewpoint; and the advancement of knowledge--if one be disposed to
concede such a thing--has to do not with its nature but with its
propagation. This whole conception of religion and science is through
and through erroneous, and none would to-day be hardy enough to
countenance it had not Schopenhauer's rhetoric taken it under
protection, this high sounding rhetoric which now gains auditors after
the lapse of a generation. Much as may be gained from Schopenhauer's
religio-ethical human and cosmical oracle as regards the comprehension
of Christianity and other religions, it is nevertheless certain that he
erred regarding the value of religion to knowledge. He himself was in
this but a servile pupil of the scientific teachers of his time who had
all taken romanticism under their protection and renounced the spirit of
enlightenment. Had he been born in our own time it would have been
impossible for him to have spoken of the sensus allegoricus of religion.
He would instead have done truth the justice to say: never has a
religion, directly or indirectly, either as dogma or as allegory,
contained a truth. For all religions grew out of dread or necessity, and
came into existence through an error of the reason. They have, perhaps,
in times of danger from science, incorporated some philosophical
doctrine or other into their systems in order to make it possible to
continue one's existence within them. But this is but a theological work
of art dating from the time in which a religion began to doubt of
itself. These theological feats of art, which are most common in
Christianity as the religion of a learned age, impregnated with
philosophy, have led to this superstition of the sensus allegoricus, as
has, even more, the habit of the philosophers (namely those
half-natures, the poetical philosophers and the philosophising artists)
of dealing with their own feelings as if they constituted the
fundamental nature of humanity and hence of giving their own religious
feelings a predominant influence over the structure of their systems. As
the philosophers mostly philosophised under the influence of hereditary
religious habits, or at least under the traditional influence of this
"metaphysical necessity," they naturally arrived at conclusions
closely resembling the Judaic or Christian or Indian religious
tenets--resembling, in the way that children are apt to look like their
mothers: only in this case the fathers were not certain as to the
maternity, as easily happens--but in the innocence of their admiration,
they fabled regarding the family likeness of all religion and science.
In reality, there exists between religion and true science neither
relationship nor friendship, not even enmity: they dwell in different
spheres. Every philosophy that lets the religious comet gleam through
the darkness of its last outposts renders everything within it that
purports to be science, suspicious. It is all probably religion,
although it may assume the guise of science.--Moreover, though all the
peoples agree concerning certain religious things, for example, the
existence of a god (which, by the way, as regards this point, is not
the case) this fact would constitute an argument against the thing
agreed upon, for example the very existence of a god. The consensus
gentium and especially hominum can probably amount only to an absurdity.
Against it there is no consensus omnium sapientium whatever, on any
point, with the exception of which Goethe's verse speaks:

     "All greatest sages to all latest ages
         Will smile, wink and slily agree
     'Tis folly to wait till a fool's empty pate
         Has learned to be knowing and free.
     So children of wisdom must look upon fools
     As creatures who're never the better for schools."

Stated without rhyme or metre and adapted to our case: the consensus
sapientium is to the effect that the consensus gentium amounts to an
absurdity.


111

=Origin of Religious Worship.=--Let us transport ourselves back to the
times in which religious life flourished most vigorously and we will
find a fundamental conviction prevalent which we no longer share and
which has resulted in the closing of the door to religious life once for
all so far as we are concerned: this conviction has to do with nature
and intercourse with her. In those times nothing is yet known of
nature's laws. Neither for earth nor for heaven is there a must. A
season, sunshine, rain can come or stay away as it pleases. There is
wanting, in particular, all idea of natural causation. If a man rows, it
is not the oar that moves the boat, but rowing is a magical ceremony
whereby a demon is constrained to move the boat. All illness, death
itself, is a consequence of magical influences. In sickness and death
nothing natural is conceived. The whole idea of "natural course" is
wanting. The idea dawns first upon the ancient Greeks, that is to say in
a very late period of humanity, in the conception of a Moira [fate]
ruling over the gods. If any person shoots off a bow, there is always an
irrational strength and agency in the act. If the wells suddenly run
dry, the first thought is of subterranean demons and their pranks. It
must have been the dart of a god beneath whose invisible influence a
human being suddenly collapses. In India, the carpenter (according to
Lubbock) is in the habit of making devout offerings to his hammer and
hatchet. A Brahmin treats the plume with which he writes, a soldier the
weapon that he takes into the field, a mason his trowel, a laborer his
plow, in the same way. All nature is, in the opinion of religious
people, a sum total of the doings of conscious and willing beings, an
immense mass of complex volitions. In regard to all that takes place
outside of us no conclusion is permissible that anything will result
thus and so, must result thus and so, that we are comparatively
calculable and certain in our experiences, that man is the rule, nature
the ruleless. This view forms the fundamental conviction that dominates
crude, religion-producing, early civilizations. We contemporary men feel
exactly the opposite: the richer man now feels himself inwardly, the
more polyphone the music and the sounding of his soul, the more
powerfully does the uniformity of nature impress him. We all, with
Goethe, recognize in nature the great means of repose for the soul. We
listen to the pendulum stroke of this great clock with longing for rest,
for absolute calm and quiescence, as if we could drink in the uniformity
of nature and thereby arrive first at an enjoyment of oneself. Formerly
it was the reverse: if we carry ourselves back to the periods of crude
civilization, or if we contemplate contemporary savages, we will find
them most strongly influenced by rule, by tradition. The individual is
almost automatically bound to rule and tradition and moves with the
uniformity of a pendulum. To him nature--the uncomprehended, fearful,
mysterious nature--must seem the domain of freedom, of volition, of
higher power, indeed as an ultra-human degree of destiny, as god. Every
individual in such periods and circumstances feels that his existence,
his happiness, the existence and happiness of the family, the state,
the success or failure of every undertaking, must depend upon these
dispositions of nature. Certain natural events must occur at the proper
time and certain others must not occur. How can influence be exercised
over this fearful unknown, how can this domain of freedom be brought
under subjection? thus he asks himself, thus he worries: Is there no
means to render these powers of nature as subject to rule and tradition
as you are yourself?--The cogitation of the superstitious and
magic-deluded man is upon the theme of imposing a law upon nature: and
to put it briefly, religious worship is the result of such cogitation.
The problem which is present to every man is closely connected with this
one: how can the weaker party dictate laws to the stronger, control its
acts in reference to the weaker? At first the most harmless form of
influence is recollected, that influence which is acquired when the
partiality of anyone has been won. Through beseeching and prayer,
through abject humiliation, through obligations to regular gifts and
propitiations, through flattering homages, it is possible, therefore, to
impose some guidance upon the forces of nature, to the extent that their
partiality be won: love binds and is bound. Then agreements can be
entered into by means of which certain courses of conduct are mutually
concluded, vows are made and authorities prescribed. But far more potent
is that species of power exercised by means of magic and incantation. As
a man is able to injure a powerful enemy by means of the magician and
render him helpless with fear, as the love potion operates at a
distance, so can the mighty forces of nature, in the opinion of weaker
mankind, be controlled by similar means. The principal means of
effecting incantations is to acquire control of something belonging to
the party to be influenced, hair, finger nails, food from his table,
even his picture or his name. With such apparatus it is possible to act
by means of magic, for the basic principle is that to everything
spiritual corresponds something corporeal. With the aid of this
corporeal element the spirit may be bound, injured or destroyed. The
corporeal affords the handle by which the spiritual can be laid hold of.
In the same way that man influences mankind does he influences some
spirit of nature, for this latter has also its corporeal element that
can be grasped. The tree, and on the same basis, the seed from which it
grew: this puzzling sequence seems to demonstrate that in both forms the
same spirit is embodied, now large, now small. A stone that suddenly
rolls, is the body in which the spirit works. Does a huge boulder lie in
a lonely moor? It is impossible to think of mortal power having placed
it there. The stone must have moved itself there. That is to say some
spirit must dominate it. Everything that has a body is subject to magic,
including, therefore, the spirits of nature. If a god is directly
connected with his portrait, a direct influence (by refraining from
devout offerings, by whippings, chainings and the like) can be brought
to bear upon him. The lower classes in China tie cords around the
picture of their god in order to defy his departing favor, when he has
left them in the lurch, and tear the picture to pieces, drag it through
the streets into dung heaps and gutters, crying: "You dog of a spirit,
we housed you in a beautiful temple, we gilded you prettily, we fed you
well, we brought you offerings, and yet how ungrateful you are!" Similar
displays of resentment have been made against pictures of the mother of
god and pictures of saints in Catholic countries during the present
century when such pictures would not do their duty during times of
pestilence and drought.

Through all these magical relationships to nature countless ceremonies
are occasioned, and finally, when their complexity and confusion grow
too great, pains are taken to systematize them, to arrange them so that
the favorable course of nature's progress, namely the great yearly
circle of the seasons, may be brought about by a corresponding course of
the ceremonial progress. The aim of religious worship is to influence
nature to human advantage, and hence to instil a subjection to law into
her that originally she has not, whereas at present man desires to find
out the subjection to law of nature in order to guide himself thereby.
In brief, the system of religious worship rests upon the idea of magic
between man and man, and the magician is older than the priest. But it
rests equally upon other and higher ideas. It brings into prominence the
sympathetic relation of man to man, the existence of benevolence,
gratitude, prayer, of truces between enemies, of loans upon security, of
arrangements for the protection of property. Man, even in very inferior
degrees of civilization, does not stand in the presence of nature as a
helpless slave, he is not willy-nilly the absolute servant of nature. In
the Greek development of religion, especially in the relationship to the
Olympian gods, it becomes possible to entertain the idea of an existence
side by side of two castes, a higher, more powerful, and a lower, less
powerful: but both are bound together in some way, on account of their
origin and are one species. They need not be ashamed of one another.
This is the element of distinction in Greek religion.


112

=At the Contemplation of Certain Ancient Sacrificial Proceedings.=--How
many sentiments are lost to us is manifest in the union of the farcical,
even of the obscene, with the religious feeling. The feeling that this
mixture is possible is becoming extinct. We realize the mixture only
historically, in the mysteries of Demeter and Dionysos and in the
Christian Easter festivals and religious mysteries. But we still
perceive the sublime in connection with the ridiculous, and the like,
the emotional with the absurd. Perhaps a later age will be unable to
understand even these combinations.


113

=Christianity as Antiquity.=--When on a Sunday morning we hear the old
bells ringing, we ask ourselves: Is it possible? All this for a Jew
crucified two thousand years ago who said he was God's son? The proof of
such an assertion is lacking.--Certainly, the Christian religion
constitutes in our time a protruding bit of antiquity from very remote
ages and that its assertions are still generally believed--although men
have become so keen in the scrutiny of claims--constitutes the oldest
relic of this inheritance. A god who begets children by a mortal woman;
a sage who demands that no more work be done, that no more justice be
administered but that the signs of the approaching end of the world be
heeded; a system of justice that accepts an innocent as a vicarious
sacrifice in the place of the guilty; a person who bids his disciples
drink his blood; prayers for miracles; sins against a god expiated upon
a god; fear of a hereafter to which death is the portal; the figure of
the cross as a symbol in an age that no longer knows the purpose and the
ignominy of the cross--how ghostly all these things flit before us out
of the grave of their primitive antiquity! Is one to believe that such
things can still be believed?


114

=The Un-Greek in Christianity.=--The Greeks did not look upon the
Homeric gods above them as lords nor upon themselves beneath as
servants, after the fashion of the Jews. They saw but the counterpart as
in a mirror of the most perfect specimens of their own caste, hence an
ideal, but no contradiction of their own nature. There was a feeling of
mutual relationship, resulting in a mutual interest, a sort of alliance.
Man thinks well of himself when he gives himself such gods and places
himself in a relationship akin to that of the lower nobility with the
higher; whereas the Italian races have a decidedly vulgar religion,
involving perpetual anxiety because of bad and mischievous powers and
soul disturbers. Wherever the Olympian gods receded into the background,
there even Greek life became gloomier and more perturbed.--Christianity,
on the other hand, oppressed and degraded humanity completely and sank
it into deepest mire: into the feeling of utter abasement it suddenly
flashed the gleam of divine compassion, so that the amazed and
grace-dazzled stupefied one gave a cry of delight and for a moment
believed that the whole of heaven was within him. Upon this unhealthy
excess of feeling, upon the accompanying corruption of heart and head,
Christianity attains all its psychological effects. It wants to
annihilate, debase, stupefy, amaze, bedazzle. There is but one thing
that it does not want: measure, standard (das Maas) and therefore is it
in the worst sense barbarous, asiatic, vulgar, un-Greek.


115

=Being Religious to Some Purpose.=--There are certain insipid,
traffic-virtuous people to whom religion is pinned like the hem of some
garb of a higher humanity. These people do well to remain religious: it
adorns them. All who are not versed in some professional
weapon--including tongue and pen as weapons--are servile: to all such
the Christian religion is very useful, for then their servility assumes
the aspect of Christian virtue and is amazingly adorned.--People whose
daily lives are empty and colorless are readily religious. This is
comprehensible and pardonable, but they have no right to demand that
others, whose daily lives are not empty and colorless, should be
religious also.


116

=The Everyday Christian.=--If Christianity, with its allegations of an
avenging God, universal sinfulness, choice of grace, and the danger of
eternal damnation, were true, it would be an indication of weakness of
mind and character not to be a priest or an apostle or a hermit, and
toil for one's own salvation. It would be irrational to lose sight of
one's eternal well being in comparison with temporary advantage:
Assuming these dogmas to be generally believed, the every day Christian
is a pitiable figure, a man who really cannot count as far as three, and
who, for the rest, just because of his intellectual incapacity, does not
deserve to be as hard punished as Christianity promises he shall be.


117

=Concerning the Cleverness of Christianity.=--It is a master stroke of
Christianity to so emphasize the unworthiness, sinfulness and
degradation of men in general that contempt of one's fellow creatures
becomes impossible. "He may sin as much as he pleases, he is not by
nature different from me. It is I who in every way am unworthy and
contemptible." So says the Christian to himself. But even this feeling
has lost its keenest sting for the Christian does not believe in his
individual degradation. He is bad in his general human capacity and he
soothes himself a little with the assertion that we are all alike.


118

=Personal Change.=--As soon as a religion rules, it has for its
opponents those who were its first disciples.


119

=Fate of Christianity.=--Christianity arose to lighten the heart, but
now it must first make the heart heavy in order to be able to lighten it
afterwards. Christianity will consequently go down.


120

=The Testimony of Pleasure.=--The agreeable opinion is accepted as true.
This is the testimony of pleasure (or as the church says, the evidence
of strength) of which all religions are so proud, although they should
all be ashamed of it. If a belief did not make blessed it would not be
believed. How little it would be worth, then!


121

=Dangerous Play.=--Whoever gives religious feeling room, must then also
let it grow. He can do nothing else. Then his being gradually changes.
The religious element brings with it affinities and kinships. The whole
circle of his judgment and feeling is clouded and draped in religious
shadows. Feeling cannot stand still. One should be on one's guard.


122

=The Blind Pupil.=--As long as one knows very well the strength and the
weakness of one's dogma, one's art, one's religion, its strength is
still low. The pupil and apostle who has no eye for the weaknesses of a
dogma, a religion and so on, dazzled by the aspect of the master and by
his own reverence for him, has, on that very account, generally more
power than the master. Without blind pupils the influence of a man and
his work has never become great. To give victory to knowledge, often
amounts to no more than so allying it with stupidity that the brute
force of the latter forces triumph for the former.


123

=The Breaking off of Churches.=--There is not sufficient religion in the
world merely to put an end to the number of religions.


124

=Sinlessness of Men.=--If one have understood how "Sin came into the
world," namely through errors of the reason, through which men in their
intercourse with one another and even individual men looked upon
themselves as much blacker and wickeder than was really the case, one's
whole feeling is much lightened and man and the world appear together in
such a halo of harmlessness that a sentiment of well being is instilled
into one's whole nature. Man in the midst of nature is as a child left
to its own devices. This child indeed dreams a heavy, anxious dream. But
when it opens its eyes it finds itself always in paradise.


125

=Irreligiousness of Artists.=--Homer is so much at home among his gods
and is as a poet so good natured to them that he must have been
profoundly irreligious. That which was brought to him by the popular
faith--a mean, crude and partially repulsive superstition--he dealt with
as freely as the Sculptor with his clay, therefore with the same freedom
that AEschylus and Aristophanes evinced and with which in later times the
great artists of the renaissance, and also Shakespeare and Goethe, drew
their pictures.


126

=Art and Strength of False Interpretation.=--All the visions, fears,
exhaustions and delights of the saint are well known symptoms of
sickness, which in him, owing to deep rooted religious and psychological
delusions, are explained quite differently, that is not as symptoms of
sickness.--So, too, perhaps, the demon of Socrates was nothing but a
malady of the ear that he explained, in view of his predominant moral
theory, in a manner different from what would be thought rational
to-day. Nor is the case different with the frenzy and the frenzied
speeches of the prophets and of the priests of the oracles. It is always
the degree of wisdom, imagination, capacity and morality in the heart
and mind of the interpreters that got so much out of them. It is among
the greatest feats of the men who are called geniuses and saints that
they made interpreters for themselves who, fortunately for mankind, did
not understand them.


127

=Reverence for Madness.=--Because it was perceived that an excitement of
some kind often made the head clearer and occasioned fortunate
inspirations, it was concluded that the utmost excitement would occasion
the most fortunate inspirations. Hence the frenzied being was revered as
a sage and an oracle giver. A false conclusion lies at the bottom of all
this.


128

=Promises of Wisdom.=--Modern science has as its object as little pain
as possible, as long a life as possible--hence a sort of eternal
blessedness, but of a very limited kind in comparison with the promises
of religion.


129

=Forbidden Generosity.=--There is not enough of love and goodness in the
world to throw any of it away on conceited people.


130

=Survival of Religious Training in the Disposition.=--The Catholic
Church, and before it all ancient education, controlled the whole domain
of means through which man was put into certain unordinary moods and
withdrawn from the cold calculation of personal advantage and from calm,
rational reflection. A church vibrating with deep tones; gloomy,
regular, restraining exhortations from a priestly band, who
involuntarily communicate their own tension to their congregation and
lead them to listen almost with anxiety as if some miracle were in
course of preparation; the awesome pile of architecture which, as the
house of a god, rears itself vastly into the vague and in all its
shadowy nooks inspires fear of its nerve-exciting power--who would care
to reduce men to the level of these things if the ideas upon which they
rest became extinct? But the results of all these things are
nevertheless not thrown away: the inner world of exalted, emotional,
prophetic, profoundly repentant, hope-blessed moods has become inborn in
man largely through cultivation. What still exists in his soul was
formerly, as he germinated, grew and bloomed, thoroughly disciplined.


131

=Religious After-Pains.=--Though one believe oneself absolutely weaned
away from religion, the process has yet not been so thorough as to make
impossible a feeling of joy at the presence of religious feelings and
dispositions without intelligible content, as, for example, in music;
and if a philosophy alleges to us the validity of metaphysical hopes,
through the peace of soul therein attainable, and also speaks of "the
whole true gospel in the look of Raphael's Madonna," we greet such
declarations and innuendoes with a welcome smile. The philosopher has
here a matter easy of demonstration. He responds with that which he is
glad to give, namely a heart that is glad to accept. Hence it is
observable how the less reflective free spirits collide only with dogmas
but yield readily to the magic of religious feelings; it is a source of
pain to them to let the latter go simply on account of the
former.--Scientific philosophy must be very much on its guard lest on
account of this necessity--an evolved and hence, also, a transitory
necessity--delusions are smuggled in. Even logicians speak of
"presentiments" of truth in ethics and in art (for example of the
presentiment that the essence of things is unity) a thing which,
nevertheless, ought to be prohibited. Between carefully deduced truths
and such "foreboded" things there lies the abysmal distinction that the
former are products of the intellect and the latter of the necessity.
Hunger is no evidence that there is food at hand to appease it. Hunger
merely craves food. "Presentiment" does not denote that the existence of
a thing is known in any way whatever. It denotes merely that it is
deemed possible to the extent that it is desired or feared. The
"presentiment" is not one step forward in the domain of certainty.--It
is involuntarily believed that the religious tinted sections of a
philosophy are better attested than the others, but the case is at
bottom just the opposite: there is simply the inner wish that it may be
so, that the thing which beautifies may also be true. This wish leads us
to accept bad grounds as good.


132

=Of the Christian Need of Salvation.=--Careful consideration must render
it possible to propound some explanation of that process in the soul of
a Christian which is termed need of salvation, and to propound an
explanation, too, free from mythology: hence one purely psychological.
Heretofore psychological explanations of religious conditions and
processes have really been in disrepute, inasmuch as a theology calling
itself free gave vent to its unprofitable nature in this domain; for its
principal aim, so far as may be judged from the spirit of its creator,
Schleier-macher, was the preservation of the Christian religion and the
maintenance of the Christian theology. It appeared that in the
psychological analysis of religious "facts" a new anchorage and above
all a new calling were to be gained. Undisturbed by such predecessors,
we venture the following exposition of the phenomena alluded to. Man is
conscious of certain acts which are very firmly implanted in the general
course of conduct: indeed he discovers in himself a predisposition to
such acts that seems to him to be as unalterable as his very being. How
gladly he would essay some other kind of acts which in the general
estimate of conduct are rated the best and highest, how gladly he would
welcome the consciousness of well doing which ought to follow unselfish
motive! Unfortunately, however, it goes no further than this longing:
the discontent consequent upon being unable to satisfy it is added to
all other kinds of discontent which result from his life destiny in
particular or which may be due to so called bad acts; so that a deep
depression ensues accompanied by a desire for some physician to remove
it and all its causes.--This condition would not be found so bitter if
the individual but compared himself freely with other men: for then he
would have no reason to be discontented with himself in particular as he
is merely bearing his share of the general burden of human discontent
and incompleteness. But he compares himself with a being who alone must
be capable of the conduct that is called unegoistic and of an enduring
consciousness of unselfish motive, with God. It is because he gazes into
this clear mirror, that his own self seems so extraordinarily distracted
and so troubled. Thereupon the thought of that being, in so far as it
flits before his fancy as retributive justice, occasions him anxiety. In
every conceivable small and great experience he believes he sees the
anger of the being, his threats, the very implements and manacles of his
judge and prison. What succors him in this danger, which, in the
prospect of an eternal duration of punishment, transcends in hideousness
all the horrors that can be presented to the imagination?


133

Before we consider this condition in its further effects, we would admit
to ourselves that man is betrayed into this condition not through his
"fault" and "sin" but through a series of delusions of the reason; that
it was the fault of the mirror if his own self appeared to him in the
highest degree dark and hateful, and that that mirror was his own work,
the very imperfect work of human imagination and judgment. In the first
place a being capable of absolutely unegoistic conduct is as fabulous as
the phoenix. Such a being is not even thinkable for the very reason that
the whole notion of "unegoistic conduct," when closely examined,
vanishes into air. Never yet has a man done anything solely for others
and entirely without reference to a personal motive; indeed how could he
possibly do anything that had no reference to himself, that is without
inward compulsion (which must always have its basis in a personal need)?
How could the ego act without ego?--A god, who, on the other hand, is
all love, as he is usually represented, would not be capable of a
solitary unegoistic act: whence one is reminded of a reflection of
Lichtenberg's which is, in truth, taken from a lower sphere: "We cannot
possibly feel for others, as the expression goes; we feel only for
ourselves. The assertion sounds hard, but it is not, if rightly
understood. A man loves neither his father nor his mother nor his wife
nor his child, but simply the feelings which they inspire." Or, as La
Rochefoucauld says: "If you think you love your mistress for the mere
love of her, you are very much mistaken." Why acts of love are more
highly prized than others, namely not on account of their nature, but on
account of their utility, has already been explained in the section on
the origin of moral feelings. But if a man should wish to be all love
like the god aforesaid, and want to do all things for others and nothing
for himself, the procedure would be fundamentally impossible because he
_must_ do a great deal for himself before there would be any possibility
of doing anything for the love of others. It is also essential that
others be sufficiently egoistic to accept always and at all times this
self sacrifice and living for others, so that the men of love and self
sacrifice have an interest in the survival of unloving and selfish
egoists, while the highest morality, in order to maintain itself must
formally enforce the existence of immorality (wherein it would be really
destroying itself.)--Further: the idea of a god perturbs and discourages
as long as it is accepted but as to how it originated can no longer, in
the present state of comparative ethnological science, be a matter of
doubt, and with the insight into the origin of this belief all faith
collapses. What happens to the Christian who compares his nature with
that of God is exactly what happened to Don Quixote, who depreciated his
own prowess because his head was filled with the wondrous deeds of the
heroes of chivalrous romance. The standard of measurement which both
employ belongs to the domain of fable.--But if the idea of God
collapses, so too, does the feeling of "sin" as a violation of divine
rescript, as a stain upon a god-like creation. There still apparently
remains that discouragement which is closely allied with fear of the
punishment of worldly justice or of the contempt of one's fellow men.
The keenest thorn in the sentiment of sin is dulled when it is perceived
that one's acts have contravened human tradition, human rules and human
laws without having thereby endangered the "eternal salvation of the
soul" and its relations with deity. If finally men attain to the
conviction of the absolute necessity of all acts and of their utter
irresponsibility and then absorb it into their flesh and blood, every
relic of conscience pangs will disappear.


134

If now, as stated, the Christian, through certain delusive feelings, is
betrayed into self contempt, that is by a false and unscientific view of
his acts and feelings, he must, nevertheless, perceive with the utmost
amazement that this state of self contempt, of conscience pangs, of
despair in particular, does not last, that there are hours during which
all these things are wafted away from the soul and he feels himself once
more free and courageous. The truth is that joy in his own being, the
fulness of his own powers in connection with the inevitable decline of
his profound excitation with the lapse of time, bore off the palm of
victory. The man loves himself once more, he feels it--but this very new
love, this new self esteem seems to him incredible. He can see in it
only the wholly unmerited stream of the light of grace shed down upon
him. If he formerly saw in every event merely warnings, threats,
punishments and every kind of indication of divine anger, he now reads
into his experiences the grace of god. The latter circumstance seems to
him full of love, the former as a helpful pointing of the way, and his
entirely joyful frame of mind now seems to him to be an absolute proof
of the goodness of God. As formerly in his states of discouragement he
interpreted his conduct falsely so now he does the same with his
experiences. His state of consolation is now regarded as the effect
produced by some external power. The love with which, at bottom, he
loves himself, seems to be the divine love. That which he calls grace
and the preliminary of salvation is in reality self-grace,
self-salvation.


135

Therefore a certain false psychology, a certain kind of imaginativeness
in the interpretation of motives and experiences is the essential
preliminary to being a Christian and to experiencing the need of
salvation. Upon gaining an insight into this wandering of the reason and
the imagination, one ceases to be a Christian.


136

=Of Christian Asceticism and Sanctity.=--Much as some thinkers have
exerted themselves to impart an air of the miraculous to those singular
phenomena known as asceticism and sanctity, to question which or to
account for which upon a rational basis would be wickedness and
sacrilege, the temptation to this wickedness is none the less great. A
powerful impulse of nature has in every age led to protest against such
phenomena. At any rate science, inasmuch as it is the imitation of
nature, permits the casting of doubts upon the inexplicable character
and the supernal degree of such phenomena. It is true that heretofore
science has not succeeded in its attempts at explanation. The phenomena
remain unexplained still, to the great satisfaction of those who revere
moral miracles. For, speaking generally, the unexplained must rank as
the inexplicable, the inexplicable as the non-natural, supernatural,
miraculous--so runs the demand in the souls of all the religious and all
the metaphysicians (even the artists if they happen to be thinkers),
whereas the scientific man sees in this demand the "evil
principle."--The universal, first, apparent truth that is encountered in
the contemplation of sanctity and asceticism is that their nature is
complicated; for nearly always, within the physical world as well as in
the moral, the apparently miraculous may be traced successfully to the
complex, the obscure, the multi-conditioned. Let us venture then to
isolate a few impulses in the soul of the saint and the ascetic, to
consider them separately and then view them as a synthetic development.


137

There is an obstinacy against oneself, certain sublimated forms of which
are included in asceticism. Certain kinds of men are under such a strong
necessity of exercising their power and dominating impulses that, if
other objects are lacking or if they have not succeeded with other
objects they will actually tyrannize over some portions of their own
nature or over sections and stages of their own personality. Thus do
many thinkers bring themselves to views which are far from likely to
increase or improve their fame. Many deliberately bring down the
contempt of others upon themselves although they could easily have
retained consideration by silence. Others contradict earlier opinions
and do not shrink from the ordeal of being deemed inconsistent. On the
contrary they strive for this and act like eager riders who enjoy
horseback exercise most when the horse is skittish. Thus will men in
dangerous paths ascend to the highest steeps in order to laugh to scorn
their own fear and their own trembling limbs. Thus will the philosopher
embrace the dogmas of asceticism, humility, sanctity, in the light of
which his own image appears in its most hideous aspect. This crushing of
self, this mockery of one's own nature, this spernere se sperni out of
which religions have made so much is in reality but a very high
development of vanity. The whole ethic of the sermon on the mount
belongs in this category: man has a true delight in mastering himself
through exaggerated pretensions or excessive expedients and later
deifying this tyrannically exacting something within him. In every
scheme of ascetic ethics, man prays to one part of himself as if it were
god and hence it is necessary for him to treat the rest of himself as
devil.


138

=Man is Not at All Hours Equally Moral=; this is established. If one's
morality be judged according to one's capacity for great, self
sacrificing resolutions and abnegations (which when continual, and made
a habit are known as sanctity) one is, in affection, or disposition, the
most moral: while higher excitement supplies wholly new impulses which,
were one calm and cool as ordinarily, one would not deem oneself even
capable of. How comes this? Apparently from the propinquity of all great
and lofty emotional states. If a man is brought to an extraordinary
pitch of feeling he can resolve upon a fearful revenge or upon a fearful
renunciation of his thirst for vengeance indifferently. He craves, under
the influences of powerful emotion, the great, the powerful, the
immense, and if he chances to perceive that the sacrifice of himself
will afford him as much satisfaction as the sacrifice of another, or
will afford him more, he will choose self sacrifice. What concerns him
particularly is simply the unloading of his emotion. Hence he readily,
to relieve his tension, grasps the darts of the enemy and buries them in
his own breast. That in self abnegation and not in revenge the element
of greatness consisted must have been brought home to mankind only after
long habituation. A god who sacrifices himself would be the most
powerful and most effective symbol of this sort of greatness. As the
conquest of the most hardly conquered enemy, the sudden mastering of a
passion--thus does such abnegation _appear_: hence it passes for the
summit of morality. In reality all that is involved is the exchange of
one idea for another whilst the temperament remained at a like altitude,
a like tidal state. Men when coming out of the spell, or resting from
such passionate excitation, no longer understand the morality of such
instants, but the admiration of all who participated in the occasion
sustains them. Pride is their support if the passion and the
comprehension of their act weaken. Therefore, at bottom even such acts
of self-abnegation are not moral inasmuch as they are not done with a
strict regard for others. Rather do others afford the high strung
temperament an opportunity to lighten itself through such abnegation.


139

=Even the Ascetic Seeks to Make Life Easier=, and generally by means of
absolute subjection to another will or to an all inclusive rule and
ritual, pretty much as the Brahmin leaves absolutely nothing to his own
volition but is guided in every moment of his life by some holy
injunction or other. This subjection is a potent means of acquiring
dominion over oneself. One is occupied, hence time does not bang heavy
and there is no incitement of the personal will and of the individual
passion. The deed once done there is no feeling of responsibility nor
the sting of regret. One has given up one's own will once for all and
this is easier than to give it up occasionally, as it is also easier
wholly to renounce a desire than to yield to it in measured degree. When
we consider the present relation of man to the state we perceive
unconditional obedience is easier than conditional. The holy person also
makes his lot easier through the complete surrender of his life
personality and it is all delusion to admire such a phenomenon as the
loftiest heroism of morality. It is always more difficult to assert
one's personality without shrinking and without hesitation than to give
it up altogether in the manner indicated, and it requires moreover more
intellect and thought.


140

After having discovered in many of the less comprehensible actions mere
manifestations of pleasure in emotion for its own sake, I fancy I can
detect in the self contempt which characterises holy persons, and also
in their acts of self torture (through hunger and scourgings,
distortions and chaining of the limbs, acts of madness) simply a means
whereby such natures may resist the general exhaustion of their will to
live (their nerves). They employ the most painful expedients to escape
if only for a time from the heaviness and weariness in which they are
steeped by their great mental indolence and their subjection to a will
other than their own.


141

=The Most Usual Means= by which the ascetic and the sanctified
individual seeks to make life more endurable comprises certain combats
of an inner nature involving alternations of victory and prostration.
For this purpose an enemy is necessary and he is found in the so called
"inner enemy." That is, the holy individual makes use of his tendency to
vanity, domineering and pride, and of his mental longings in order to
contemplate his life as a sort of continuous battle and himself as a
battlefield, in which good and evil spirits wage war with varying
fortune. It is an established fact that the imagination is restrained
through the regularity and adequacy of sexual intercourse while on the
other hand abstention from or great irregularity in sexual intercourse
will cause the imagination to run riot. The imaginations of many of the
Christian saints were obscene to a degree; and because of the theory
that sexual desires were in reality demons that raged within them, the
saints did not feel wholly responsible for them. It is to this
conviction that we are indebted for the highly instructive sincerity of
their evidence against themselves. It was to their interest that this
contest should always be kept up in some fashion because by means of
this contest, as already stated, their empty lives gained distraction.
In order that the contest might seem sufficiently great to inspire
sympathy and admiration in the unsanctified, it was essential that
sexual capacity be ever more and more damned and denounced. Indeed the
danger of eternal damnation was so closely allied to this capacity that
for whole generations Christians showed their children with actual
conscience pangs. What evil may not have been done to humanity through
this! And yet here the truth is just upside down: an exceedingly
unseemly attitude for the truth. Christianity, it is true, had said that
every man is conceived and born in sin, and in the intolerable and
excessive Christianity of Calderon this thought is again perverted and
entangled into the most distorted paradox extant in the well known lines

     The greatest sin of man
     Is the sin of being born.

In all pessimistic religions the act of procreation is looked upon as
evil in itself. This is far from being the general human opinion. It is
not even the opinion of all pessimists. Empedocles, for example, knows
nothing of anything shameful, devilish and sinful in it. He sees rather
in the great field of bliss of unholiness simply a healthful and hopeful
phenomenon, Aphrodite. She is to him an evidence that strife does not
always rage but that some time a gentle demon is to wield the sceptre.
The Christian pessimists of practice, had, as stated, a direct interest
in the prevalence of an opposite belief. They needed in the loneliness
and the spiritual wilderness of their lives an ever living enemy, and a
universally known enemy through whose conquest they might appear to the
unsanctified as utterly incomprehensible and half unnatural beings. When
this enemy at last, as a result of their mode of life and their
shattered health, took flight forever, they were able immediately to
people their inner selves with new demons. The rise and fall of the
balance of cheerfulness and despair maintained their addled brains in a
totally new fluctuation of longing and peace of soul. And in that period
psychology served not only to cast suspicion on everything human but to
wound and scourge it, to crucify it. Man wanted to find himself as base
and evil as possible. Man sought to become anxious about the state of
his soul, he wished to be doubtful of his own capacity. Everything
natural with which man connects the idea of badness and sinfulness (as,
for instance, is still customary in regard to the erotic) injures and
degrades the imagination, occasions a shamed aspect, leads man to war
upon himself and makes him uncertain, distrustful of himself. Even his
dreams acquire a tincture of the unclean conscience. And yet this
suffering because of the natural element in certain things is wholly
superfluous. It is simply the result of opinions regarding the things.
It is easy to understand why men become worse than they are if they are
brought to look upon the unavoidably natural as bad and later to feel it
as of evil origin. It is the master stroke of religions and metaphysics
that wish to make man out bad and sinful by nature, to render nature
suspicious in his eyes and to so make himself evil, for he learns to
feel himself evil when he cannot divest himself of nature. He gradually
comes to look upon himself, after a long life lived naturally, so
oppressed by a weight of sin that supernatural powers become necessary
to relieve him of the burden; and with this notion comes the so called
need of salvation, which is the result not of a real but of an imaginary
sinfulness. Go through the separate moral expositions in the vouchers of
christianity and it will always be found that the demands are excessive
in order that it may be impossible for man to satisfy them. The object
is not that he may become moral but that he may feel as sinful as
possible. If this feeling had not been rendered agreeable to man--why
should he have improvised such an ideal and clung to it so long? As in
the ancient world an incalculable strength of intellect and capacity for
feeling was squandered in order to increase the joy of living through
feastful systems of worship, so in the era of christianity an equally
incalculable quantity of intellectual capacity has been sacrificed in
another endeavor: that man should in every way feel himself sinful and
thereby be moved, inspired, inspirited. To move, to inspire, to inspirit
at any cost--is not this the freedom cry of an exhausted, over-ripe,
over cultivated age? The circle of all the natural sensations had been
gone through a hundred times: the soul had grown weary. Then the saints
and the ascetics found a new order of ecstacies. They set themselves
before the eyes of all not alone as models for imitation to many, but as
fearful and yet delightful spectacles on the boundary line between this
world and the next world, where in that period everyone thought he saw
at one time rays of heavenly light, at another fearful, threatening
tongues of flame. The eye of the saint, directed upon the fearful
significance of the shortness of earthly life, upon the imminence of the
last judgment, upon eternal life hereafter; this glowering eye in an
emaciated body caused men, in the old time world, to tremble to the
depths of their being. To look, to look away and shudder, to feel anew
the fascination of the spectacle, to yield to it, sate oneself upon it
until the soul trembled with ardor and fever--that was the last pleasure
left to classical antiquity when its sensibilities had been blunted by
the arena and the gladiatorial show.


142

=To Sum Up All That Has Been Said=: that condition of soul at which the
saint or expectant saint is rejoiced is a combination of elements which
we are all familiar with, except that under other influences than those
of mere religious ideation they customarily arouse the censure of men in
the same way that when combined with religion itself and regarded as the
supreme attainment of sanctity, they are object of admiration and even
of prayer--at least in more simple times. Very soon the saint turns upon
himself that severity that is so closely allied to the instinct of
domination at any price and which inspire even in the most solitary
individual the sense of power. Soon his swollen sensitiveness of feeling
breaks forth from the longing to restrain his passions within it and is
transformed into a longing to master them as if they were wild steeds,
the master impulse being ever that of a proud spirit; next he craves a
complete cessation of all perturbing, fascinating feelings, a waking
sleep, an enduring repose in the lap of a dull, animal, plant-like
indolence. Next he seeks the battle and extinguishes it within himself
because weariness and boredom confront him. He binds his
self-deification with self-contempt. He delights in the wild tumult of
his desires and the sharp pain of sin, in the very idea of being lost.
He is able to play his very passions, for instance the desire to
domineer, a trick so that he goes to the other extreme of abject
humiliation and subjection, so that his overwrought soul is without any
restraint through this antithesis. And, finally, when indulgence in
visions, in talks with the dead or with divine beings overcomes him,
this is really but a form of gratification that he craves, perhaps a
form of gratification in which all other gratifications are blended.
Novalis, one of the authorities in matters of sanctity, because of his
experience and instinct, betrays the whole secret with the utmost
simplicity when he says: "It is remarkable that the close connection of
gratification, religion and cruelty has not long ago made men aware of
their inner relationship and common tendency."


143

=Not What the Saint is but what he was in= the eyes of the
non-sanctified gives him his historical importance. Because there
existed a delusion respecting the saint, his soul states being falsely
viewed and his personality being sundered as much as possible from
humanity as a something incomparable and supernatural, because of these
things he attained the extraordinary with which he swayed the
imaginations of whole nations and whole ages. Even he knew himself not
for even he regarded his dispositions, passions and actions in
accordance with a system of interpretation as artificial and exaggerated
as the pneumatic interpretation of the bible. The distorted and diseased
in his own nature with its blending of spiritual poverty, defective
knowledge, ruined health, overwrought nerves, remained as hidden from
his view as from the view of his beholders. He was neither a
particularly good man nor a particularly bad man but he stood for
something that was far above the human standard in wisdom and goodness.
Faith in him sustained faith in the divine and miraculous, in a
religious significance of all existence, in an impending day of
judgment. In the last rays of the setting sun of the ancient world,
which fell upon the christian peoples, the shadowy form of the saint
attained enormous proportions--to such enormous proportions, indeed,
that down even to our own age, which no longer believes in god, there
are thinkers who believe in the saints.


144

It stands to reason that this sketch of the saint, made upon the model
of the whole species, can be confronted with many opposing sketches that
would create a more agreeable impression. There are certain exceptions
among the species who distinguish themselves either by especial
gentleness or especial humanity, and perhaps by the strength of their
own personality. Others are in the highest degree fascinating because
certain of their delusions shed a particular glow over their whole
being, as is the case with the founder of christianity who took himself
for the only begotten son of God and hence felt himself sinless; so that
through his imagination--that should not be too harshly judged since the
whole of antiquity swarmed with sons of god--he attained the same goal,
the sense of complete sinlessness, complete irresponsibility, that can
now be attained by every individual through science.--In the same manner
I have viewed the saints of India who occupy an intermediate station
between the christian saints and the Greek philosophers and hence are
not to be regarded as a pure type. Knowledge and science--as far as they
existed--and superiority to the rest of mankind by logical discipline
and training of the intellectual powers were insisted upon by the
Buddhists as essential to sanctity, just as they were denounced by the
christian world as the indications of sinfulness.





End of Project Gutenberg's Human, All Too Human, by Friedrich Nietzsche


================================================================================
[Ecce Homo (이 사람을 보라)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ecce homo, Wie man wird, was man ist
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Ecce homo, Wie man wird, was man ist

Author: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche


        
Release date: January 1, 2005 [eBook #7202]
                Most recently updated: December 30, 2020

Language: German

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/7202

Credits: This text has been derived from HTML files at "Projekt Gutenberg DE"


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ECCE HOMO, WIE MAN WIRD, WAS MAN IST ***




This text has been derived from HTML files at "Projekt Gutenberg -
DE" (http://www.gutenberg2000.de/nietzsche/eccehomo/eccehomo.htm),
prepared by juergen@redestb.es.




Friedrich Nietzsche

Ecce homo

Wie man wird, was man ist




Vorwort

1.

In Voraussicht, dass ich über Kurzem mit der schwersten Forderung
an die Menschheit herantreten muss, die je an sie gestellt wurde,
scheint es mir unerlässlich, zu sagen, wer ich bin. Im Grunde dürfte
man's wissen: denn ich habe mich nicht "unbezeugt gelassen". Das
Missverhältniss aber zwischen der Grösse meiner Aufgabe und der
Kleinheit meiner Zeitgenossen ist darin zum Ausdruck gekommen, dass
man mich weder gehört, noch auch nur gesehn hat. Ich lebe auf meinen
eignen Credit hin, es ist vielleicht bloss ein Vorurtheil, dass ich
lebe?... Ich brauche nur irgend einen "Gebildeten" zu sprechen, der im
Sommer ins Oberengadin kommt, um mich zu überzeugen, dass ich nicht
lebe... Unter diesen Umständen giebt es eine Pflicht, gegen die
im Grunde meine Gewohnheit, noch mehr der Stolz meiner Instinkte
revoltirt, nämlich zu sagen: Hört mich! denn ich bin der und der.
Verwechselt mich vor Allem nicht!


2.

Ich bin zum Beispiel durchaus kein Popanz, kein Moral-Ungeheuer, - ich
bin sogar eine Gegensatz-Natur zu der Art Mensch, die man bisher als
tugendhaft verehrt hat. Unter uns, es scheint mir, dass gerade Das zu
meinem Stolz gehört. Ich bin ein jünger des Philosophen Dionysos, ich
zöge vor, eher noch ein Satyr zu sein als ein Heiliger. Aber man lese
nur diese Schrift. Vielleicht gelang es mir, vielleicht hatte diese
Schrift gar keinen andren Sinn, als diesen Gegensatz in einer heitren
und menschenfreundlichen Weise zum Ausdruck zu bringen. Das Letzte,
was ich versprechen würde, wäre, die Menschheit zu "verbessern". Von
mir werden keine neuen Götzen aufgerichtet; die alten mögen lernen,
was es mit thönernen Beinen auf sich hat. Götzen (mein Wort für
"Ideale") umwerfen - das gehört schon eher zu meinem Handwerk. Man
hat die Realität in dem Grade um ihren Werth, ihren Sinn, ihre
Wahrhaftigkeit gebracht, als man eine ideale Welt erlog... Die "wahre
Welt" und die "scheinbare Welt" - auf deutsch: die erlogne Welt und
die Realität... Die Lüge des Ideals war bisher der Fluch über der
Realität, die Menschheit selbst ist durch sie bis in ihre untersten
Instinkte hinein verlogen und falsch geworden bis zur Anbetung der
umgekehrten Werthe, als die sind, mit denen ihr erst das Gedeihen, die
Zukunft, das hohe Recht auf Zukunft verbürgt wäre.


3.

Wer die Luft meiner Schriften zu athmen weiss, weiss, dass es eine
Luft der Höhe ist, eine starke Luft. Man muss für sie geschaffen sein,
sonst ist die Gefahr keine kleine, sich in ihr zu erkälten. Das Eis
ist nahe, die Einsamkeit ist ungeheuer - aber wie ruhig alle Dinge im
Lichte liegen! wie frei man athmet! wie Viel man unter sich fühlt! -
Philosophie, wie ich sie bisher verstanden und gelebt habe, ist das
freiwillige Leben in Eis und Hochgebirge - das Aufsuchen alles Fremden
und Fragwürdigen im Dasein, alles dessen, was durch die Moral bisher
in Bann gethan war. Aus einer langen Erfahrung, welche eine solche
Wanderung im Verbotenen gab, lernte ich die Ursachen, aus denen bisher
moralisirt und idealisirt wurde, sehr anders ansehn als es erwünscht
sein mag: die verborgene Geschichte der Philosophen, die Psychologie
ihrer grossen Namen kam für mich an's Licht. - Wie viel Wahrheit
erträgt, wie viel Wahrheit wagt ein Geist? das wurde für mich immer
mehr der eigentliche Werthmesser. Irrthum (- der Glaube an's Ideal
-) ist nicht Blindheit, Irrthum ist Feigheit... Jede Errungenschaft,
jeder Schritt vorwärts in der Erkenntniss folgt aus dem Muth, aus der
Härte gegen sich, aus der Sauberkeit gegen sich... Ich widerlege die
Ideale nicht, ich ziehe bloss Handschuhe vor ihnen an... Nitimur in
vetitum: in diesem Zeichen siegt einmal meine Philosophie, denn man
verbot bisher grundsätzlich immer nur die Wahrheit. -


4.

Innerhalb meiner Schriften steht für sich mein Zarathustra. Ich habe
mit ihm der Menschheit das grösste Geschenk gemacht, das ihr bisher
gemacht worden ist. Dies Buch, mit einer Stimme über Jahrtausende
hinweg, ist nicht nur das höchste Buch, das es giebt, das eigentliche
Höhenluft-Buch - die ganze Thatsache Mensch liegt in ungeheurer Ferne
unter ihm -, es ist auch das tiefste, das aus dem innersten Reichthum
der Wahrheit heraus geborene, ein unerschöpflicher Brunnen, in den
kein Eimer hinabsteigt, ohne mit Gold und Güte gefüllt heraufzukommen.
Hier redet kein "Prophet", keiner jener schauerlichen Zwitter von
Krankheit und Willen zur Macht, die man Religionsstifter nennt.
Man muss vor Allem den Ton, der aus diesem Munde kommt, diesen
halkyonischen Ton richtig hören, um dem Sinn seiner Weisheit nicht
erbarmungswürdig Unrecht zu thun. "Die stillsten Worte sind es, welche
den Sturm bringen, Gedanken, die mit Taubenfüssen kommen, lenken die
Welt."

Die Feigen fallen von den Bäumen, sie sind gut und süss: und indem
sie fallen, reisst ihnen die rothe Haut. Ein Nordwind bin ich reifen
Feigen.

Also, gleich Feigen, fallen euch diese Lehren zu, meine Freunde: nun
trinkt ihren Saft und ihr süsses Fleisch! Herbst ist es umher und
reiner Himmel und Nachmittag -

Hier redet kein Fanatiker, hier wird nicht "gepredigt", hier wird
nicht Glauben verlangt: aus einer unendlichen Lichtfülle und
Glückstiefe fällt Tropfen für Tropfen, Wort für Wort, eine zärtliche
Langsamkeit ist das tempo dieser Reden. Dergleichen gelangt nur zu
den Auserwähltesten; es ist ein Vorrecht ohne Gleichen hier Hörer zu
sein; es steht Niemandem frei, für Zarathustra Ohren zu haben... Ist
Zarathustra mit Alledem nicht ein Verführer?... Aber was sagt er doch
selbst, als er zum ersten Male wieder in seine Einsamkeit zurückkehrt?
Genau das Gegentheil von dem, was irgend ein "Weiser", "Heiliger",
"Welt-Erlöser" und andrer décadent in einem solchen Falle sagen
würde... Er redet nicht nur anders, er ist auch anders...

Allein gehe ich nun, meine Jünger! Auch ihr geht nun davon und allein!
So will ich es.

Geht fort von mir und wehrt euch gegen Zarathustra! Und besser noch:
schämt euch seiner! Vielleicht betrog er euch.

Der Mensch der Erkenntniss muss nicht nur seine Feinde lieben, er muss
auch seine Freunde hassen können.

Man vergilt einem Lehrer schlecht, wenn man immer nur der Schüler
bleibt. Und warum wollt ihr nicht an meinem Kranze rupfen?

Ihr verehrt mich: aber wie, wenn eure Verehrung eines Tages umfällt?
Hütet euch, dass euch nicht eine Bildsäule erschlage!

Ihr sagt, ihr glaubt an Zarathustra? Aber was liegt an Zarathustra!
Ihr seid meine Gläubigen, aber was liegt an allen Gläubigen!

Ihr hattet euch noch nicht gesucht: da fandet ihr mich. So thun alle
Gläubigen; darum ist es so wenig mit allem Glauben.

Nun heisse ich euch, mich verlieren und euch finden; und erst, wenn
ihr mich Alle verleugnet habt, will ich euch wiederkehren...

Friedrich Nietzsche.




Inhalt

    Warum ich so weise bin.
    Warum ich so klug bin.
    Warum ich so gute Bücher schreibe.
    Geburt der Tragödie.
    Die Unzeitgemässen.
    Menschliches, Allzumenschliches.
    Morgenröthe.
    La gaya scienza.
    Also sprach Zarathustra.
    Jenseits von Gut und Böse.
    Genealogie der Moral.
    Götzen-Dämmerung.
    Der Fall Wagner.
    Warum ich ein Schicksal bin.
    Kriegserklärung.
    Der Hammer redet




An diesem vollkommnen Tage, wo Alles reift und nicht nur die Traube
braun wird, fiel mir eben ein Sonnenblick auf mein Leben: ich sah
rückwärts, ich sah hinaus, ich sah nie so viel und so gute Dinge auf
einmal. Nicht umsonst begrub ich heute mein vierundvierzigstes Jahr,
ich durfte es begraben, - was in ihm Leben war, ist gerettet, ist
unsterblich. Die Umwerthung aller Werthe, die Dionysos-Dithyramben
und, zur Erholung, die Götzen-Dämmerung - Alles Geschenke dieses
Jahrs, sogar seines letzten Vierteljahrs! Wie sollte ich nicht meinem
ganzen Leben dankbar sein? Und so erzähle ich mir mein Leben.



Warum ich so weise bin.

1.

Das Glück meines Daseins, seine Einzigkeit vielleicht, liegt in seinem
Verhängniss: ich bin, um es in Räthselform auszudrücken, als mein
Vater bereits gestorben, als meine Mutter lebe ich noch und werde alt.
Diese doppelte Herkunft, gleichsam aus der obersten und der untersten
Sprosse an der Leiter des Lebens, décadent zugleich und Anfang - dies,
wenn irgend Etwas, erklärt jene Neutralität, jene Freiheit von Partei
im Verhältniss zum Gesammtprobleme des Lebens, die mich vielleicht
auszeichnet. Ich habe für die Zeichen von Aufgang und Niedergang eine
feinere Witterung als je ein Mensch gehabt hat, ich bin der Lehrer par
excellence hierfür, - ich kenne Beides, ich bin Beides. - Mein Vater
starb mit sechsunddreissig Jahren: er war zart, liebenswürdig und
morbid, wie ein nur zum Vorübergehn bestimmtes Wesen, - eher eine
gütige Erinnerung an das Leben, als das Leben selbst. Im gleichen
Jahre, wo sein Leben abwärts gieng, gieng auch das meine abwärts: im
sechsunddreissigsten Lebensjahre kam ich auf den niedrigsten Punkt
meiner Vitalität, - ich lebte noch, doch ohne drei Schritt weit vor
mich zu sehn. Damals - es war 1879 - legte ich meine Basler Professur
nieder, lebte den Sommer über wie ein Schatten in St. Moritz und den
nächsten Winter, den sonnenärmsten meines Lebens, als Schatten in
Naumburg. Dies war mein Minimum: "Der Wanderer und sein Schatten"
entstand währenddem. Unzweifelhaft, ich verstand mich damals auf
Schatten... Im Winter darauf, meinem ersten Genueser Winter, brachte
jene Versüssung und Vergeistigung, die mit einer extremen Armuth an
Blut und Muskel beinahe bedingt ist, die "Morgenröthe" hervor. Die
vollkommne Helle und Heiterkeit, selbst Exuberanz des Geistes, welche
das genannte Werk wiederspiegelt, verträgt sich bei mir nicht nur
mit der tiefsten physiologischen Schwäche, sondern sogar mit einem
Excess von Schmerzgefühl. Mitten in Martern, die ein ununterbrochner
dreitägiger Gehirn-Schmerz sammt mühseligem Schleimerbrechen mit sich
bringt, - besass ich eine Dialektiker-Klarheit par excellence und
dachte Dinge sehr kaltblütig durch, zu denen ich in gesünderen
Verhältnissen nicht Kletterer, nicht raffinirt, nicht kalt genug
bin. Meine Leser wissen vielleicht, in wie fern ich Dialektik als
Décadence-Symptom betrachte, zum Beispiel im allerberühmtesten Fall:
im Fall des Sokrates. - Alle krankhaften Störungen des Intellekts,
selbst jene Halbbetäubung, die das Fieber im Gefolge hat, sind mir bis
heute gänzlich fremde Dinge geblieben, über deren Natur und Häufigkeit
ich mich erst auf gelehrtem Wege zu unterrichten hatte. Mein Blut
läuft langsam. Niemand hat je an mir Fieber constatiren können.
Ein Arzt, der mich länger als Nervenkranken behandelte, sagte
schliesslich: "nein! an Ihren Nerven liegt's nicht, ich selber bin nur
nervös." Schlechterdings unnachweisbar irgend eine lokale Entartung;
kein organisch bedingtes Magenleiden, wie sehr auch immer, als Folge
der Gesammterschöpfung, die tiefste Schwäche des gastrischen Systems.
Auch das Augenleiden, dem Blindwerden zeitweilig sich gefährlich
annähernd, nur Folge, nicht ursächlich: so dass mit jeder Zunahme an
Lebenskraft auch die Sehkraft wieder zugenommen hat. - Eine lange,
allzulange Reihe von Jahren bedeutet bei mir Genesung, - sie bedeutet
leider auch zugleich Rückfall, Verfall, Periodik einer Art décadence.
Brauche ich, nach alledem, zu sagen, dass ich in Fragen der décadence
erfahren bin? Ich habe sie vorwärts und rückwärts buchstabirt. Selbst
jene Filigran-Kunst des Greifens und Begreifens überhaupt, jene Finger
für nuances, jene Psychologie des "Um-die-Ecke-sehns" und was sonst
mir eignet, ward damals erst erlernt, ist das eigentliche Geschenk
jener Zeit, in der Alles sich bei mir verfeinerte, die Beobachtung
selbst wie alle Organe der Beobachtung. Von der Kranken-Optik aus nach
gesünderen Begriffen und Werthen, und wiederum umgekehrt aus der Fülle
und Selbstgewissheit des reichen Lebens hinuntersehn in die heimliche
Arbeit des Décadence-Instinkts - das war meine längste Übung, meine
eigentliche Erfahrung, wenn irgend worin wurde ich darin Meister.
Ich habe es jetzt in der Hand, ich habe die Hand dafür, Perspektiven
umzustellen: erster Grund, weshalb für mich allein vielleicht eine
"Umwerthung der Werthe" überhaupt möglich ist.


2.

Abgerechnet nämlich, dass ich ein décadent bin, bin ich auch dessen
Gegensatz. Mein Beweis dafür ist, unter Anderem, dass ich instinktiv
gegen die schlimmen Zustände immer die rechten Mittel wählte: während
der décadent an sich immer die ihm nachtheiligen Mittel wählt. Als
summa summarum war ich gesund, als Winkel, als Specialität war ich
décadent. Jene Energie zur absoluten Vereinsamung und Herauslösung
aus gewohnten Verhältnissen, der Zwang gegen mich, mich nicht mehr
besorgen, bedienen, beärzteln zu lassen - das verräth die unbedingte
Instinkt-Gewissheit darüber, was damals vor Allem noth that. Ich nahm
mich selbst in die Hand, ich machte mich selbst wieder gesund: die
Bedingung dazu - jeder Physiologe wird das zugeben - ist, dass man
im Grunde gesund ist. Ein typisch morbides Wesen kann nicht gesund
werden, noch weniger sich selbst gesund machen; für einen typisch
Gesunden kann umgekehrt Kranksein sogar ein energisches Stimulans zum
Leben, zum Mehr-leben sein. So in der That erscheint mir jetzt jene
lange Krankheits-Zeit: ich entdeckte das Leben gleichsam neu, mich
selber eingerechnet, ich schmeckte alle guten und selbst kleinen
Dinge, wie sie Andre nicht leicht schmecken könnten, - ich machte
aus meinem Willen zur; Gesundheit, zum Leben, meine Philosophie...
Denn man gebe Acht darauf: die Jahre meiner niedrigsten Vitalität
waren es, wo ich aufhörte, Pessimist zu sein: der Instinkt der
Selbst-Wiederherstellung verbot mir eine Philosophie der Armuth und
Entmuthigung... Und woran erkennt man im Grunde die Wohlgerathenheit!
Dass ein wohlgerathner Mensch unsern Sinnen wohlthut: dass er aus
einem Holze geschnitzt ist, das hart, zart und wohlriechend zugleich
ist. Ihm schmeckt nur, was ihm zuträglich ist; sein Gefallen, seine
Lust hört auf, wo das Maass des Zuträglichen überschritten wird. Er
erräth Heilmittel gegen Schädigungen, er nützt schlimme Zufälle zu
seinem Vortheil aus; was ihn nicht umbringt, macht ihn stärker. Er
sammelt instinktiv aus Allem, was er sieht, hört, erlebt, seine Summe:
er ist ein auswählendes Princip, er lässt Viel durchfallen. Er ist
immer in seiner Gesellschaft, ob er mit Büchern, Menschen oder
Landschaften verkehrt: er ehrt, indem er wählt, indem er zulässt,
indem er vertraut. Er reagirt auf alle Art Reize langsam, mit jener
Langsamkeit, die eine lange Vorsicht und ein gewollter Stolz ihm
angezüchtet haben, - er prüft den Reiz, der herankommt, er ist
fern davon, ihm entgegenzugehn. Er glaubt weder an "Unglück", noch
an "Schuld": er wird fertig, mit sich, mit Anderen, er weiss zu
vergessen, - er ist stark genug, dass ihm Alles zum Besten gereichen
muss. - Wohlan, ich bin das Gegenstück eines décadent: denn ich
beschrieb eben mich.


3.

Ich betrachte es als ein grosses Vorrecht, einen solchen Vater gehabt
zu haben: die Bauern, vor denen er predigte - denn er war, nachdem
er einige Jahre am Altenburger Hofe gelebt hatte, die letzten Jahre
Prediger - sagten, so müsse wohl ein Engel aussehn. - Und hiermit
berühre ich die Frage der Rasse. ich bin ein polnischer Edelmann pur
sang, dem auch nicht ein Tropfen schlechtes Blut beigemischt ist, am
wenigsten deutsches. Wenn ich den tiefsten Gegensatz zu mir suche, die
unausrechenbare Gemeinheit der Instinkte, so finde ich immer meine
Mutter und Schwester, - mit solcher canaille mich verwandt zu glauben
wäre eine Lästerung auf meine Göttlichkeit. Die Behandlung, die
ich von Seiten meiner Mutter und Schwester erfahre, bis auf diesen
Augenblick, flösst mir ein unsägliches Grauen ein: hier arbeitet
eine vollkommene Höllenmaschine, mit unfehlbarer Sicherheit über den
Augenblick, wo man mich blutig verwunden kann - in meinen höchsten
Augenblicken,... denn da fehlt jede Kraft, sich gegen giftiges Gewürm
zu wehren... Die physiologische Contiguität ermöglicht eine solche
disharmonia praestabilita... Aber ich bekenne, dass der tiefste
Einwand gegen die "ewige Wiederkunft", mein eigentlich abgründlicher
Gedanke, immer Mutter und Schwester sind. - Aber auch als Pole bin ich
ein ungeheurer Atavismus. Man würde Jahrhunderte zurückzugehn haben,
um diese vornehmste Rasse, die es auf Erden gab, in dem Masse
instinktrein zu finden, wie ich sie darstelle. Ich habe gegen Alles,
was heute noblesse heisst, ein souveraines Gefühl von Distinktion, -
ich würde dem jungen deutschen Kaiser nicht die Ehre zugestehn, mein
Kutscher zu sein. Es giebt einen einzigen Fall, wo ich meines Gleichen
anerkenne ich bekenne es mit tiefer Dankbarkeit. Frau Cosima Wagner
ist bei Weitem die vornehmste Natur; und, damit ich kein Wort zu wenig
sage, sage ich, dass Richard Wagner der mir bei Weitem verwandteste
Mann war... Der Rest ist Schweigen... Alle herrschenden Begriffe über
Verwandtschafts-Grade sind ein physiologischer Widersinn, der nicht
überboten werden kann. Der Papst treibt heute noch Handel mit diesem
Widersinn. Man ist am wenigsten mit seinen Eltern verwandt: es wäre
das äusserste Zeichen von Gemeinheit, seinen Eltern verwandt zu sein.
Die höheren Naturen haben ihren Ursprung unendlich weiter zurück, auf
sie hin hat am längsten gesammelt, gespart, gehäuft werden müssen.
Die grossen Individuen sind die ältesten: ich verstehe es nicht, aber
Julius Cäsar könnte mein Vater sein - oder Alexander, dieser leibhafte
Dionysos... In diesem Augenblick, wo ich dies schreibe, bringt die
Post mir einen Dionysos-Kopf...


4.

Ich habe nie die Kunst verstanden, gegen mich einzunehmen auch das
verdanke ich meinem unvergleichlichen Vater - und selbst noch, wenn
es mir von grossem Werthe schien. Ich bin sogar, wie sehr immer das
unchristlich scheinen mag, nicht einmal gegen mich eingenommen. Man
mag mein Leben hin- und herwenden, man wird darin, jenen Einen Fall
abgerechnet, keine Spuren davon entdecken, dass jemand bösen Willen
gegen mich gehabt hätte, - vielleicht aber etwas zu viel Spuren
von gutem Willen... Meine Erfahrungen selbst mit Solchen, an denen
Jedermann schlechte Erfahrungen macht, sprechen ohne Ausnahme zu deren
Gunsten; ich zähme jeden Bär, ich mache die Hanswürste noch sittsam.
In den sieben Jahren, wo ich an der obersten Klasse des Basler
Pädagogiums Griechisch lehrte, habe ich keinen Anlass gehabt, eine
Strafe zu verhängen; die Faulsten waren bei mir fleissig. Dem Zufall
bin ich immer gewachsen; ich muss unvorbereitet sein, um meiner
Herr zu sein. Das Instrument, es sei, welches es wolle, es sei so
verstimmt, wie nur das Instrument "Mensch" verstimmt werden kann
- ich müsste krank sein, wenn es mir nicht gelingen sollte, ihm
etwas Anhörbares abzugewinnen. Und wie oft habe ich das von den
"Instrumenten" selber gehört, dass sie sich noch nie so gehört
hätten... Am schönsten vielleicht von jenem unverzeihlich jung
gestorbenen Heinrich von Stein, der einmal, nach sorgsam eingeholter
Erlaubniss, auf drei Tage in Sils-Maria erschien, Jedermann erklärend,
dass er nicht wegen des Engadins komme. Dieser ausgezeichnete Mensch,
der mit der ganzen ungestümen Einfalt eines preussischen Junkers in
den Wagner'schen Sumpf hineingewatet war (- und ausserdem noch in
den Dühring'schen!) war diese drei Tage wie umgewandelt durch einen
Sturmwind der Freiheit, gleich Einem, der plötzlich in seine Höhe
gehoben wird und Flügel bekommt. Ich sagte ihm immer, das mache die
gute Luft hier oben, so gehe es jedem, man sei nicht umsonst 6000 Fuss
über Bayreuth, - aber er wollte mir's nicht glauben... Wenn trotzdem
an mir manche kleine und grosse Missethat verübt worden ist, so war
nicht "der Wille", am wenigsten der böse Wille Grund davon: eher schon
hätte ich mich - ich deutete es eben an - über den guten Willen zu
beklagen, der keinen kleinen Unfug in meinem Leben angerichtet hat.
Meine Erfahrungen geben mir ein Anrecht auf Misstrauen überhaupt
hinsichtlich der sogenannten "selbstlosen" Triebe, der gesammten zu
Rath und That bereiten "Nächstenliebe". Sie gilt mir an sich als
Schwäche, als Einzelfall der Widerstands-Unfähigkeit gegen Reize, -
das Mitleiden heisst nur bei décadents eine Tugend. Ich werfe den
Mitleidigen vor, dass ihnen die Scham, die Ehrfurcht, das Zartgefühl
vor Distanzen leicht abhanden kommt, dass Mitleiden im Handumdrehn
nach Pöbel riecht und schlechten Manieren zum Verwechseln ähnlich
sieht, - dass mitleidige Hände unter Umständen geradezu zerstörerisch
in ein grosses Schicksal in eine Vereinsamung unter Wunden, in ein
Vorrecht auf schwere Schuld hineingreifen können. Die Überwindung
des Mitleids rechne ich unter die vornehmen Tugenden: ich habe als
"Versuchung Zarathustra's" einen Fall gedichtet, wo ein grosser
Nothschrei an ihn kommt, wo das Mitleiden wie eine letzte Sünde ihn
überfallen, ihn von sich abspenstig machen will. Hier Herr bleiben,
hier die Höhe seiner Aufgabe rein halten von den viel niedrigeren
und kurzsichtigeren Antrieben, welche in den sogenannten selbstlosen
Handlungen thätig sind, das ist die Probe, die letzte Probe
vielleicht, die ein Zarathustra abzulegen hat - sein eigentlicher
Beweis von Kraft...


5.

Auch noch in einem anderen Punkte bin ich bloss mein Vater noch einmal
und gleichsam sein Fortleben nach einem allzufrühen Tode. Gleich
jedem, der nie unter seines Gleichen lebte und dem der Begriff
"Vergeltung" so unzugänglich ist wie etwa der Begriff "gleiche
Rechte", verbiete ich mir in Fällen, wo eine kleine oder sehr
grosse Thorheit an mir begangen wird, jede Gegenmaassregel, jede
Schutzmaassregel, - wie billig, auch jede Vertheidigung, jede
"Rechtfertigung". Meine Art Vergeltung besteht darin, der Dummheit
so schnell wie möglich eine Klugheit nachzuschicken: so holt man sie
vielleicht noch ein. Im Gleichniss geredet: ich schicke einen Topf mit
Confitüren, um eine sauere Geschichte loszuwerden... Man hat nur Etwas
an mir schlimm zu machen, ich "vergelte" es, dessen sei man sicher:
ich finde über Kurzem eine Gelegenheit, dem "Missethäter" meinen Dank
auszudrücken (mitunter sogar für die Missethat) - oder ihn um Etwas zu
bitten, was verbindlicher sein kann als Etwas geben... Auch scheint es
mir, dass das gröbste Wort, der gröbste Brief noch gutartiger, noch
honnetter sind als Schweigen. Solchen, die schweigen, fehlt es fast
immer an Feinheit und Höflichkeit des Herzens; Schweigen ist ein
Einwand, Hinunterschlucken macht nothwendig einen schlechten
Charakter, - es verdirbt selbst den Magen. Alle Schweiger sind
dyspeptisch. - Man sieht, ich möchte die Grobheit nicht unterschätzt
wissen, sie ist bei weitem die humanste Form des Widerspruchs und,
inmitten der modernen Verzärtelung, eine unsrer ersten Tugenden. -
Wenn man reich genug dazu ist, ist es selbst ein Glück, Unrecht zu
haben. Ein Gott, der auf die Erde käme, dürfte gar nichts Andres thun
als Unrecht, - nicht die Strafe, sondern die Schuld auf sich zu nehmen
wäre erst göttlich.


6.

Die Freiheit vom Ressentiment, die Aufklärung über das Ressentiment -
wer weiss, wie sehr ich zuletzt auch darin meiner langen Krankheit zu
Dank verpflichtet bin! Das Problem ist nicht gerade einfach: man muss
es aus der Kraft heraus und aus der Schwäche heraus erlebt haben. Wenn
irgend Etwas überhaupt gegen Kranksein, gegen Schwachsein geltend
gemacht werden muss, so ist es, dass in ihm der eigentliche
Heilinstinkt, das ist der Wehr- und Waffen-Instinkt im Menschen mürbe
wird. Man weiss von Nichts loszukommen, man weiss mit Nichts fertig
zu werden, man weiss Nichts zurückzustossen, - Alles verletzt. Mensch
und Ding kommen zudringlich nahe, die Erlebnisse treffen zu tief,
die Erinnerung ist eine eiternde Wunde. Kranksein ist eine Art
Ressentiment selbst. - Hiergegen hat der Kranke nur Ein grosses
Heilmittel - ich nenne es den russischen Fatalismus, jenen Fatalismus
ohne Revolte, mit dem sich ein russischer Soldat, dem der Feldzug zu
hart wird, zuletzt in den Schnee legt. Nichts überhaupt mehr annehmen,
an sich nehmen, in sich hineinnehmen, - überhaupt nicht mehr
reagiren... Die grosse Vernunft dieses Fatalismus, der nicht
immer nur der Muth zum Tode ist, als lebenerhaltend unter
den lebensgefährlichsten Umständen, ist die Herabsetzung des
Stoffwechsels, dessen Verlangsamung, eine Art Wille zum Winterschlaf.
Ein paar Schritte weiter in dieser Logik, und man hat den Fakir,
der wochenlang in einem Grabe schläft... Weil man zu schnell sich
verbrauchen würde, wenn man überhaupt reagirte, reagirt man gar nicht
mehr: dies ist die Logik. Und mit Nichts brennt man rascher ab,
als mit den Ressentiments-Affekten. Der Ärger, die krankhafte
Verletzlichkeit, die Ohnmacht zur Rache, die Lust, der Durst nach
der Rache, das Giftmischen in jedem Sinne - das ist für Erschöpfte
sicherlich die nachtheiligste Art zu reagiren: ein rapider Verbrauch
von Nervenkraft, eine krankhafte Steigerung schädlicher Ausleerungen,
zum Beispiel der Galle in den Magen, ist damit bedingt. Das
Ressentiment ist das Verbotene an sich für den Kranken - sein Böses:
leider auch sein natürlichster Hang. - Das begriff jener tiefe
Physiolog Buddha. Seine "Religion", die man besser als eine Hygiene
bezeichnen dürfte, um sie nicht mit so erbarmungswürdigen Dingen wie
das Christenthum ist, zu vermischen, machte ihre Wirkung abhängig von
dem Sieg über das Ressentiment: die Seele davon frei machen - erster
Schritt zur Genesung. "Nicht durch Feindschaft kommt Feindschaft zu
Ende, durch Freundschaft kommt Feindschaft zu Ende": das steht am
Anfang der Lehre Buddha's - so redet nicht die Moral, so redet die
Physiologie. - Das Ressentiment, aus der Schwäche geboren, Niemandem
schädlicher als dem Schwachen selbst, - im andern Falle, wo eine
reiche Natur die Voraussetzung ist, ein überflüssiges Gefühl, ein
Gefühl, über das Herr zu bleiben beinahe der Beweis des Reichthums
ist. Wer den Ernst kennt, mit dem meine Philosophie den Kampf mit den
Rach- und Nachgefühlen bis in die Lehre vom "freien Willen" hinein
aufgenommen hat - der Kampf mit dem Christenthum ist nur ein
Einzelfall daraus - wird verstehn, weshalb ich mein persönliches
Verhalten, meine instinktsicherheit in der Praxis hier gerade an's
Licht stelle. In den Zeiten der décadence verbot ich sie mir als
schädlich; sobald das Leben wieder reich und stolz genug dazu war,
verbot ich sie mir als unter mir. Jener "russische Fatalismus",
von dem ich sprach, trat darin bei mir hervor, dass ich beinahe
unerträgliche Lagen, Orte, Wohnungen, Gesellschaften, nachdem sie
einmal, durch Zufall, gegeben waren, Jahre lang zäh festhielt, - es
war besser, als sie ändern, als sie veränderbar zu fühlen, - als
sich gegen sie aufzulehnen... Mich in diesem Fatalismus stören, mich
gewaltsam aufwecken nahm ich damals tödtlich übel: - in Wahrheit war
es auch jedes Mal tödtlich gefährlich. - Sich selbst wie ein Fatum
nehmen, nicht sich "anders" wollen - das ist in solchen Zuständen die
grosse Vernunft selbst.


7.

Ein ander Ding ist der Krieg. Ich bin meiner Art nach kriegerisch.
Angreifen gehört zu meinen Instinkten. Feind sein können, Feind sein
- das setzt vielleicht eine starke Natur voraus, jedenfalls ist es
bedingt in jeder starken Natur. Sie braucht Widerstände, folglich
sucht sie Widerstand: das aggressive Pathos gehört ebenso nothwendig
zur Stärke als das Rach- und Nachgefühl zur Schwäche. Das Weib zum
Beispiel ist rachsüchtig: das ist in seiner Schwäche bedingt, so gut
wie seine Reizbarkeit für fremde Noth. - Die Stärke des Angreifenden
hat in der Gegnerschaft, die er nöthig hat, eine Art Maass; jedes
Wachsthum verräth sich im Aufsuchen eines gewaltigeren Gegners -
oder Problems: denn ein Philosoph, der kriegerisch ist, fordert auch
Probleme zum Zweikampf heraus. Die Aufgabe ist nicht, überhaupt über
Widerstände Herr zu werden, sondern über solche, an denen man seine
ganze Kraft, Geschmeidigkeit und Waffen-Meisterschaft einzusetzen
hat, - über gleiche Gegner... Gleichheit vor dem Feinde - erste
Voraussetzung zu einem rechtschaffnen Duell. Wo man verachtet, kann
man nicht Krieg führen; wo man befiehlt, wo man Etwas unter sich
sieht, hat man nicht Krieg zu führen. Meine Kriegs-Praxis ist in vier
Sätze zu fassen. Erstens: ich greife nur Sachen an, die siegreich
sind, - ich warte unter Umständen, bis sie siegreich sind. Zweitens:
ich greife nur Sachen an, wo ich keine Bundesgenossen finden würde,
wo ich allein stehe, - wo ich mich allein compromittire... Ich habe
nie einen Schritt öffentlich gethan, der nicht compromittirte: das
ist mein Kriterium des rechten Handelns. Drittens: ich greife nie
Personen an, - ich bediene mich der Person nur wie eines starken
Vergrösserungsglases, mit dem man einen allgemeinen, aber
schleichenden, aber wenig greifbaren Nothstand sichtbar machen
kann. So griff ich David Strauss an, genauer den Erfolg eines
altersschwachen Buchs bei der deutschen "Bildung", - ich ertappte
diese Bildung dabei auf der That... So griff ich Wagnern an, genauer
die Falschheit, die Instinkt-Halbschlächtigkeit unsrer "Cultur",
welche die Raffinirten mit den Reichen, die Späten mit den Grossen
verwechselt. Viertens: ich greife nur Dinge an, wo jedwede
Personen-Differenz ausgeschlossen ist, wo jeder Hintergrund schlimmer
Erfahrungen fehlt. Im Gegentheil, angreifen ist bei mir ein Beweis des
Wohlwollens, unter Umständen der Dankbarkeit. Ich ehre, ich zeichne
aus damit, dass ich meinen Namen mit dem einer Sache, einer Person
verbinde: für oder wider - das gilt mir darin gleich. Wenn ich dem
Christenthum den Krieg mache, so steht dies mir zu, weil ich von
dieser Seite aus keine Fatalitäten und Hemmungen erlebt habe, - die
ernstesten Christen sind mir immer gewogen gewesen. Ich selber, ein
Gegner des Christenthums de rigueur, bin ferne davon, es dem Einzelnen
nachzutragen, was das Verhängniss von Jahrtausenden ist.


8.

Darf ich noch. einen letzten Zug meiner Natur anzudeuten wagen,
der mir im Umgang mit Menschen keine kleine Schwierigkeit
macht? Mir eignet eine vollkommen unheimliche Reizbarkeit des
Reinlichkeits-Instinkts, so dass ich die Nähe oder - was sage ich? -
das Innerlichste, die "Eingeweide" jeder Seele physiologisch wahrnehme
- rieche... Ich habe an dieser Reizbarkeit psychologische Fühlhörner,
mit denen ich jedes Geheimniss betaste und in die Hand bekomme: der
viele verborgene Schmutz auf dem Grunde mancher Natur, vielleicht in
schlechtem Blut bedingt, aber durch Erziehung übertüncht, wird mir
fast bei der ersten Berührung schon bewusst. Wenn ich recht beobachtet
habe, empfinden solche meiner Reinlichkeit unzuträgliche Naturen
die Vorsicht meines Ekels auch ihrerseits: sie werden damit nicht
wohlriechender... So wie ich mich immer gewöhnt habe - eine extreme
Lauterkeit gegen mich ist meine Daseins-Voraussetzung, ich komme
um unter unreinen Bedingungen, schwimme und bade und plätschere
ich gleichsam beständig im Wasser, in irgend einem vollkommen
durchsichtigen und glänzenden Elemente. Das macht mir aus dem Verkehr
mit Menschen keine kleine Gedulds-Probe; meine Humanität besteht
nicht darin, mitzufühlen, wie der Mensch ist, sondern es auszuhalten,
dass ich ihn mitfühle... Meine Humanität ist eine beständige
Selbstüberwindung. - Aber ich habe Einsamkeit nöthig, will sagen,
Genesung, Rückkehr zu mir, den Athem einer freien leichten spielenden
Luft... Mein ganzer Zarathustra ist ein Dithyrambus auf die
Einsamkeit, oder, wenn man mich verstanden hat, auf die Reinheit...
Zum Glück nicht auf die reine Thorheit. - Wer Augen für Farben hat,
wird ihn diamanten nennen. - Der Ekel am Menschen, am "Gesindel" war
immer meine grösste Gefahr... Will man die Worte hören, in denen
Zarathustra von der Erlösung vom Ekel redet?

Was geschah mir doch? Wie erlöste ich mich vom Ekel? Wer verjüngte
mein Auge? Wie erflog ich die Höhe, wo kein Gesindel mehr am Brunnen
sitzt?

Schuf mein Ekel selber mir Flügel und quellenahnende Kräfte?
Wahrlich, in's Höchste musste ich fliegen, dass ich den Born der Lust
wiederfände!-

Oh ich fand ihn, meine Brüder! Hier im Höchsten quillt mir der Born
der Lust! Und es giebt ein Leben, an dem kein Gesindel mittrinkt!

Fast zu heftig strömst du mir, Quell der Lust! Und oft leerst du den
Becher wieder, dadurch, dass du ihn füllen willst.

Und noch muss ich lernen, bescheidener dir zu nahen: allzuheftig
strömt dir noch mein Herz entgegen:

- mein Herz, auf dem mein Sommer brennt, der kurze, heisse,
schwermüthige, überselige: wie verlangt mein Sommer-Herz nach deiner
Kühle!

Vorbei die zögernde Trübsal meines Frühlings! Vorüber die
Schneeflocken meiner Bosheit im Juni! Sommer wurde ich ganz und
Sommer-Mittag,

- ein Sommer im Höchsten mit kalten Quellen und seliger Stille: oh
kommt, meine Freunde, dass die Stille noch seliger werde!

Denn dies ist unsre Höhe und unsre Heimat: zu hoch und steil wohnen
wir hier allen Unreinen und ihrem Durste.

Werft nur eure reinen Augen in den Born meiner Lust, ihr Freunde! Wie
sollte er darob trübe werden? Entgegenlachen soll er euch mit seiner
Reinheit.

Auf dem Baume Zukunft bauen wir unser Nest; Adler sollen uns Einsamen
Speise bringen in ihren Schnäbeln!

Wahrlich, keine Speise, an der Unsaubere mitessen dürften! Feuer
würden sie zu fressen wähnen und sich die Mäuler verbrennen.

Wahrlich, keine Heimstätten halten wir hier bereit für Unsaubere!
Eishöhle würde ihren Leibern unser Glück heissen und ihren Geistern!

Und wie starke Winde wollen wir über ihnen leben, Nachbarn den Adlern,
Nachbarn dem Schnee, Nachbarn der Sonne: also leben starke Winde.

Und einem Winde gleich will ich einst noch zwischen sie blasen und mit
meinem Geiste ihrem Geiste den Athem nehmen: so will es meine Zukunft.

Wahrlich, ein starker Wind ist Zarathustra allen Niederungen: und
solchen Rath räth er seinen Feinden und Allem, was spuckt und speit:
hütet euch, gegen den Wind zu speien!...



Warum ich so klug bin.

1.

- Warum ich Einiges mehr weiss? Warum ich überhaupt so klug bin? Ich
habe nie über Fragen nachgedacht, die keine sind, - ich habe mich
nicht verschwendet. - Eigentliche religiöse Schwierigkeiten zum
Beispiel kenne ich nicht aus Erfahrung. Es ist mir gänzlich entgangen,
in wiefern ich "sündhaft" sein sollte. Insgleichen fehlt mir ein
zuverlässiges Kriterium dafür, was ein Gewissensbiss ist: nach
dem, was man darüber hört, scheint mir ein Gewissensbiss nichts
Achtbares... Ich möchte nicht eine Handlung hinterdrein in Stich
lassen, ich würde vorziehn, den schlimmen Ausgang, die Folgen
grundsätzlich aus der Werthfrage wegzulassen. Man verliert beim
schlimmen Ausgang gar zu leicht den richtigen Blick für Das, was man
that: ein Gewissensbiss scheint mir eine Art "böser Blick". Etwas, das
fehlschlägt, um so mehr bei sich in Ehren halten, weil es fehlschlug
- das gehört eher schon zu meiner Moral. - "Gott", "Unsterblichkeit
der Seele", "Erlösung", "Jenseits" lauter Begriffe, denen ich keine
Aufmerksamkeit, auch keine Zeit geschenkt habe, selbst als Kind
nicht, - ich war vielleicht nie kindlich genug dazu? - Ich kenne den
Atheismus durchaus nicht als Ergebniss, noch weniger als Ereigniss:
er versteht sich bei mir aus Instinkt. Ich bin zu neugierig, zu
fragwürdig, zu übermüthig, um mir eine faustgrobe Antwort gefallen zu
lassen. Gott ist eine faustgrobe Antwort, eine Undelicatesse gegen uns
Denker -, im Grunde sogar bloss ein faustgrobes Verbot an uns: ihr
sollt nicht denken!... Ganz anders interessirt mich eine Frage,
an der mehr das "Heil der Menschheit" hängt, als an irgend einer
Theologen-Curiosität: die Frage der Ernährung. Man kann sie sich, zum
Handgebrauch, so formuliren: "wie hast gerade du dich zu ernähren,
um zu deinem Maximum von Kraft, von Virtù im Renaissance-Stile, von
moralinfreier Tugend zu kommen?" - Meine Erfahrungen sind hier so
schlimm als möglich; ich bin erstaunt, diese Frage so spät gehört,
aus diesen Erfahrungen so spät "Vernunft" gelernt zu haben. Nur
die vollkommne Nichtswürdigkeit unsrer deutschen Bildung - ihr
"Idealismus" - erklärt mir einigermaassen, weshalb ich gerade hier
rückständig bis zur Heiligkeit war. Diese "Bildung", welche von
vornherein die Realitäten aus den Augen verlieren lehrt, um durchaus
problematischen, sogenannten "idealen" Zielen nachzujagen, zum
Beispiel der "klassischen Bildung": - als ob es nicht von vornherein
verurtheilt wäre, "klassisch", und "deutsch" in Einen Begriff zu
einigen! Mehr noch, es wirkt erheiternd, - man denke sich einmal einen
"klassisch gebildeten" Leipziger! - In der That, ich habe bis zu
meinen reifsten Jahren immer nur schlecht gegessen, - moralisch
ausgedrückt "unpersönlich", "selbstlos", "altruistisch", zum Heil
der Köche und andrer Mitchristen. Ich verneinte zum Beispiel durch
Leipziger Küche, gleichzeitig mit meinem ersten Studium Schopenhauer's
(1865), sehr ernsthaft meinen "Willen zum Leben". Sich zum Zweck
unzureichender Ernährung auch noch den Magen verderben - dies Problem
schien mir die genannte Küche zum Verwundern glücklich zu lösen.
(Man sagt, 1866 habe darin eine Wendung hervorgebracht -.) Aber die
deutsche Küche überhaupt - was hat sie nicht Alles auf dem Gewissen!
Die Suppe vor der Mahlzeit (noch in Venetianischen Kochbüchern des 16.
Jahrhunderts alla tedesca genannt); die ausgekochten Fleische, die
fett und mehlig gemachten Gemüse; die Entartung der Mehlspeise
zum Briefbeschwerer! Rechnet man gar noch die geradezu viehischen
Nachguss-Bedürfnisse der alten, durchaus nicht bloss alten Deutschen
dazu, so versteht man auch die Herkunft des deutschen Geistes - aus
betrübten Eingeweiden... Der deutsche Geist ist eine Indigestion,
er wird mit Nichts fertig. - Aber auch die englische Diät, die, im
Vergleich mit der deutschen, selbst der französischen, eine Art
"Rückkehr zur Natur", nämlich zum Canibalismus ist, geht meinem eignen
Instinkt tief zuwider; es scheint mir, dass sie dem Geist schwere
Füsse giebt - Engländerinnen-Füsse... Die beste Küche ist die
Piemont's. - Alkoholika sind mir nachtheilig; ein Glas Wein oder Bier
des Tags reicht vollkommen aus, mir aus dem Leben ein "Jammerthal" zu
machen, - in München leben meine Antipoden. Gesetzt, dass ich dies
ein wenig spät begriff, erlebt habe ich's eigentlich von Kindesbeinen
an. Als Knabe glaubte ich, Weintrinken sei wie Tabakrauchen anfangs
nur eine Vanitas junger Männer, später eine schlechte Gewöhnung.
Vielleicht, dass an diesem herben Urtheil auch der Naumburger Wein
mit schuld ist. Zu glauben, dass der Wein erheitert, dazu müsste ich
Christ sein, will sagen glauben, was gerade für mich eine Absurdität
ist. Seltsam genug, bei dieser extremen Verstimmbarkeit durch kleine,
stark verdünnte Dosen Alkohol, werde ich beinahe zum Seemann, wenn es
sich um starke Dosen handelt. Schon als Knabe hatte ich hierin meine
Tapferkeit. Eine lange lateinische Abhandlung in Einer Nachtwache
niederzuschreiben und auch noch abzuschreiben, mit dem Ehrgeiz in
der Feder, es meinem Vorbilde Sallust in Strenge und Gedrängtheit
nachzuthun und einigen Grog von schwerstem Kaliber über mein Latein zu
giessen, dies stand schon, als ich Schüler der ehrwürdigen Schulpforta
war, durchaus nicht im Widerspruch zu meiner Physiologie, noch
vielleicht auch zu der des Sallust wie sehr auch immer zur ehrwürdigen
Schulpforta... Später, gegen die Mitte des Lebens hin, entschied ich
mich freilich immer strenger gegen jedwedes "geistige" Getränk: ich,
ein Gegner des Vegetarierthums aus Erfahrung, ganz wie Richard Wagner,
der mich bekehrt hat, weiss nicht ernsthaft genug die unbedingte
Enthaltung von Alcoholicis allen geistigeren Naturen anzurathen.
Wasser thut's... Ich ziehe Orte vor, wo man überall Gelegenheit hat,
aus fliessenden Brunnen zu schöpfen (Nizza, Turin, Sils); ein kleines
Glas läuft mir nach wie ein Hund. In vino veritas: es scheint, dass
ich auch hier wieder über den Begriff "Wahrheit" mit aller Welt
uneins bin: - bei mir schwebt der Geist über dem Wasser... Ein paar
Fingerzeige noch aus meiner Moral. Eine starke Mahlzeit ist leichter
zu verdauen als eine zu kleine. Dass der Magen als Ganzes in
Thätigkeit tritt, erste Voraussetzung einer guten Verdauung. Man
muss die Grösse seines Magens kennen. Aus gleichem Grunde sind
jene langwierigen Mahlzeiten zu widerrathen, die ich unterbrochne
Opferfeste nenne, die an der table d'hôte. - Keine Zwischenmahlzeiten,
keinen Café: Café verdüstert. Thee nur morgens zuträglich. Wenig, aber
energisch; Thee sehr nachtheilig und den ganzen Tag ankränkelnd, wenn
er nur um einen Grad zu schwach ist. Jeder hat hier sein Maass, oft
zwischen den engsten und delikatesten Grenzen. In einem sehr agaçanten
Klima ist Thee als Anfang unräthlich: man soll eine Stunde vorher eine
Tasse dicken entölten Cacao's den Anfang machen lassen. - So wenig als
möglich sitzen; keinem Gedanken Glauben schenken, der nicht im Freien
geboren ist und bei freier Bewegung, in dem nicht auch die Muskeln
ein Fest feiern. Alle Vorurtheile kommen aus den Eingeweiden. - Das
Sitzfleisch - ich sagte es schon einmal - die eigentliche Sünde wider
den heiligen Geist.


2.

Mit der Frage der Ernährung ist nächstverwandt die Frage nach Ort
und Klima. Es steht Niemandem frei, überall zu leben; und wer grosse
Aufgaben zu lösen hat, die seine ganze Kraft herausfordern, hat
hier sogar eine sehr enge Wahl. Der klimatische Einfluss auf den
Stoffwechsel, seine Hemmung, seine Beschleunigung, geht so weit, dass
ein Fehlgriff in Ort und Klima jemanden nicht nur seiner Aufgabe
entfremden, sondern ihm dieselbe überhaupt vorenthalten kann: er
bekommt sie nie zu Gesicht. Der animalische vigor ist nie gross genug
bei ihm geworden, dass jene ins Geistigste überströmende Freiheit
erreicht wird, wo jemand erkennt: das kann ich allein... Eine zur
schlechten Gewohnheit gewordne noch so kleine Eingeweide-Trägheit
genügt vollständig, um aus einem Genie etwas Mittelmässiges, etwas
"Deutsches", zu machen; das deutsche Klima allein ist ausreichend,
um starke und selbst heroisch angelegte Eingeweide zu entmuthigen.
Das tempo des Stoffwechsels steht in einem genauen Verhältniss zur
Beweglichkeit oder Lahmheit der Füsse des Geistes; der "Geist"
selbst ist ja nur eine Art dieses Stoffwechsels. Man stelle sich die
Orte zusammen, wo es geistreiche Menschen giebt und gab, wo Witz,
Raffinement, Bosheit zum Glück gehörten, wo das Genie fast nothwendig
sich heimisch machte: sie haben alle eine ausgezeichnet trockne Luft.
Paris, die Provence, Florenz, Jerusalem, Athen - diese Namen beweisen
Etwas: das Genie ist bedingt durch trockne Luft, durch reinen Himmel,
- das heisst durch rapiden Stoffwechsel, durch die Möglichkeit,
grosse, selbst ungeheure Mengen Kraft sich immer wieder zuzuführen.
Ich habe einen Fall vor Augen, wo ein bedeutend und frei angelegter
Geist bloss durch Mangel an Instinkt-Feinheit im Klimatischen eng,
verkrochen, Specialist und Sauertopf wurde. Und ich selber hätte
zuletzt dieser Fall werden können, gesetzt, dass mich nicht die
Krankheit zur Vernunft, zum Nachdenken über die Vernunft in der
Realität gezwungen hätte. Jetzt, wo ich die Wirkungen klimatischen und
meteorologischen Ursprungs aus langer Übung an mir als an einem sehr
feinen und zuverlässigen Instrumente ablese und bei einer kurzen Reise
schon, etwa von Turin nach Mailand, den Wechsel in den Graden der
Luftfeuchtigkeit physiologisch bei mir nachrechne, denke ich mit
Schrecken an die unheimliche Tatsache, dass mein Leben bis auf die
letzten 10 Jahre, die lebensgefährlichen Jahre, immer sich nur in
falschen und mir geradezu verbotenen Orten abgespielt hat. Naumburg,
Schulpforta, Thüringen überhaupt, Leipzig, Basel - ebenso viele
Unglücks-Orte für meine Physiologie. Wenn ich überhaupt von meiner
ganzen Kindheit und Jugend keine willkommne Erinnerung habe, so wäre
es eine Thorheit, hier sogenannte "moralische" Ursachen geltend
zu machen, - etwa den unbestreitbaren Mangel an zureichender
Gesellschaft: denn dieser Mangel besteht heute wie er immer bestand,
ohne dass er mich hinderte, heiter und tapfer zu sein. Sondern die
Unwissenheit in physiologicis - der verfluchte "Idealismus" - ist das
eigentliche Verhängniss in meinem Leben, das überflüssige und Dumme
darin, Etwas, aus dem nichts Gutes gewachsen, für das es keine
Ausgleichung, keine Gegenrechnung giebt. Aus den Folgen dieses
"Idealismus" erkläre ich mir alle Fehlgriffe, alle grossen
Instinkt-Abirrungen und "Bescheidenheiten" abseits der Aufgabe meines
Lebens, zum Beispiel, dass ich Philologe wurde - warum zum Mindesten
nicht Arzt oder sonst irgend etwas Augen-Aufschliessendes? In meiner
Basler Zeit war meine ganze geistige Diät, die Tages-Eintheilung
eingerechnet, ein vollkommen sinnloser Missbrauch ausserordentlicher
Kräfte, ohne eine irgendwie den Verbrauch deckende Zufuhr von Kräften,
ohne ein Nachdenken selbst über Verbrauch und Ersatz. Es fehlte jede
feinere Selbstigkeit, jede Obhut eines gebieterischen Instinkts, es
war ein Sich-gleichsetzen mit Irgendwem, eine "Selbstlosigkeit", ein
Vergessen seiner Distanz, - Etwas, das ich mir nie verzeihe. Als
ich fast am Ende war, dadurch das sich fast am Ende war, wurde
ich nachdenklich über diese Grund-Unvernunft meines Lebens - den
"Idealismus". Die Krankheit brachte mich erst zur Vernunft. -


3.

Die Wahl in der Ernährung; die Wahl von Klima und Ort; das Dritte,
worin man um keinen Preis einen Fehlgriff thun darf, ist die Wahl
seiner Art Erholung. Auch hier sind je nach dem Grade, in dem ein
Geist sui generis ist, die Grenzen des ihm Erlaubten, das heisst
Nützlichen, eng und enger. In meinem Fall gehört alles Lesen zu meinen
Erholungen: folglich zu dem, was mich von mir losmacht, was mich in
fremden Wissenschaften und Seelen spazieren gehn lässt, - was ich
nicht mehr ernst nehme. Lesen erholt mich eben von meinem Ernste. In
tief arbeitsamen Zeiten sieht man keine Bücher bei mir: ich würde mich
hüten, jemanden in meiner Nähe reden oder gar denken zu lassen. Und
das hiesse ja lesen... Hat man eigentlich beobachtet, dass in jener
tiefen Spannung, zu der die Schwangerschaft den Geist und im Grunde
den ganzen Organismus verurtheilt, der Zufall, jede Art Reiz von
aussen her zu vehement wirkt, zu tief "einschlägt"? Man muss dem
Zufall, dem Reiz von aussen her so viel als möglich aus dem Wege gehn;
eine Art Selbst-Vermauerung gehört zu den ersten Instinkt-Klugheiten
der geistigen Schwangerschaft. Werde ich es erlauben, dass ein fremder
Gedanke heimlich über die Mauer steigt? - Und das hiesse ja lesen...
Auf die Zeiten der Arbeit und Fruchtbarkeit folgt die Zeit der
Erholung: heran mit euch, ihr angenehmen, ihr geistreichen, ihr
gescheuten Bücher! - Werden es deutsche Bücher sein?... Ich muss ein
Halbjahr zurückrechnen, dass ich mich mit einem Buch in der Hand
ertappe. Was war es doch? - Eine ausgezeichnete Studie von Victor
Brochard, les Sceptiques Grecs, in der auch meine Laertiana gut
benutzt sind. Die Skeptiker, der einzige ehrenwerthe Typus unter dem
so zwei- bis fünfdeutigen Volk der Philosophen!... Sonst nehme ich
meine Zuflucht fast immer zu den selben Büchern, einer kleinen Zahl im
Grunde, den gerade für mich bewiesenen Büchern. Es liegt vielleicht
nicht in meiner Art, Viel und Vielerlei zu lesen: ein Lesezimmer macht
mich krank. Es liegt auch nicht in meiner Art, Viel oder Vielerlei zu
lieben. Vorsicht, selbst Feindseligkeit gegen neue Bücher gehört eher
schon zu meinem Instinkte, als "Toleranz", "largeur du coeur" und
andre "Nächstenliebe"... Im Grunde ist es eine kleine Anzahl älterer
Franzosen zu denen ich immer wieder zurückkehre: ich glaube nur
an französische Bildung und halte Alles, was sich sonst in Europa
"Bildung" nennt, für Missverständniss, nicht zu reden von der
deutschen Bildung... Die wenigen Fälle hoher Bildung, die ich in
Deutschland vorfand, waren alle französischer Herkunft, vor Allem Frau
Cosima Wagner, bei weitem die erste Stimme in Fragen des Geschmacks,
die ich gehört habe... Dass ich Pascal nicht lese, sondern liebe, als
das lehrreichste Opfer des Christenthums, langsam hingemordet, erst
leiblich, dann psychologisch, die ganze Logik dieser schauderhaftesten
Form unmenschlicher Grausamkeit; dass ich Etwas von Montaigne's
Muthwillen im Geiste, wer weiss? vielleicht auch im Leibe habe; dass
mein Artisten-Geschmack die Namen Molière, Corneille und Racine nicht
ohne Ingrimm gegen ein wüstes Genie wie Shakespeare in Schutz nimmt:
das schliesst zuletzt nicht aus, dass mir nicht auch die allerletzten
Franzosen eine charmante Gesellschaft wären. Ich sehe durchaus nicht
ab, in welchem Jahrhundert der Geschichte man so neugierige und
zugleich so delikate Psychologen zusammenfischen könnte, wie im
jetzigen Paris: ich nenne versuchsweise - denn ihre Zahl ist gar nicht
klein - die Herrn Paul Bourget, Pierre Loti, Gyp, Meilhac, Anatole
France, Jules Lemaître, oder um Einen von der starken Rasse
hervorzuheben, einen echten Lateiner, dem ich besonders zugethan bin,
Guy de Maupassant. Ich ziehe diese Generation, unter uns gesagt, sogar
ihren grossen Lehrern vor, die allesammt durch deutsche Philosophie
verdorben sind: Herr Taine zum Beispiel durch Hegel, dem er das
Missverständniss grosser Menschen und Zeiten verdankt. So weit
Deutschland reicht, verdirbt es die Cultur. Der Krieg erst hat den
Geist in Frankreich "erlöst"... Stendhal, einer der schönsten Zufälle
meines Lebens - denn Alles, was in ihm Epoche macht, hat der Zufall,
niemals eine Empfehlung mir zugetrieben - ist ganz unschätzbar mit
seinem vorwegnehmenden Psychologen-Auge, mit seinem Thatsachen-Griff,
der an die Nähe des grössten Thatsächlichen erinnert (ex ungue
Napoleonem -); endlich nicht am Wenigsten als ehrlicher Atheist, eine
in Frankreich spärliche und fast kaum auffindbare species, - Prosper
Mérimée in Ehren... Vielleicht bin ich selbst auf Stendhal neidisch?
Er hat mir den besten Atheisten-Witz weggenommen, den gerade ich hätte
machen können: "die einzige Entschuldigung Gottes ist, dass er nicht
existirt"... Ich selbst habe irgendwo gesagt: was war der grösste
Einwand gegen das Dasein bisher? Gott...


4.

Den höchsten Begriff vom Lyriker hat mir Heinrich Heine gegeben. Ich
suche umsonst in allen Reichen der Jahrtausende nach einer gleich
süssen und leidenschaftlichen Musik. Er besass jene göttliche Bosheit,
ohne die ich mir das Vollkommne nicht zu denken vermag, - ich schätze
den Werth von Menschen, von Rassen darnach ab, wie nothwendig sie den
Gott nicht abgetrennt vom Satyr zu verstehen wissen. - Und wie er
das Deutsche handhabt! Man wird einmal sagen, dass Heine und ich bei
weitem die ersten Artisten der deutschen Sprache gewesen sind - in
einer unausrechenbaren Entfernung von Allem, was blosse Deutsche mit
ihr gemacht haben. - Mit Byrons Manfred muss ich tief verwandt sein:
ich fand alle diese Abgründe in mir, - mit dreizehn Jahren war ich für
dies Werk reif. Ich habe kein Wort, bloss einen Blick für die, welche
in Gegenwart des Manfred das Wort Faust auszusprechen wagen. Die
Deutschen sind unfähig jedes Begriffs von Grösse: Beweis Schumann.
Ich habe eigens, aus Ingrimm gegen diesen süsslichen Sachsen, eine
Gegenouvertüre zum Manfred componirt, von der Hans von Bülow sagte,
dergleichen habe er nie auf Notenpapier gesehn: das sei Nothzucht an
der Euterpe. - Wenn ich meine höchste Formel für Shakespeare suche,
so finde ich immer nur die, dass er den Typus Cäsar concipirt hat.
Dergleichen erräth man nicht, - man ist es oder man ist es nicht. Der
grosse Dichter schöpft nur aus seiner Realität - bis zu dem Grade,
dass er hinterdrein sein Werk nicht mehr aushält... Wenn, ich einen
Blick in meinen Zarathustra geworfen habe, gehe ich eine halbe Stunde
im Zimmer auf und ab, unfähig, über einen unerträglichen Krampf von
Schluchzen Herr zu werden. - Ich kenne keine herzzerreissendere
Lektüre als Shakespeare: was muss ein Mensch gelitten haben, um
dergestalt es nöthig zu haben, Hanswurst zu sein! - Versteht man den
Hamlet? Nicht der Zweifel, die Gewissheit ist das, was wahnsinnig
macht... Aber dazu muss man tief, Abgrund, Philosoph sein, um so zu
fühlen... Wir fürchten uns Alle vor der Wahrheit... Und, dass ich
es bekenne: ich bin dessen instinktiv sicher und gewiss, dass Lord
Bacon der Urheber, der Selbstthierquäler dieser unheimlichsten
Art Litteratur ist: was geht mich das erbarmungswürdige Geschwätz
amerikanischer Wirr- und Flachköpfe an? Aber die Kraft zur mächtigsten
Realität der Vision ist nicht nur verträglich mit der mächtigsten
Kraft zur That, zum Ungeheuren der That, zum Verbrechen sie setzt sie
selbst voraus... Wir wissen lange nicht genug von Lord Bacon, dem
ersten Realisten in jedem grossen Sinn des Wortes, um zu wissen, was
er Alles gethan, was er gewollt, was er mit sich erlebt hat... Und zum
Teufel, mein[e] Herrn Kritiker! Gesetzt, ich hätte meinen Zarathustra
auf einen fremden Namen getauft, zum Beispiel auf den von Richard
Wagner, der Scharfsinn von zwei Jahrtausenden hätte nicht ausgereicht,
zu errathen, dass der Verfasser von "Menschliches, Allzumenschliches"
der Visionär des Zarathustra ist...


5.

Hier, wo ich von den Erholungen meines Lebens rede, habe ich ein Wort
nöthig, um meine Dankbarkeit für das auszudrücken, was mich in ihm bei
weitem am Tiefsten und Herzlichsten erholt hat. Dies ist ohne allen
Zweifel der intimere Verkehr mit Richard Wagner gewesen. Ich lasse
den Rest meiner menschlichen Beziehungen billig; ich möchte um keinen
Preis die Tage von Tribschen aus meinem Leben weggeben, Tage des
Vertrauens, der Heiterkeit, der sublimen Zufälle - der tiefen
Augenblicke... Ich weiss nicht, was Andre mit Wagner erlebt haben:
über unsern Himmel ist nie eine Wolke hinweggegangen. - Und hiermit
komme ich nochmals auf Frankreich zurück, - ich habe keine Gründe,
ich habe bloss einen verachtenden Mundwinkel gegen Wagnerianer et hoc
genus omne übrig, welche Wagner damit zu ehren glauben, dass sie ihn
sich ähnlich finden... So wie ich bin, in meinen tiefsten Instinkten
Allem, was deutsch ist, fremd, so dass schon die Nähe eines Deutschen
meine Verdauung verzögert, war die erste Berührung mit Wagner auch das
erste Aufathmen in meinem Leben: ich empfand, ich verehrte ihn als
Ausland, als Gegensatz, als leibhaften Protest gegen alle "deutschen
Tugenden" - Wir, die wir in der Sumpfluft der Fünfziger Jahre Kinder
gewesen sind, sind mit Nothwendigkeit Pessimisten für den Begriff
"deutsch"; wir können gar nichts Anderes sein als Revolutionäre, - wir
werden keinen Zustand der Dinge zugeben, wo der Mucker obenauf ist. Es
ist mir vollkommen gleichgültig, ob er heute in andren Farben spielt,
ob er sich in Scharlach kleidet und Husaren-Uniformen anzieht...
Wohlan! Wagner war ein Revolutionär - er lief vor den Deutschen
davon... Als Artist hat man keine Heimat in Europa ausser in Paris;
die délicatesse in allen fünf Kunstsinnen, die Wagner's Kunst
voraussetzt, die Finger für nuances, die psychologische Morbidität,
findet sich nur in Paris. Man hat nirgendswo sonst diese Leidenschaft
in Fragen der Form, diesen Ernst in der mise en scène - es ist der
Pariser Ernst par excellence. Man hat in Deutschland gar keinen
Begriff von der ungeheuren Ambition, die in der Seele eines Pariser
Künstlers lebt. Der Deutsche ist gutmüthig - Wagner war durchaus
nicht gutmüthig... Aber ich habe schon zur Genüge ausgesprochen (in
"Jenseits von Gut und Böse" S. 256 f.), wohin Wagner gehört, in wem
er seine Nächstverwandten hat: es ist die französische Spät-Romantik,
jene hochfliegende und hoch emporreissende Art von Künstlern
wie Delacroix, wie Berlioz, mit einem fond von Krankheit, von
Unheilbarkeit im Wesen, lauter Fanatiker des Ausdrucks, Virtuosen
durch und durch... Wer war der erste intelligente Anhänger Wagner's
überhaupt? Charles Baudelaire, derselbe, der zuerst Delacroix
verstand, jener typische décadent, in dem sich ein ganzes Geschlecht
von Artisten wiedererkannt hat - er war vielleicht auch der letzte...
Was ich Wagnern nie vergeben habe? Dass er zu den Deutschen
condescendirte, - dass er reichsdeutsch wurde... Soweit Deutschland
reicht, verdirbt es die Cultur. -


6.

Alles erwogen, hätte ich meine Jugend nicht ausgehalten ohne
Wagnerische Musik. Denn ich war verurtheilt zu Deutschen. Wenn man
von einem unerträglichen Druck loskommen will, so hat man Haschisch
nöthig. Wohlan, ich hatte Wagner nöthig. Wagner ist das Gegengift
gegen alles Deutsche par excellence, - Gift, ich bestreite es nicht...
Von dem Augenblick an, wo es einen Klavierauszug des Tristan gab -
mein Compliment, Herr von Bülow! -, war ich Wagnerianer. Die älteren
Werke Wagner's sah ich unter mir - noch zu gemein, zu "deutsch"...
Aber ich suche heute noch nach einem Werke von gleich gefährlicher
Fascination, von einer gleich schauerlichen und süssen Unendlichkeit,
wie der Tristan ist, - ich suche in allen Künsten vergebens. Alle
Fremdheiten Lionardo da Vinci's entzaubern sich beim ersten Tone
des Tristan. Dies Werk ist durchaus das non plus ultra Wagner's; er
erholte sich von ihm mit den Meistersingern und dem Ring. Gesünder
werden - das ist ein Rückschritt bei einer Natur wie Wagner... Ich
nehme es als Glück ersten Rangs, zur rechten Zeit gelebt und gerade
unter Deutschen gelebt zu haben, um reif für dies Werk zu sein: so
weit geht bei mir die Neugierde des Psychologen. Die Welt ist arm für
den, der niemals krank genug für diese "Wollust der Hölle" gewesen
ist: es ist erlaubt, es ist fast geboten, hier eine Mystiker-Formel
anzuwenden. - Ich denke, ich kenne besser als irgend jemand das
Ungeheure, das Wagner vermag, die fünfzig Welten fremder Entzückungen,
zu denen Niemand ausser ihm Flügel hatte; und so wie ich bin, stark
genug, um mir auch das Fragwürdigste und Gefährlichste noch zum
Vortheil zu wenden und damit stärker zu werden, nenne ich Wagner den
grossen Wohlthäter meines Lebens. Das, worin wir verwandt sind, dass
wir tiefer gelitten haben, auch an einander, als Menschen dieses
Jahrhunderts zu leiden vermöchten, wird unsre Namen ewig wieder
zusammenbringen; und so gewiss Wagner unter Deutschen bloss ein
Missverständniss ist, so gewiss bin ich's und werde es immer sein. -
Zwei Jahrhunderte psychologische und artistische Diciplin zu erst,
meine Herrn Germanen!... Aber das holt man nicht nach.


7.

Ich sage noch ein Wort für die ausgesuchtesten Ohren: was ich
eigentlich von der Musik will. Dass sie heiter und tief ist, wie ein
Nachmittag im Oktober. Dass sie eigen, ausgelassen, zärtlich, ein
kleines süsses Weib von Niedertracht und Anmuth ist... ich werde nie
zulassen, dass ein Deutscher wissen könne, was Musik ist. Was man
deutsche Musiker nennt, die grössten voran, sind Ausländer, Slaven,
Croaten, Italiäner, Niederländer - oder Juden; im andren Falle
Deutsche der starken Rasse, ausgestorbene Deutsche, wie Heinrich
Schütz, Bach und Händel. Ich selbst bin immer noch Pole genug, um
gegen Chopin den Rest der Musik hinzugeben: ich nehme, aus drei
Gründen, Wagner's Siegfried-Idyll aus, vielleicht auch Liszt, der die
vornehmen Orchester-Accente vor allen Musikern voraus hat; zuletzt
noch Alles, was jenseits der Alpen gewachsen ist - diesseits... Ich
würde Rossini nicht zu missen wissen, noch weniger meinen Süden in der
Musik, die Musik meines Venediger maëstro Pietro Gasti. Und wenn ich
jenseits der Alpen sage, sage ich eigentlich nur Venedig. Wenn ich ein
andres Wort für Musik suche, so finde ich immer nur das Wort Venedig.
Ich weiss keinen Unterschied zwischen Thränen und Musik zu machen, ich
weiss das Glück, den Süden nicht ohne Schauder von Furchtsamkeit zu
denken.

    An der Brücke stand
    jüngst ich in brauner Nacht.
    Fernher kam Gesang:
    goldener Tropfen quoll's
    über die zitternde Fläche weg.
    Gondeln, Lichter, Musik
    trunken schwamm's in die Dämmrung hinaus...

    Meine Seele, ein Saitenspiel,
    sang sich, unsichtbar berührt,
    heimlich ein Gondellied dazu,
    zitternd vor bunter Seligkeit.
    - Hörte Jemand ihr zu?...


8.

In Alledem - in der Wahl von Nahrung, von Ort und Klima, von Erholung
- gebietet ein Instinkt der Selbsterhaltung, der sich als Instinkt der
Selbstvertheidigung am unzweideutigsten ausspricht. Vieles nicht sehn,
nicht hören, nicht an sich herankommen lassen - erste Klugheit, erster
Beweis dafür, dass man kein Zufall, sondern eine Necessität ist. Das
gangbare Wort für diesen Selbstvertheidigungs-Instinkt ist Geschmack.
Sein Imperativ befiehlt nicht nur Nein zu sagen, wo das Ja eine
"Selbstlosigkeit" sein würde, sondern auch sowenig als möglich Nein
zu sagen. Sich trennen, sich abscheiden von dem, wo immer und immer
wieder das Nein nöthig werden würde. Die Vernunft darin ist, dass
Defensiv-Ausgaben, selbst noch so kleine, zur Regel, zur Gewohnheit
werdend, eine ausserordentliche und vollkommen überflüssige Verarmung
bedingen. Unsre grossen Ausgaben sind die häufigsten kleinen. Das
Abwehren, das Nicht-heran-kommen-lassen ist eine Ausgabe man täusche
sich hierüber nicht -, eine zu negativen Zwecken verschwendete Kraft.
Man kann, bloss in der beständigen Noth der Abwehr, schwach genug
werden, um sich nicht mehr wehren zu können. - Gesetzt, ich trete aus
meinem Haus heraus und fände, statt des stillen und aristokratischen
Turin, die deutsche Kleinstadt: mein Instinkt würde sich zu sperren
haben, um Alles das zurückzudrängen, was aus dieser plattgedrückten
und feigen Welt auf ihn eindringt. Oder ich fände die deutsche
Grossstadt, dies gebaute Laster, wo nichts wächst, wo jedwedes Ding,
Gutes und Schlimmes, eingeschleppt ist. Müsste ich nicht darüber
zum Igel werden? - Aber Stacheln zu haben ist eine Vergeudung, ein
doppelter Luxus sogar, wenn es freisteht, keine Stacheln zu haben,
sondern offne Hände...

Eine andre Klugheit und Selbstvertheidigung besteht darin, dass man
so selten als möglich reagirt und dass man sich Lagen und Bedingungen
entzieht, wo man verurtheilt wäre, seine "Freiheit", seine Initiative
gleichsam auszuhängen und ein blosses Reagens zu werden. Ich nehme als
Gleichniss den Verkehr mit Büchern. Der Gelehrte, der im Grunde nur
noch Bücher "wälzt" - der Philologe mit mässigem Ansatz des Tags
ungefähr 200 - verliert zuletzt ganz und gar das Vermögen, von sich
aus zu denken. Wälzt er nicht, so denkt er nicht. Er antwortet auf
einen Reiz (- einen gelesenen Gedanken), wenn er denkt, - er reagirt
zuletzt bloss noch. Der Gelehrte giebt seine ganze Kraft im Ja und
Neinsagen, in der Kritik von bereits Gedachtem ab, - er selber denkt
nicht mehr... Der Instinkt der Selbstvertheidigung ist bei ihm mürbe
geworden; im andren Falle würde er sich gegen Bücher wehren. Der
Gelehrte - ein décadent. - Das habe ich mit Augen gesehn: begabte,
reich und frei angelegte Naturen schon in den dreissiger Jahren "zu
Schanden gelesen", bloss noch Streichhölzer, die man reiben muss,
damit sie Funken - "Gedanken" geben. - Frühmorgens beim Anbruch des
Tags, in aller Frische, in der Morgenröthe seiner Kraft, ein Buch
lesen - das nenne ich lasterhaft! - -


9.

An dieser Stelle ist nicht mehr zu umgehn die eigentliche Antwort auf
die Frage, wie man wird, was man ist, zu geben. Und damit berühre ich
das Meisterstück in der Kunst der Selbsterhaltung - der Selbstsucht...
Angenommen nämlich, dass die Aufgabe, die Bestimmung, das Schicksal
der Aufgabe über ein durchschnittliches Maass bedeutend hinausliegt,
so würde keine Gefahr grösser als sich selbst mit dieser Aufgabe
zu Gesicht zu bekommen. Dass man wird, was man ist, setzt voraus,
dass man nicht im Entferntesten ahnt, was man ist. Aus diesem
Gesichtspunkte haben selbst die Fehlgriffe des Lebens ihren
eignen Sinn und Werth, die zeitweiligen Nebenwege und Abwege, die
Verzögerungen, die "Bescheidenheiten", der Ernst, auf Aufgaben
verschwendet, die jenseits der Aufgabe liegen. Darin kann eine grosse
Klugheit, sogar die oberste Klugheit zum Ausdruck [kommen]: wo
nosce te ipsum das Recept zum Untergang wäre, wird Sich-Vergessen,
Sich-Missverstehn, Sich-Verkleinern, -Verengern, -Vermittelmässigen
zur Vernunft selber. Moralisch ausgedrückt: Nächstenliebe, Leben
für Andere und Anderes kann die Schutzmassregel zur Erhaltung der
härtesten Selbstigkeit sein. Dies ist der Ausnahmefall, in welchem
ich, gegen meine Regel und Überzeugung, die Partei der "selbstlosen"
Triebe nehme: sie arbeiten hier im Dienste der Selbstsucht,
Selbstzucht. - Man muss die ganze Oberfläche des Bewusstseins -
Bewusstsein ist eine Oberfläche - rein erhalten von irgend einem der
grossen Imperative. Vorsicht selbst vor jedem grossen Worte, jeder
grossen Attitüde! Lauter Gefahren, dass der Instinkt zu früh "sich
versteht" - - Inzwischen wächst und wächst die organisirende, die zur
Herrschaft berufne "Idee" in der Tiefe, - sie beginnt zu befehlen,
sie leitet langsam aus Nebenwegen und Abwegen zurück, sie bereitet
einzelne Qualitäten und Tüchtigkeiten vor, die einmal als Mittel zum
Ganzen sich unentbehrlich erweisen werden, - sie bildet der Reihe
nach alle dienenden Vermögen aus, bevor sie irgend Etwas von der
dominirenden Aufgabe, von "Ziel", "Zweck", "Sinn" verlauten lässt. -
Nach dieser Seite hin betrachtet ist mein Leben einfach wundervoll.
Zur Aufgabe einer Umwerthung der Werthe waren vielleicht mehr Vermögen
nöthig, als je in einem Einzelnen bei einander gewohnt haben, vor
Allem auch Gegensätze von Vermögen, ohne dass diese sich stören,
zerstören durften. Rangordnung der Vermögen; Distanz; die Kunst zu
trennen, ohne zu verfeinden; Nichts vermischen, Nichts "versöhnen";
eine ungeheure Vielheit, die trotzdem das Gegenstück des Chaos ist -
dies war die Vorbedingung, die lange geheime Arbeit und Künstlerschaft
meines Instinkts. Seine höhere Obhut zeigte sich in dem Maasse stark,
dass ich in keinem Falle auch nur geahnt habe, was in mir wächst,
- dass alle meine Fähigkeiten plötzlich, reif, in ihrer letzten
Vollkommenheit eines Tags hervorsprangen. Es fehlt in meiner
Erinnerung, dass ich mich je bemüht hätte, - es ist kein Zug von
Ringen in meinem Leben nachweisbar, ich bin der Gegensatz einer
heroischen Natur. Etwas "wollen", nach Etwas "streben", einen "Zweck",
einen "Wunsch" im Auge haben das kenne ich Alles nicht aus Erfahrung.
Noch in diesem Augenblick sehe ich auf meine Zukunft - eine weite
Zukunft! wie auf ein glattes Meer hinaus: kein Verlangen kräuselt sich
auf ihm. Ich will nicht im Geringsten, dass Etwas anders wird als
es ist; ich selber will nicht anders werden. Aber so habe ich immer
gelebt. Ich habe keinen Wunsch gehabt. Jemand, der nach seinem
vierundvierzigsten Jahre sagen kann, dass er sich nie um Ehren, um
Weiber, um Geld bemüht hat! Nicht dass sie mir gefehlt hätten... So
war ich zum Beispiel eines Tags Universitätsprofessor, - ich hatte nie
im Entferntesten an dergleichen gedacht, denn ich war kaum 24 Jahr
alt. So war ich zwei Jahr früher eines Tags Philolog: in dem Sinne,
dass meine erste philologische Arbeit, mein Anfang in jedem Sinne, von
meinem Lehrer Ritschl für sein "Rheinisches Museum" zum Druck verlangt
wurde ( Ritschl - ich sage es mit Verehrung - der einzige geniale
Gelehrte, den ich bis heute zu Gesicht bekommen habe. Er besass jene
angenehme Verdorbenheit, die uns Thüringer auszeichnet und mit der
sogar ein Deutscher sympathisch wird: - wir ziehn selbst, um zur
Wahrheit zu gelangen, noch die Schleichwege vor. Ich möchte mit
diesen Worten meinen näheren Landsmann, den klugen Leopold von Ranke,
durchaus nicht unterschätzt haben...)


10.

An dieser Stelle thut eine grosse Besinnung Noth. Man wird mich
fragen, warum ich eigentlich alle diese kleinen und nach herkömmlichem
Urtheil gleichgültigen Dinge erzählt habe; ich schade mir selbst
damit, um so mehr, wenn ich grosse Aufgaben zu vertreten bestimmt sei.
Antwort: diese kleinen Dinge Ernährung, Ort, Clima, Erholung, die
ganze Casuistik der Selbstsucht - sind über alle Begriffe hinaus
wichtiger als Alles, was man bisher wichtig nahm. Hier gerade muss man
anfangen, umzulernen. Das, was die Menschheit bisher ernsthaft erwogen
hat, sind nicht einmal Realitäten, blosse Einbildungen, strenger
geredet, Lügen aus den schlechten Instinkten kranker, im tiefsten
Sinne schädlicher Naturen heraus alle die Begriffe "Gott", "Seele",
"Tugend", "Sünde", "Jenseits", "Wahrheit", "ewiges Leben"... Aber man
hat die Grösse der menschlichen Natur, ihre "Göttlichkeit" in ihnen
gesucht... Alle Fragen der Politik, der Gesellschafts-Ordnung, der
Erziehung sind dadurch bis in Grund und Boden gefälscht, dass man
die schädlichsten Menschen für grosse Menschen nahm, - dass man die
"kleinen" Dinge, will sagen die Grundangelegenheiten des Lebens
selber verachten lehrte... Unsre jetzige Cultur ist im höchsten Grade
zweideutig... Der deutsche Kaiser mit dem Papst paktirend, als ob
nicht der Papst der Repräsentant der Todfeindschaft gegen das Leben
wäre!... Das, was heute gebaut wird, steht in drei Jahren nicht mehr.
- Wenn ich mich darnach messe, was ich kann, nicht davon zu reden, was
hinter mir drein kommt, ein Umsturz, ein Aufbau ohne Gleichen, so habe
ich mehr als irgend ein Sterblicher den Anspruch auf das Wort Grösse.
Vergleiche ich mich nun mit den Menschen, die man bisher als erste
Menschen ehrte, so ist der Unterschied handgreiflich. Ich rechne diese
angeblich "Ersten" nicht einmal zu den Menschen überhaupt, - sie sind
für mich Ausschuss der Menschheit, Ausgeburten von Krankheit und
rachsüchtigen Instinkten: sie sind lauter unheilvolle, im Grunde
unheilbare Unmenschen, die am Leben Rache nehmen... Ich will dazu
der Gegensatz sein: mein Vorrecht ist, die höchste Feinheit für alle
Zeichen gesunder Instinkte zu haben. Es fehlt jeder krankhafte Zug
an mir; ich bin selbst in Zeiten schwerer Krankheit nicht krankhaft
geworden; umsonst, dass man in meinem Wesen einen Zug von Fanatismus
sucht. Man wird mir aus keinem Augenblick meines Lebens irgend eine
anmaassliche oder pathetische Haltung nachweisen können. Das Pathos
der Attitüde gehört nicht zur Grösse; wer Attitüden überhaupt nöthig
hat, ist falsch... Vorsicht vor allen pittoresken Menschen! - Das
Leben ist mir leicht geworden, am leichtesten, wenn es das Schwerste
von mir verlangte. Wer mich in den siebzig Tagen dieses Herbstes
gesehn hat, wo ich, ohne Unterbrechung, lauter Sachen ersten Ranges
gemacht habe die kein Mensch mir nachmacht - oder vormacht, mit einer
Verantwortlichkeit für alle Jahrtausende nach mir, wird keinen Zug
von Spannung an mir wahrgenommen haben, um so mehr eine überströmende
Frische und Heiterkeit. Ich ass nie mit angenehmeren Gefühlen, ich
schlief nie besser. - Ich kenne keine andre Art, mit grossen Aufgaben
zu verkehren als das Spiel: dies ist, als Anzeichen der Grösse, eine
wesentliche Voraussetzung. Der geringste Zwang, die düstre Miene,
irgend ein harter Ton im Halse sind alles Einwände gegen einen
Menschen, um wie viel mehr gegen sein Werk!... Man darf keine Nerven
haben... Auch an der Einsamkeit leiden ist ein Einwand, - ich habe
immer nur an der "Vielsamkeit" gelitten... In einer absurd frühen
Zeit, mit sieben Jahren, wusste ich bereits, dass mich nie ein
menschliches Wort erreichen würde: hat man mich je darüber betrübt
gesehn? - Ich habe heute noch die gleiche Leutseligkeit gegen
Jedermann, ich bin selbst voller Auszeichnung für die Niedrigsten: in
dem Allen ist nicht ein Gran von Hochmuth, von geheimer Verachtung.
Wen ich verachte, der erräth, dass er von mir verachtet wird: ich
empöre durch mein blosses Dasein Alles, was schlechtes Blut im Leibe
hat... Meine Formel für die Grösse am Menschen ist amor fati: dass man
Nichts anders haben will, vorwärts nicht, rückwärts nicht, in alle
Ewigkeit nicht. Das Nothwendige nicht bloss ertragen, noch weniger
verhehlen - aller Idealismus ist Verlogenheit vor dem Nothwendigen -,
sondern es lieben...



Warum ich so gute Bücher schreibe.

1.

Das Eine bin ich, das Andre sind meine Schriften. - Hier werde,
bevor ich von ihnen selber rede, die Frage nach dem Verstanden- oder
Nicht-verstanden-werden dieser Schriften berührt. Ich thue es so
nachlässig, als es sich irgendwie schickt: denn diese Frage ist
durchaus noch nicht an der Zeit. Ich selber bin noch nicht an
der Zeit, Einige werden posthum geboren -- Irgend wann wird man
Institutionen nöthig haben, in denen man lebt und lehrt, wie ich leben
und lehren verstehe; vielleicht selbst, dass man dann auch eigene
Lehrstühle zur Interpretation des Zarathustra errichtet. Aber es wäre
ein vollkommner Widerspruch zu mir, wenn ich heute bereits Ohren und
Hände für meine Wahrheiten erwartete: dass man heute nicht hört, dass
man heute nicht von mir zu nehmen weiss, ist nicht nur begreiflich,
es scheint mir selbst das Rechte. Ich will nicht verwechselt werden,
- dazu gehört, dass ich mich selber nicht verwechsele. - Nochmals
gesagt, es ist wenig in meinem Leben nachweisbar von "bösem Willen";
auch von litterarischem "bösen Willen" wüsste ich kaum einen Fall zu
erzählen. Dagegen zu viel von reiner Thorheit... Es scheint mir eine
der seltensten Auszeichnungen, die Jemand sich erweisen kann, wenn er
ein Buch von mir in die Hand nimmt, - ich nehme selbst an, er zieht
dazu die Schuhe aus, - nicht von Stiefeln zu reden... Als sich einmal
der Doktor Heinrich von Stein ehrlich darüber beklagte, kein Wort aus
meinem Zarathustra zu verstehn, sagte ich ihm, das sei in Ordnung:
sechs Sätze daraus verstanden, das heisst: erlebt haben, hebe auf eine
höhere Stufe der Sterblichen hinauf als "moderne" Menschen erreichen
könnten. Wie könnte ich, mit diesem Gefühle der Distanz, auch nur
wünschen, von den "Modernen", die ich kenne -, gelesen zu werden! -
Mein Triumph ist gerade der umgekehrte, als der Schopenhauer's war,
- ich sage "non legor, non legar". - Nicht, dass ich das Vergnügen
unterschätzen möchte, das mir mehrmals die Unschuld im Neinsagen zu
meinen Schriften gemacht hat. Noch in diesem Sommer, zu einer Zeit,
wo ich vielleicht mit meiner schwerwiegenden, zu schwer wiegenden
Litteratur den ganzen Rest von Litteratur aus dem Gleichgewicht zu
bringen vermöchte, gab mir ein Professor der Berliner Universität
wohlwollend zu verstehn, ich sollte mich doch einer andren Form
bedienen: so Etwas lese Niemand. - Zuletzt war es nicht Deutschland,
sondern die Schweiz, die die zwei extremen Fälle geliefert hat. Ein
Aufsatz des Dr. V. Widmann im "Bund", über "Jenseits von Gut und
Böse", unter dem Titel "Nietzsche's gefährliches Buch", und ein
Gesammt-Bericht über meine Bücher überhaupt seitens des Herrn Karl
Spitteler, gleichfalls im Bund, sind ein Maximum in meinem Leben - ich
hüte mich zu sagen wovon... Letzterer behandelte zum Beispiel meinen
Zarathustra als "höhere Stilübung", mit dem Wunsche, ich möchte später
doch auch für Inhalt sorgen; Dr. Widmann drückte mir seine Achtung
vor dem Muth aus, mit dem ich mich um Abschaffung aller anständigen
Gefühle bemühe. - Durch eine kleine Tücke von Zufall war hier jeder
Satz, mit einer Folgerichtigkeit, die ich bewundert habe, eine auf
den Kopf gestellte Wahrheit: man hatte im Grunde Nichts zu thun, als
alle "Werthe umzuwerthen", um, auf eine sogar bemerkenswerthe Weise,
über mich den Nagel auf den Kopf zu treffen - statt meinen Kopf mit
einem Nagel zu treffen... Um so mehr versuche ich eine Erklärung. -
Zuletzt kann Niemand aus den Dingen, die Bücher eingerechnet, mehr
heraushören, als er bereits weiss. Wofür man vom Erlebnisse her
keinen Zugang hat, dafür hat man kein Ohr. Denken wir uns nun einen
äussersten Fall, dass ein Buch von lauter Erlebnissen redet, die
gänzlich ausserhalb der Möglichkeit einer häufigen oder auch nur
seltneren Erfahrung liegen, - dass es die erste Sprache für eine neue
Reihe von Erfahrungen ist. In diesem Falle wird einfach Nichts gehört,
mit der akustischen Täuschung, dass wo Nichts gehört wird, auch Nichts
da ist -. Dies ist zuletzt meine durchschnittliche Erfahrung und,
wenn man will, die Originalität meiner Erfahrung. Wer Etwas von mir
verstanden zu haben glaubte, hat sich Etwas aus mir zurecht gemacht,
nach seinem Bilde, - nicht selten einen Gegensatz von mir, zum
Beispiel einen "Idealisten"; wer Nichts von mir verstanden hatte,
leugnete, dass ich überhaupt in Betracht käme. - Das Wort "Übermensch"
zur Bezeichnung eines Typus höchster Wohlgerathenheit, im Gegensatz
zu "modernen" Menschen, zu "guten" Menschen, zu Christen und andren
Nihilisten - ein Wort, das im Munde eines Zarathustra, des Vernichters
der Moral, ein sehr nachdenkliches Wort wird, ist fast überall mit
voller Unschuld im Sinn derjenigen Werthe verstanden worden, deren
Gegensatz in der Figur Zarathustra's zur Erscheinung gebracht worden
ist, will sagen als "idealistischer" Typus einer höheren Art Mensch,
halb "Heiliger", halb "Genie"... Andres gelehrtes Hornvieh hat mich
seinethalben des Darwinismus verdächtigt; selbst der von mir so
boshaft abgelehnte "Heroen-Cultus", jenes grossen Falschmünzers wider
Wissen und Willen, Carlyle's, ist darin wiedererkannt worden. Wem ich
ins Ohr flüsterte, er solle sich eher noch nach einem Cesare Borgia
als nach einem Parsifal umsehn, der traute seinen Ohren nicht. - Dass
ich gegen Besprechungen meiner Bücher, in Sonderheit durch Zeitungen,
ohne jedwede Neugierde bin, wird man mir verzeihn müssen. Meine
Freunde, meine Verleger wissen das und sprechen mir nicht von
dergleichen. In einem besondren Falle bekam ich einmal Alles zu
Gesicht, was über ein einzelnes Buch - es war "Jenseits von Gut und
Böse" - gesündigt worden ist; ich hätte einen artigen Bericht darüber
abzustatten. Sollte man es glauben, dass die Nationalzeitung - eine
preussische Zeitung, für meine ausländischen Leser bemerkt, ich selbst
lese, mit Verlaub, nur das Journal des Débats - allen Ernstes das Buch
als ein "Zeichen der Zeit" zu verstehn wusste, als die echte rechte
Junker-Philosophie, zu der es der Kreuzzeitung nur an Muth gebreche?


2.

Dies war für Deutsche gesagt: denn überall sonst habe ich Leser -
lauter ausgesuchte Intelligenzen, bewährte, in hohen Stellungen
und Pflichten erzogene Charaktere; ich habe sogar wirkliche Genies
unter meinen Lesern. In Wien, in St. Petersburg, in Stockholm, in
Kopenhagen, in Paris und New-York - überall bin ich entdeckt: ich
bin es nicht in Europa's Flachland Deutschland... Und, dass ich es
bekenne, ich freue mich noch mehr über meine Nicht-Leser, solche, die
weder meinen Namen, noch das Wort Philosophie je gehört haben; aber
wohin ich komme, hier in Turin zum Beispiel, erheitert und vergütigt
sich bei meinem Anblick jedes Gesicht. Was mir bisher am meisten
geschmeichelt hat, das ist, dass alte Hökerinnen nicht Ruhe haben,
bevor sie mir nicht das Süsseste aus ihren Trauben zusammengesucht
haben. Soweit muss man Philosoph sein. - Man nennt nicht umsonst die
Polen die Franzosen unter den Slaven. Eine charmante Russin wird
sich nicht einen Augenblick darüber vergreifen, wohin ich gehöre.
Es gelingt mir nicht, feierlich zu werden, ich bringe es höchstens
bis zur Verlegenheit... Deutsch denken, deutsch fühlen - ich kann
Alles, aber das geht über meine Kräfte... Mein alter Lehrer Ritschl
behauptete sogar, ich concipirte selbst noch meine philologischen
Abhandlungen wie ein Pariser romancier - absurd spannend. In Paris
selbst ist man erstaunt über "toutes mes audaces et finesses" - der
Ausdruck ist von Monsieur Taine -; ich fürchte, bis in die höchsten
Formen des Dithyrambus findet man bei mir von jenem Salze beigemischt,
das niemals dumm - "deutsch" - wird, esprit... Ich kann nicht anders.
Gott helfe mir! Amen. - Wir wissen Alle, Einige wissen es sogar aus
Erfahrung, was ein Langohr ist. Wohlan, ich wage zu behaupten, dass
ich die kleinsten Ohren habe. Dies interessirt gar nicht wenig
die Weiblein -, es scheint mir, sie fühlen sich besser von mir
verstanden?... Ich bin der Antiesel par excellence und damit ein
welthistorisches Unthier, - ich bin, auf griechisch, und nicht nur auf
griechisch, der Antichrist...


3.

Ich kenne einigermassen meine Vorrechte als Schriftsteller; in
einzelnen Fällen ist es mir auch bezeugt, wie sehr die Gewöhnung an
meine Schriften den Geschmack "verdirbt". Man hält einfach andre
Bücher nicht mehr aus, am wenigsten philosophische. Es ist eine
Auszeichnung ohne Gleichen, in diese vornehme und delikate Welt
einzutreten, - man darf dazu durchaus kein Deutscher sein; es ist
zuletzt eine Auszeichnung, die man sich verdient haben muss. Wer mir
aber durch Höhe des Wollens verwandt ist, erlebt dabei wahre Ekstasen
des Lernens: denn ich komme aus Höhen, die kein Vogel je erflog, ich
kenne Abgründe, in die noch kein Fuss sich verirrt hat. Man hat mir
gesagt, es sei nicht möglich, ein Buch von mir aus der Hand zu legen,
- ich störte selbst die Nachtruhe... Es giebt durchaus keine stolzere
und zugleich raffinirtere Art von Büchern: sie erreichen hier und da
das Höchste, was auf Erden erreicht werden kann, den Cynismus; man
muss sie sich ebenso mit den zartesten Fingern wie mit den tapfersten
Fäusten erobern. Jede Gebrechlichkeit der Seele schliesst aus davon,
ein für alle Male, selbst jede Dyspepsie: man muss keine Nerven haben,
man muss einen fröhlichen Unterleib haben. Nicht nur die Armut, die
Winkel-Luft einer Seele schliesst davon aus, noch viel mehr das Feige,
das Unsaubere, das Heimlich-Rachsüchtige in den Eingeweiden: ein
Wort von mir treibt alle schlechten Instinkte ins Gesicht. Ich habe
an meinen Bekannten mehrere Versuchsthiere, an denen ich mir die
verschiedene, sehr lehrreich verschiedene Reaktion auf meine Schriften
zu Gemüthe führe. Wer nichts mit ihrem Inhalte zu thun haben will,
meine sogenannten Freunde zum Beispiel, wird dabei "unpersönlich": man
wünscht mir Glück, wieder "so weit" zu sein, - auch ergäbe sich ein
Fortschritt in einer grösseren Heiterkeit des Tons... Die vollkommen
lasterhaften "Geister", die "schönen Seelen", die in Grund und Boden
Verlognen, wissen schlechterdings nicht, was sie mit diesen Büchern
anfangen sollen, - folglich sehn sie dieselben unter sich, die schöne
Folgerichtigkeit aller "schönen Seelen". Das Hornvieh unter meinen
Bekannten, blosse Deutsche, mit Verlaub, giebt zu verstehn, man sei
nicht immer meiner Meinung, aber doch mitunter, zum Beispiel... Ich
habe dies selbst über den Zarathustra gehört... Insgleichen ist jeder
"Femininismus" im Menschen, auch im Manne, ein Thorschluss für mich:
man wird niemals in dies Labyrinth verwegener Erkenntnisse eintreten.
Man muss sich selbst nie geschont haben, man muss die Härte in seinen
Gewohnheiten haben, um unter lauter harten Wahrheiten wohlgemuth
und heiter zu sein. Wenn ich mir das Bild eines vollkommnen Lesers
ausdenke, so wird immer ein Unthier von Muth und Neugierde daraus,
ausserdem noch etwas Biegsames, Listiges, Vorsichtiges, ein geborner
Abenteurer und Entdecker. Zuletzt: ich wüsste es nicht besser zu
sagen, zu wem ich im Grunde allein rede, als es Zarathustra gesagt
hat: wem allein will er sein Räthsel erzählen?

Euch, den kühnen Suchern, Versuchern, und wer je sich mit listigen
Segeln auf furchtbare Meere einschiffte, -

euch, den Räthsel-Trunkenen, den Zwielicht-Frohen, deren Seele mit
Flöten zu jedem Irrschlunde gelockt wird:

- denn nicht wollt ihr mit feiger Hand einem Faden nachtasten; und wo
ihr errathen könnt, da hasst ihr es, zu erschliessen...


4.

Ich sage zugleich noch ein allgemeines Wort über meine Kunst des
Stils. Einen Zustand, eine innere Spannung von Pathos durch Zeichen,
eingerechnet das tempo dieser Zeichen, mitzutheilen - das ist der Sinn
jedes Stils; und in Anbetracht, dass die Vielheit innerer Zustände bei
mir ausserordentlich ist, giebt es bei mir viele Möglichkeiten des
Stils - die vielfachste Kunst des Stils überhaupt, über die je ein
Mensch verfügt hat. Gut ist jeder Stil, der einen inneren Zustand
wirklich mittheilt, der sich über die Zeichen, über das tempo der
Zeichen, über die Gebärden - alle Gesetze der Periode sind Kunst der
Gebärde - nicht vergreift. Mein Instinkt ist hier unfehlbar. - Guter
Stil an sich - eine reine Thorheit, blosser "Idealismus", etwa,
wie das "Schöne an sich", wie das "Gute an sich", wie das "Ding an
sich"... Immer noch vorausgesetzt, dass es Ohren giebt - dass es
Solche giebt, die eines gleichen Pathos fähig und würdig sind, dass
die nicht fehlen, denen man sich mittheilen darf. - Mein Zarathustra
zum Beispiel sucht einstweilen noch nach Solchen - ach! er wird noch
lange zu suchen haben! - Man muss dessen werth sein, ihn zu hören...
Und bis dahin wird es Niemanden geben, der die Kunst, die hier
verschwendet worden ist, begreift: es hat nie jemand mehr von neuen,
von unerhörten, von wirklich erst dazu geschaffnen Kunstmitteln zu
verschwenden gehabt. Dass dergleichen gerade in deutscher Sprache
möglich war, blieb zu beweisen: ich selbst hätte es vorher am
härtesten abgelehnt. Man weiss vor mir nicht, was man mit der
deutschen Sprache kann, - was man überhaupt mit der Sprache kann.
- Die Kunst des grossen Rhythmus, der grosse Stil der Periodik
zum Ausdruck eines ungeheuren Auf und Nieder von sublimer, von
übermenschlicher, Leidenschaft ist erst von mir entdeckt; mit einem
Dithyrambus wie dem letzten des dritten Zarathustra, "die sieben
Siegel", überschrieben, flog ich tausend Meilen über das hinaus, was
bisher Poesie hiess.


5.

- Dass aus meinen Schriften ein Psychologe redet, der nicht seines
Gleichen hat, das ist vielleicht die erste Einsicht, zu der ein guter
Leser gelangt - ein Leser, wie ich ihn verdiene, der mich liest,
wie gute alte Philologen ihren Horaz lasen. Die Sätze, über
die im Grunde alle Welt einig ist, gar nicht zu reden von den
Allerwelts-Philosophen, den Moralisten und andren Hohltöpfen,
Kohlköpfen - erscheinen bei mir als Naivetäten des Fehlgriffs: zum
Beispiel jener Glaube, dass "unegoistisch" und "egoistisch" Gegensätze
sind, während das ego selbst bloss ein "höherer Schwindel", ein
"Ideal" ist... Es giebt weder egoistische, noch unegoistische
Handlungen: beide Begriffe sind psychologischer Widersinn. Oder der
Satz "der Mensch strebt nach Glück"... Oder der Satz "das Glück
ist der Lohn der Tugend"... Oder der Satz "Lust und Unlust sind
Gegensätze"... Die Circe der Menschheit, die Moral, hat alle
psychologica in Grund und Boden gefälscht - vermoralisirt - bis zu
jenem schauderhaften Unsinn, dass die Liebe etwas "Unegoistisches"
sein soll... Man muss fest auf sich sitzen, man muss tapfer auf seinen
beiden Beinen stehn, sonst kann man gar nicht lieben. Das wissen
zuletzt die Weiblein nur zu gut: sie machen sich den Teufel was aus
selbstlosen, aus bloss objektiven Männern... Darf ich anbei die
Vermuthung wagen, dass ich die Weiblein kenne? Das gehört zu meiner
dionysischen Mitgift. Wer weiss? vielleicht bin ich der erste
Psycholog des Ewig-Weiblichen. Sie lieben mich Alle - eine
alte Geschichte: die verunglückten Weiblein abgerechnet, die
"Emancipirten", denen das Zeug zu Kindern abgeht. - Zum Glück bin
ich nicht Willens mich zerreissen zu lassen: das vollkommne Weib
zerreisst, wenn es liebt... Ich kenne diese liebenswürdigen Mänaden...
Ah, was für ein gefährliches, schleichendes, unterirdisches kleines
Raubthier! Und so angenehm dabei!... Ein kleines Weib, das seiner
Rache nachrennt, würde das Schicksal selbst über den Haufen rennen.
- Das Weib ist unsäglich viel böser als der Mann, auch klüger; Güte
am Weibe ist schon eine Form der Entartung... Bei allen sogenannten
"schönen Seelen" giebt es einen physiologischen Übelstand auf dem
Grunde, - ich sage nicht Alles, ich würde sonst medicynisch werden.
Der Kampf um gleiche Rechte ist sogar ein Symptom von Krankheit: jeder
Arzt weiss das. - Das Weib, je mehr Weib es ist, wehrt sich ja mit
Händen und Füssen gegen Rechte überhaupt: der Naturzustand, der ewige
Krieg zwischen den Geschlechtern giebt ihm ja bei weitem den ersten
Rang. - Hat man Ohren für meine Definition der Liebe gehabt? es ist
die einzige, die eines Philosophen würdig ist. Liebe - in ihren
Mitteln der Krieg, in ihrem Grunde der Todhass der Geschlechter. -
Hat man meine Antwort auf die Frage gehört, wie man ein Weib kurirt -
"erlöst"? Man macht ihm ein Kind. Das Weib hat Kinder nöthig, der Mann
ist immer nur Mittel: also sprach Zarathustra. - "Emancipation des
Weibes" - das ist der Instinkthass des missrathenen, das heisst
gebäruntüchtigen Weibes gegen das wohlgerathene, - der Kampf gegen
den "Mann" ist immer nur Mittel, Vorwand, Taktik. Sie wollen, indem
sie sich hinaufheben, als "Weib an sich", als "höheres Weib",
als "Idealistin" von Weib, das allgemeine Rang-Niveau des Weibes
herunterbringen; kein sichereres Mittel dazu als Gymnasial-Bildung,
Hosen und politische Stimmvieh-Rechte. Im Grunde sind die
Emancipirten die Anarchisten in der Welt des "Ewig-Weiblichen", die
Schlechtweggekommenen, deren unterster Instinkt Rache ist... Eine
ganze Gattung des bösartigsten "Idealismus" - der übrigens auch bei
Männern vorkommt, zum Beispiel bei Henrik Ibsen, dieser typischen
alten Jungfrau - hat als Ziel das gute Gewissen, die Natur in der
Geschlechtsliebe zu vergiften... Und damit ich über meine in diesem
Betracht ebenso honnette als strenge Gesinnung keinen Zweifel lasse,
will ich noch einen Satz aus meinem Moral-Codex gegen das Laster
mittheilen: mit dem Wort Laster bekämpfe ich jede Art Widernatur oder
wenn man schöne Worte liebt, Idealismus. Der Satz heisst: "die Predigt
der Keuschheit ist eine öffentliche Aufreizung zur Widernatur. Jede
Verachtung des geschlechtlichen Lebens, jede Verunreinigung desselben
durch den Begriff `unrein` ist das Verbrechen selbst am Leben, - ist
die eigentliche Sünde wider den heiligen Geist des Lebens." -


6.

Um einen Begriff von mir als Psychologen zu geben, nehme ich ein
curioses Stück Psychologie, das in "Jenseits von Gut und Böse"
vorkommt, - ich verbiete übrigens jede Muthmassung darüber, wen ich
an dieser Stelle beschreibe. "Das Genie des Herzens, wie es jener
grosse Verborgene hat, der Versucher-Gott und geborne Rattenfänger
der Gewissen, dessen Stimme bis in die Unterwelt jeder Seele
hinabzusteigen weiss, welcher nicht ein Wort sagt, nicht einen Blick
blickt, in dem nicht eine Rücksicht und Falte der Lockung läge, zu
dessen Meisterschaft es gehört, dass er zu scheinen versteht - und
nicht das, was er ist, sondern was denen, die ihm folgen, ein Zwang
mehr ist, um sich immer näher an ihn zu drängen, um ihm immer
innerlicher und gründlicher zu folgen... Das Genie des Herzens, das
alles Laute und Selbstgefällige verstummen macht und horchen lehrt,
das die rauhen Seelen glättet und ihnen ein neues Verlangen zu kosten
giebt, - still zu liegen, wie ein Spiegel, dass sich der tiefe Himmel
auf ihnen spiegele... Das Genie des Herzens, das die tölpische
und überrasche Hand zögern und zierlicher greifen lehrt; das den
verborgenen und vergessenen Schatz, den Tropfen Güte und süsser
Geistigkeit unter trübem dickem Eise erräth und eine Wünschelruthe für
jedes Korn Goldes ist, welches lange im Kerker vielen Schlammes und
Sandes begraben lag... Das Genie des Herzens, von dessen Berührung
jeder reicher fortgeht, nicht begnadet und überrascht, nicht wie von
fremdem Gute beglückt und bedrückt, sondern reicher an sich selber,
sich neuer als zuvor, aufgebrochen, von einem Thauwinde angeweht
und ausgehorcht, unsicherer vielleicht, zärtlicher zerbrechlicher
zerbrochener, aber voll Hoffnungen, die noch keinen Namen haben,
voll neuen Willens und Strömens, voll neuen Unwillens und
Zurückströmens..."



Die Geburt der Tragödie.

1.

Um gegen die "Geburt der Tragödie" (1872) gerecht zu sein, wird
man Einiges vergessen müssen. Sie hat mit dem gewirkt und selbst
fascinirt, was an ihr verfehlt war - mit ihrer Nutzanwendung auf die
Wagnerei, als ob dieselbe ein Aufgangs-Symptom sei. Diese Schrift war
eben damit im Leben Wagner's ein Ereigniss: von da an gab es erst
grosse Hoffnungen bei dem Namen Wagner. Noch heute erinnert man mich
daran, unter Umständen mitten aus dem Parsifal heraus: wie ich es
eigentlich auf dem Gewissen habe, dass eine so hohe Meinung über den
Cultur-Werth dieser Bewegung obenauf gekommen sei. - Ich fand die
Schrift mehrmals citirt als "die Wiedergeburt der Tragödie aus dem
Geiste der Musik": man hat nur Ohren für eine neue Formel der Kunst,
der Absicht, der Aufgabe Wagner's gehabt, - darüber wurde überhört,
was die Schrift im Grunde Werthvolles barg. "Griechenthum und
Pessimismus": das wäre ein unzweideutigerer Titel gewesen: nämlich
als erste Belehrung darüber, wie die Griechen fertig wurden mit dem
Pessimismus, - womit sie ihn überwanden... Die Tragödie gerade ist der
Beweis dafür, dass die Griechen keine Pessimisten waren: Schopenhauer
vergriff sich hier, wie er sich in Allem vergriffen hat. - Mit einiger
Neutralität in die Hand genommen, sieht die "Geburt der Tragödie" sehr
unzeitgemäss aus: man würde sich nicht träumen lassen, dass sie unter
den Donnern der Schlacht bei Wörth begonnen wurde. Ich habe diese
Probleme vor den Mauern von Metz, in kalten September-Nächten, mitten
im Dienste der Krankenpflege, durchgedacht; man könnte eher schon
glauben, dass die Schrift fünfzig Jahre älter sei. Sie ist politisch
indifferent, - "undeutsch", wird man heute sagen - sie riecht
anstössig Hegelisch, sie ist nur in einigen Formeln mit dem
Leichenbitter-parfum Schopenhauer's behaftet. Eine "Idee" - der
Gegensatz dionysisch und apollinisch - ins Metaphysische übersetzt;
die Geschichte selbst als die Entwicklung dieser "Idee"; in der
Tragödie der Gegensatz zur Einheit aufgehoben; unter dieser Optik
Dinge, die noch nie einander ins Gesicht gesehn hatten, plötzlich
gegenüber gestellt, aus einander beleuchtet und begriffen... Die Oper
zum Beispiel und die Revolution. - Die zwei entscheidenden Neuerungen
des Buchs sind einmal das Verständniss des dionysischen Phänomens
bei den Griechen: es giebt dessen erste Psychologie, es sieht in ihm
die Eine Wurzel der ganzen griechischen Kunst. Das Andre ist das
Verständniss des Sokratismus: Sokrates als Werkzeug der griechischen
Auflösung, als typischer décadent zum ersten Male erkannt.
"Vernünftigkeit", gegen Instinkt. Die "Vernünftigkeit" um jeden Preis
als gefährliche, als leben-untergrabende Gewalt! - Tiefes feindseliges
Schweigen über das Christenthum im ganzen Buche. Es ist weder
apollinisch, noch dionysisch; es negirt alle ästhetischen Werthe -
die einzigen Werthe, die die "Geburt der Tragödie" anerkennt: es ist
im tiefsten Sinne nihilistisch, während im dionysischen Symbol die
äusserste Grenze der Bejahung erreicht ist. Einmal wird auf die
christlichen Priester wie auf eine "tückische Art von Zwergen", von
"Unterirdischen" angespielt...


2.

Dieser Anfang ist über alle Maassen merkwürdig. Ich hatte zu meiner
innersten Erfahrung das einzige Gleichniss und Seitenstück, das die
Geschichte hat, entdeckt, - ich hatte ebendamit das wundervolle
Phänomen des Dionysischen als der Erste begriffen. Insgleichen
war damit, dass ich Sokrates als décadent erkannte, ein völlig
unzweideutiger Beweis dafür gegeben, wie wenig die Sicherheit meines
psychologischen Griffs von Seiten irgend einer Moral-Idiosynkrasie
Gefahr laufen werde: - die Moral selbst als décadence-Symptom ist
eine Neuerung, eine Einzigkeit ersten Rangs in der Geschichte der
Erkenntniss. Wie hoch war ich mit Beidem über das erbärmliche
Flachkopf-Geschwätz von Optimismus contra Pessimismus
hinweggesprungen! - Ich sah zuerst den eigentlichen Gegensatz: - den
entartenden Instinkt, der sich gegen das Leben mit unterirdischer
Rachsucht wendet (- Christenthum, die Philosophie Schopenhauers, in
gewissem Sinne schon die Philosophie Platos, der ganze Idealismus als
typische Formen) und eine aus der Fülle, der Überfülle geborene Formel
der höchsten Bejahung, ein Jasagen ohne Vorbehalt, zum Leiden selbst,
zur Schuld selbst, zu allem Fragwürdigen und Fremden des Daseins
selbst... Dieses letzte, freudigste, überschwänglich-übermüthigste Ja
zum Leben ist nicht nur die höchste Einsicht, es ist auch die tiefste,
die von Wahrheit und Wissenschaft am strengsten bestätigte und
aufrecht erhaltene. Es ist Nichts, was ist, abzurechnen, es ist Nichts
entbehrlich - die von den Christen und andren Nihilisten abgelehnten
Seiten des Daseins sind sogar von unendlich höherer Ordnung in der
Rangordnung der Werthe als das, was der Décadence-Instinkt gutheissen,
gutheissen durfte. Dies zu begreifen, dazu gehört Muth und, als dessen
Bedingung, ein Überschuss von Kraft: denn genau so weit als der Muth
sich vorwärts wagen darf, genau nach dem Maass von Kraft nähert man
sich der Wahrheit. Die Erkenntniss, das Jasagen zur Realität ist für
den Starken eine ebensolche Nothwendigkeit als für den Schwachen,
unter der Inspiration der Schwäche, die Feigheit und Flucht vor der
Realität - das "Ideal"... Es steht ihnen nicht frei, zu erkennen:
die décadents haben die Lüge nöthig, sie ist eine ihrer
Erhaltungs-Bedingungen. - Wer das Wort "Dionysisch" nicht nur
begreift, sondern sich in dem Wort "dionysisch" begreift, hat keine
Widerlegung Platos oder des Christenthums oder Schopenhauers nöthig -
er riecht die Verwesung...


3.

In wiefern ich ebendamit den Begriff "tragisch", die endliche
Erkenntniss darüber, was die Psychologie der Tragödie ist, gefunden
hatte, habe ich zuletzt noch in der Götzen-Dämmerung Seite 139 zum
Ausdruck gebracht. "Das Jasagen zum Leben selbst noch in seinen
fremdesten und härtesten Problemen; der Wille zum Leben im Opfer
seiner höchsten Typen der eignen Unerschöpflichkeit frohwerdend - das
nannte ich dionysisch, das verstand ich als Brücke zur Psychologie des
tragischen Dichters. Nicht um von Schrecken und Mitleiden loszukommen,
nicht um sich von einem gefährlichen Affekt durch eine vehemente
Entladung zu reinigen so missverstand es Aristoteles: sondern um, über
Schrecken und Mitleiden hinaus, die ewige Lust des Werdens selbst
Zusein, jene Lust, die auch noch die Lust am Vernichten in sich
schliesst..." In diesem Sinne habe ich das Recht, mich selber als den
ersten tragischen Philosophen zu verstehn - das heisst den äussersten
Gegensatz und Antipoden eines pessimistischen Philosophen. Vor mir
giebt es diese Umsetzung des Dionysischen in ein philosophisches
Pathos nicht: es fehlt die tragische Weisheit, - ich habe vergebens
nach Anzeichen davon selbst bei den grossen Griechen der Philosophie,
denen der zwei Jahrhunderte vor Sokrates, gesucht. Ein Zweifel blieb
mir zurück bei Heraklit, in dessen Nähe überhaupt mir wärmer, mir
wohler zu Muthe wird als irgendwo sonst. Die Bejahung des Vergehens
und Vernichtens, das Entscheidende in einer dionysischen Philosophie,
das Jasagen zu Gegensatz und Krieg, das Wer den, mit radikaler
Ablehnung auch selbst des Begriffs "Sein" - darin muss ich unter
allen Umständen das mir Verwandteste anerkennen, was bisher gedacht
worden ist. Die Lehre von der "ewigen Wiederkunft", das heisst vom
unbedingten und unendlich wiederholten Kreislauf aller Dinge - diese
Lehre Zarathustra's könnte zuletzt auch schon von Heraklit gelehrt
worden sein. Zum Mindesten hat die Stoa, die fast alle ihre
grundsätzlichen Vorstellungen von Heraklit geerbt hat, Spuren davon.


4.

Aus dieser Schrift redet eine ungeheure Hoffnung. Zuletzt fehlt mir
jeder Grund, die Hoffnung auf eine dionysische Zukunft der Musik
zurückzunehmen. Werfen wir einen Blick ein Jahrhundert voraus, setzen
wir den Fall, dass mein Attentat auf zwei Jahrtausende Widernatur und
Menschenschändung gelingt. Jene neue Partei des Lebens, welche die
grösste aller Aufgaben, die Höherzüchtung der Menschheit in die Hände
nimmt, eingerechnet die schonungslose Vernichtung alles Entartenden
und Parasitischen, wird jenes Zuviel von Leben auf Erden wieder
möglich machen, aus dem auch der dionysische Zustand wieder erwachsen
muss. Ich verspreche ein tragisches Zeitalter: die höchste Kunst im
Jasagen zum Leben, die Tragödie, wird wiedergeboren werden, wenn die
Menschheit das Bewusstsein der härtesten, aber nothwendigsten Kriege
hinter sich hat, ohne daran zu leiden... Ein Psychologe dürfte noch
hinzufügen, dass was ich in jungen Jahren bei Wagnerischer Musik
gehört habe, Nichts überhaupt mit Wagner zu thun hat; dass wenn ich
die dionysische Musik beschrieb, ich das beschrieb, was ich gehört
hatte, - dass ich instinktiv Alles in den neuen Geist übersetzen und
transfiguriren musste, den ich in mir trug. Der Beweis dafür, so stark
als nur ein Beweis sein kann, ist meine Schrift "Wagner in Bayreuth":
an allen psychologisch entscheidenden Stellen ist nur von mir die
Rede, man darf rücksichtslos meinen Namen oder das Wort "Zarathustra"
hinstellen, wo der Text das Wort Wagner giebt. Das ganze Bild des
dithyrambischen Künstlers ist das Bild des präexistenten Dichters des
Zarathustra, mit abgründlicher Tiefe hingezeichnet und ohne einen
Augenblick die Wagnersche Realität auch nur zu berühren. Wagner selbst
hatte einen Begriff davon; er erkannte sich in der Schrift nicht
wieder. - Insgleichen hatte sich "der Gedanke von Bayreuth" in Etwas
verwandelt, das den Kennern meines Zarathustra kein Räthsel-Begriff
sein wird: in jenen grossen Mittag, wo sich die Auserwähltesten zur
grössten aller Aufgaben weihen - wer weiss? die Vision eines Festes,
das ich noch erleben werde... Das Pathos der ersten Seiten ist
welthistorisch; der Blick, von dem auf der siebenten Seite die
Rede ist, ist der eigentliche Zarathustra-Blick; Wagner, Bayreuth,
die ganze kleine deutsche Erbärmlichkeit ist eine Wolke, in der
eine unendliche fata morgana der Zukunft sich spiegelt. Selbst
psychologisch sind alle entscheidenden Züge meiner eignen Natur
in die Wagners eingetragen das Nebeneinander der lichtesten und
verhängnissvollsten Kräfte, der Wille zur Macht, wie ihn nie ein
Mensch besessen hat, die rücksichtslose Tapferkeit im Geistigen,
die unbegrenzte Kraft zu lernen, ohne dass der Wille zur That damit
erdrückt würde. Es ist Alles an dieser Schrift vorherverkündend: die
Nähe der Wiederkunft des griechischen Geistes, die Nothwendigkeit von
Gegen-Alexandern, welche den gordischen Knoten der griechischen Cultur
wieder binden, nachdem er gelöst war... Man höre den welthistorischen
Accent, mit dem auf Seite 30 der Begriff "tragische Gesinnung"
eingeführt wird: es sind lauter welthistorische Accente in dieser
Schrift. Dies ist die fremdartigste "Objektivität", die es geben kann:
die absolute Gewissheit darüber, was ich bin, projicirte sich auf
irgend eine zufällige Realität, - die Wahrheit über mich redete aus
einer schauervollen Tiefe. Auf Seite 71 wird der Stil des Zarathustra
mit einschneidender Sicherheit beschrieben und vorweggenommen; und
niemals wird man einen grossartigeren Ausdruck für das Ereigniss
Zarathustra, den Akt einer ungeheuren Reinigung und Weihung der
Menschheit, finden, als er in den Seiten 43-46 gefunden ist. -



Die Unzeitgemässen.

1.

Die vier Unzeitgemässen sind durchaus kriegerisch. Sie beweisen, dass
ich kein "Hans der Träumer" war, dass es mir Vergnügen macht, den
Degen zu ziehn, - vielleicht auch, dass ich das Handgelenk gefährlich
frei habe. Der erste Angriff (1873) galt der deutschen Bildung, auf
die ich damals schon mit schonungsloser Verachtung hinabblickte. Ohne
Sinn, ohne Substanz, ohne Ziel: eine blosse "öffentliche Meinung".
Kein bösartigeres Missverständniss als zu glauben, der grosse
Waffen-Erfolg der Deutschen beweise irgend Etwas zu Gunsten dieser
Bildung - oder gar ihren Sieg über Frankreich... Die zweite
Unzeitgemässe (1874) bringt das Gefährliche, das Leben-Annagende und
-Vergiftende in unsrer Art des Wissenschafts-Betriebs an's Licht -:
das Leben krank an diesem entmenschten Räderwerk und Mechanismus, an
der "Unpersönlichkeit" des Arbeiters, an der falschen Ökonomie der
"Theilung der Arbeit". Der Zweck geht verloren, die Cultur: - das
Mittel, der moderne Wissenschafts-Betrieb, barbarisirt... In dieser
Abhandlung wurde der "historische Sinn", auf den dies Jahrhundert
stolz ist, zum ersten Mal als Krankheit erkannt, als typisches Zeichen
des Verfalls. - In der dritten und vierten Unzeitgemässen werden, als
Fingerzeige zu einem höheren Begriff der Cultur, zur Wiederherstellung
des Begriffs "Cultur", zwei Bilder der härtesten Selbstsucht,
Selbstzucht dagegen aufgestellt, unzeitgemässe Typen par excellence,
voll souverainer Verachtung gegen Alles, was um sie herum "Reich",
"Bildung", "Christenthum", "Bismarck", "Erfolg" hiess, - Schopenhauer
und Wagner oder, mit Einem Wort, Nietzsche...


2.

Von diesen vier Attentaten hatte das erste einen ausserordentlichen
Erfolg. Der Lärm, den es hervorrief, war in jedem Sinne prachtvoll.
Ich hatte einer siegreichen Nation an ihre wunde Stelle gerührt, -
dass ihr Sieg nicht ein Cultur-Ereigniss sei, sondern vielleicht,
vielleicht etwas ganz Anderes... Die Antwort kam von allen Seiten und
durchaus nicht bloss von den alten Freunden David Straussens, den ich
als Typus eines deutschen Bildungsphilisters und satisfait, kurz als
Verfasser seines Bierbank-Evangeliums vom "alten und neuen Glauben"
lächerlich gemacht hatte (- das Wort Bildungsphilister ist von meiner
Schrift her in der Sprache übrig geblieben). Diese alten Freunde,
denen ich als Würtembergern und Schwaben einen tiefen Stich versetzt
hatte, als ich ihr Wunderthier, ihren Strauss komisch fand,
antworteten so bieder und grob, als ich's irgendwie wünschen konnte;
- die preussischen Entgegnungen waren klüger, - sie hatten mehr
"Berliner Blau" in sich. Das Unanständigste leistete ein Leipziger
Blatt, die berüchtigten "Grenzboten"; ich hatte mühe, die entrüsteten
Basler von Schritten abzuhalten. Unbedingt für mich entschieden sich
nur einige alte Herrn, aus gemischten und zum Theil unausfindlichen
Gründen. Darunter Ewald in Göttingen, der zu verstehn gab, mein
Attentat sei für Strauss tödtlich abgelaufen. Insgleichen der
alte Hegelianer Bruno Bauer, an dem ich von da an einen meiner
aufmerksamsten Leser gehabt habe. Er liebte es, in seinen letzten
Jahren, auf mich zu verweisen, zum Beispiel Herrn von Treitschke, dem
preussischen Historiographen, einen Wink zu geben, bei wem er sich
Auskunft über den ihm verloren gegangnen Begriff "Cultur" holen könne.
Das Nachdenklichste, auch das Längste über die Schrift und ihren Autor
wurde von einem alten Schüler des Philosophen von Baader gesagt, einem
Professor Hoffmann in Würzburg. Er sah aus der Schrift eine grosse
Bestimmung für mich voraus, - eine Art Krisis und höchste Entscheidung
im Problem des Atheismus herbeizuführen, als dessen instinktivsten
und rücksichtslosesten Typus er mich errieth. Der Atheismus war das,
was mich zu Schopenhauer führte. - Bei weitem am besten gehört, am
bittersten empfunden wurde eine ausserordentlich starke und tapfere
Fürsprache des sonst so milden Karl Hillebrand, dieses letzten humanen
Deutschen, der die Feder zu führen wusste. Man las seinen Aufsatz
in der "Augsburger Zeitung"; man kann ihn heute, in einer etwas
vorsichtigeren Form, in seinen gesammelten Schriften lesen. Hier
war die Schrift als Ereigniss, Wendepunkt, erste Selbstbesinnung,
allerbestes Zeichen dargestellt, als eine wirkliche Wiederkehr des
deutschen Ernstes und der deutschen Leidenschaft in geistigen Dingen.
Hillebrand war voll hoher Auszeichnung für die Form der Schrift,
für ihren reifen Geschmack, für ihren vollkommnen Takt in der
Unterscheidung von Person und Sache: er zeichnete sie als die beste
polemische Schrift aus, die deutsch geschrieben sei, - in der gerade
für Deutsche so gefährlichen, so widerrathbaren Kunst der Polemik.
Unbedingt jasagend, mich sogar in dem verschärfend, was ich über
die Sprach-Verlumpung in Deutschland zu sagen gewagt hatte (- heute
spielen sie die Puristen und können keinen Satz mehr bauen -), in
gleicher Verachtung gegen die "ersten Schriftsteller" dieser Nation,
endete er damit, seine Bewunderung für meinen Muth auszudrücken -
jenen "höchsten Muth, der gerade die Lieblinge eines Volks auf die
Anklagebank bringt"... Die Nachwirkung dieser Schrift ist geradezu
unschätzbar in meinem Leben. Niemand hat bisher mit mir Händel
gesucht. Man schweigt, man behandelt mich in Deutschland mit einer
düstern Vorsicht: ich habe seit Jahren von einer unbedingten
Redefreiheit Gebrauch gemacht, zu der Niemand heute, am wenigsten
im "Reich", die Hand frei genug hat. Mein Paradies ist "unter dem
Schatten meines Schwertes"... Im Grunde hatte ich eine Maxime
Stendhals prakticirt: er räth an, seinen Eintritt in die Gesellschaft
mit einem Duell zu machen. Und wie ich mir meinen Gegner gewählt
hatte! den ersten deutschen Freigeist!... In der That, eine ganz
neue Art Freigeisterei kam damit zum ersten Ausdruck: bis heute ist
mir Nichts fremder und unverwandter als die ganze europäische und
amerikanische Species von "libres penseurs". Mit ihnen als mit
unverbesserlichen Flachköpfen und Hanswürsten der "modernen Ideen"
befinde ich mich sogar in einem tieferen Zwiespalt als mit Irgendwem
von ihren Gegnern. Sie wollen auch, auf ihre Art, die Menschheit
"verbessern", nach ihrem Bilde, sie würden gegen das, was ich bin,
was ich will, einen unversöhnlichen Krieg machen, gesetzt dass sie es
verstünden, - sie glauben allesammt noch ans "Ideal"... Ich bin der
erste Immoralist.


3.

Dass die mit den Namen Schopenhauer und Wagner abgezeichneten
Unzeitgemässen sonderlich zum Verständniss oder auch nur zur
psychologischen Fragestellung beider Fälle dienen könnten, möchte
ich nicht behaupten, Einzelnes, wie billig, ausgenommen. So wird
zum Beispiel mit tiefer Instinkt-Sicherheit bereits hier das
Elementarische in der Natur Wagners als eine Schauspieler-Begabung
bezeichnet, die in seinen Mitteln und Absichten nur ihre Folgerungen
zieht. Im Grunde wollte ich mit diesen Schriften Etwas ganz Andres als
Psychologie treiben: - ein Problem der Erziehung ohne Gleichen, ein
neuer Begriff der Selbst-Zucht, Selbst-Vertheidigung bis zur Härte,
ein Weg zur Grösse und zu welthistorischen Aufgaben verlangte nach
seinem ersten Ausdruck. Ins Grosse gerechnet nahm ich zwei berühmte
und ganz und [gar] noch unfestgestellte Typen beim Schopf, wie man
eine Gelegenheit beim Schopf nimmt, um Etwas auszusprechen, um ein
Paar Formeln, Zeichen, Sprachmittel mehr in der Hand zu haben. Dies
ist zuletzt, mit vollkommen unheimlicher Sagacität, auf S. 93 der
dritten Unzeitgemässen auch angedeutet. Dergestalt hat sich Plato des
Sokrates bedient, als einer Semiotik für Plato. - Jetzt, wo ich aus
einiger Ferne auf jene Zustände zurückblicke, deren Zeugniss diese
Schriften sind, möchte ich nicht verleugnen, dass sie im Grunde bloss
von mir reden. Die Schrift "Wagner in Bayreuth" ist eine Vision meiner
Zukunft; dagegen ist in "Schopenhauer als Erzieher" meine innerste
Geschichte, mein Werden eingeschrieben. Vor Allem mein Gelöbniss!...
Was ich heute bin, wo ich heute bin - in einer Höhe, wo ich nicht mehr
Mit Worten, sondern mit Blitzen rede -, oh wie fern davon war ich
damals noch! - Aber ich sah das Land, - ich betrog mich nicht einen
Augenblick über Weg, Meer, Gefahr - und Erfolg! Die grosse Ruhe im
Versprechen, dies glückliche Hinausschaun in eine Zukunft, welche
nicht nur eine Verheissung bleiben soll! - Hier ist jedes Wort erlebt,
tief, innerlich; es fehlt nicht am Schmerzlichsten, es sind Worte
darin, die geradezu blutrünstig sind. Aber ein Wind der grossen
Freiheit bläst über Alles weg; die Wunde selbst wirkt nicht als
Einwand. - Wie ich den Philosophen verstehe, als einen furchtbaren
Explosionsstoff, vor dem Alles in Gefahr ist, wie ich meinen Begriff
"Philosoph" meilenweit abtrenne von einem Begriff, der sogar noch
einen Kant in sich schliesst, nicht zu reden von den akademischen
"Wiederkäuern" und andren Professoren der Philosophie: darüber giebt
diese Schrift eine unschätzbare Belehrung, zugegeben selbst, dass hier
im Grunde nicht "Schopenhauer als Erzieher", sondern sein Gegensatz,
"Nietzsche als Erzieher", zu Worte kommt. - In Anbetracht, dass damals
mein Handwerk das eines Gelehrten war, und, vielleicht auch, dass ich
mein Handwerk verstand, ist ein herbes Stück Psychologie des Gelehrten
nicht ohne Bedeutung, das in dieser Schrift plötzlich zum Vorschein
kommt: es drückt das Distanz-Gefühl aus, die tiefe Sicherheit darüber,
was bei mir Aufgabe, was bloss Mittel, Zwischenakt und Nebenwerk sein
kann. Es ist meine Klugheit, Vieles und vielerorts gewesen zu sein, um
Eins werden zu können, - um zu Einem kommen zu können. Ich musste eine
Zeit lang auch Gelehrter sein. -



Menschliches, Allzumenschliches.

Mit zwei Fortsetzungen.

1.

"Menschliches, Allzumenschliches" ist das Denkmal einer Krisis. Es
heisst sich ein Buch für freie Geister: fast jeder Satz darin drückt
einen Sieg aus - ich habe mich mit demselben vom Unzugehörigen in
meiner Natur freigemacht. Unzugehörig ist mir der Idealismus: der
Titel sagt "wo ihr ideale Dinge seht, sehe ich - Menschliches, ach nur
Allzumenschliches!"... Ich kenne den Menschen besser... - In keinem
andren Sinne will das Wort "freier Geist" hier verstanden werden: ein
frei gewordner Geist, der von sich selber wieder Besitz ergriffen hat.
Der Ton, der Stimmklang hat sich völlig verändert: man wird das Buch
klug, kühl, unter Umständen hart und spöttisch finden. Eine gewisse
Geistigkeit vornehmen Geschmacks scheint sich beständig gegen eine
leidenschaftlichere Strömung auf dem Grunde obenauf zu halten. In
diesem Zusammenhang hat es Sinn, dass es eigentlich die hundertjährige
Todesfeier Voltaire's ist, womit sich die Herausgabe des Buchs schon
für das Jahr 1878 gleichsam entschuldigt. Denn Voltaire ist, im
Gegensatz zu allem, was nach ihm schrieb, vor allem ein grandseigneur
des Geistes: genau das, was ich auch bin. - Der Name Voltaire auf
einer Schrift von mir - das war wirklich ein Fortschritt - zu mir...
Sieht man genauer zu, so entdeckt man einen unbarmherzigen Geist, der
alle Schlupfwinkel kennt, wo das Ideal heimisch ist, - wo es seine
Burgverliesse und gleichsam seine letzte Sicherheit hat. Eine Fackel
in den Händen, die durchaus kein "fackelndes" Licht giebt, mit
einer schneidenden Helle wird in diese Unterwelt des Ideals
hineingeleuchtet. Es ist der Krieg, aber der Krieg ohne Pulver
und Dampf, ohne kriegerische Attitüden, ohne Pathos und verrenkte
Gliedmaassen - dies Alles selbst wäre noch "Idealismus". Ein Irrthum
nach dem andern wird gelassen aufs Eis gelegt, das Ideal wird nicht
widerlegt - es erfriert... Hier zum Beispiel erfriert "das Genie";
eine Ecke weiter erfriert "der Heilige"; unter einem dicken Eiszapfen
erfriert "der Held"; am Schluss erfriert "der Glaube", die sogenannte
"Überzeugung", auch das "Mitleiden" kühlt sich bedeutend ab - fast
überall erfriert "das Ding an sich"...


2.

Die Anfänge dieses Buchs gehören mitten in die Wochen der ersten
Bayreuther Festspiele hinein; eine tiefe Fremdheit gegen Alles, was
mich dort umgab, ist eine seiner Voraussetzungen. Wer einen Begriff
davon hat, was für Visionen mir schon damals über den Weg gelaufen
waren, kann errathen, wie mir zu Muthe war, als ich eines Tags in
Bayreuth aufwachte. Ganz als ob ich träumte... Wo war ich doch? Ich
erkannte Nichts wieder, ich erkannte kaum Wagner wieder. Umsonst
blätterte ich in meinen Erinnerungen. Tribschen - eine ferne Insel der
Glückseligen: kein Schatten von Ähnlichkeit. Die unvergleichlichen
Tage der Grundsteinlegung, die kleine zugehörige Gesellschaft, die
sie feierte und der man nicht erst Finger für zarte Dinge zu wünschen
hatte: kein Schatten von Ähnlichkeit. Was war geschehn? - Man hatte
Wagner ins Deutsche übersetzt! Der Wagnerianer war Herr über Wagner
geworden! - Die deutsche Kunst! der deutsche Meister! das deutsche
Bier!... Wir Andern, die wir nur zu gut wissen, zu was für raffinirten
Artisten, zu welchem Cosmopolitismus des Geschmacks Wagners Kunst
allein redet, waren ausser uns, Wagnern mit deutschen "Tugenden"
behängt wiederzufinden. - Ich denke, ich kenne den Wagnerianer, ich
habe drei Generationen "erlebt", vom seligen Brendel an, der Wagner
mit Hegel verwechselte, bis zu den "Idealisten" der Bayreuther
Blätter, die Wagner mit sich selbst verwechseln, - ich habe alle Art
Bekenntnisse "schöner Seelen" über Wagner gehört. Ein Königreich für
Ein gescheidtes Wort! - In Wahrheit, eine haarsträubende Gesellschaft!
Nohl, Pohl, Kohl mit Grazie in infinitum! Keine Missgeburt fehlt
darunter, nicht einmal der Antisemit. - Der arme Wagner! Wohin war
er gerathen! - Wäre er doch wenigstens unter die Säue gefahren! Aber
unter Deutsche!... Zuletzt sollte man, zur Belehrung der Nachwelt,
einen echten Bayreuther ausstopfen, besser noch in Spiritus setzen,
denn an Spiritus fehlt es -, mit der Unterschrift: so sah der "Geist"
aus, auf den hin man das "Reich" gründete... Genug, ich reiste mitten
drin für ein paar Wochen ab, sehr plötzlich, trotzdem dass eine
charmante Pariserin mich zu trösten suchte; ich entschuldigte mich
bei Wagner bloss mit einem fatalistischen Telegramm. In einem tief in
Wäldern verborgnen Ort des Böhmerwalds, Klingenbrunn, trug ich meine
Melancholie und Deutschen-Verachtung wie eine Krankheit mit mir herum
und schrieb von Zeit zu Zeit, unter dem Gesammttitel "die Pflugschar",
einen Satz in mein Taschenbuch, lauter harte Psychologica, die sich
vielleicht in "Menschliches, Allzumenschliches" noch wiederfinden
lassen.


3.

Was sich damals bei mir entschied, war nicht etwa ein Bruch mit Wagner
- ich empfand eine Gesammt-Abirrung meines Instinkts, von der der
einzelne Fehlgriff, heisse er nun Wagner oder Basler Professur, bloss
ein Zeichen war. Eine Ungeduld mit mir überfiel mich; ich sah ein,
dass es die höchste Zeit war, mich auf mich zurückzubesinnen. Mit
Einem Male war mir auf eine schreckliche Weise klar, wie viel Zeit
bereits verschwendet sei, - wie nutzlos, wie willkürlich sich meine
ganze Philologen-Existenz an meiner Aufgabe ausnehme. Ich schämte
mich dieser falschen Bescheidenheit... Zehn Jahre hinter mir, wo ganz
eigentlich die Ernährung des Geistes bei mir stillgestanden hatte, wo
ich nichts Brauchbares hinzugelernt hatte, wo ich unsinnig Viel über
einem Krimskrams verstaubter Gelehrsamkeit vergessen hatte. Antike
Metriker mit Akribie und schlechten Augen durchkriechen - dahin war
es mit mir gekommen! - Ich sah mit Erbarmen mich ganz mager, ganz
abgehungert: die Realitäten fehlten geradezu innerhalb meines
Wissens und die "Idealitäten" taugten den Teufel was! - Ein geradezu
brennender Durst ergriff mich: von da an habe ich in der That nichts
mehr getrieben als Physiologie, Medizin und Naturwissenschaften,
- selbst zu eigentlichen historischen Studien bin ich erst wieder
zurückgekehrt, als die Aufgabe mich gebieterisch dazu zwang.
Damals errieth ich auch zuerst den Zusammenhang zwischen einer,
instinktwidrig gewählten Thätigkeit, einem sogenannten "Beruf", zu dem
man am letzten berufen ist und jenem Bedürfniss nach einer Betäubung
des Öde- und Hungergefühls durch eine narkotische Kunst, - zum
Beispiel durch die Wagnerische Kunst. Bei einem vorsichtigeren Umblick
habe ich entdeckt, dass für eine grosse Anzahl junger Männer der
gleiche Nothstand besteht: Eine Widernatur erzwingt förmlich eine
zweite. In Deutschland, im "Reich", um unzweideutig zu reden, sind nur
zu Viele verurtheilt, sich unzeitig zu entscheiden und dann, unter
einer unabwerfbar gewordnen Last, hinzusiechen... Diese verlangen nach
Wagner als nach einem Opiat, - sie vergessen sich, sie werden sich
einen Augenblick los... Was sage ich! fünf bis sechs Stunden!


4.

Damals entschied sich mein Instinkt unerbittlich gegen ein noch
längeres Nachgeben, Mitgehn, Mich-selbst-verwechseln. Jede Art Leben,
die ungünstigsten Bedingungen, Krankheit, Armut - Alles schien mir
jener unwürdigen "Selbstlosigkeit" vorziehenswerth, in die ich zuerst
aus Unwissenheit, aus Jugend gerathen war, in der ich später aus
Trägheit, aus sogenanntem "Pflichtgefühl" hängen geblieben war. -
Hier kam mir, auf eine Weise, die ich nicht genug bewundern kann, und
gerade zur rechten Zeit jene schlimme Erbschaft von Seiten meines
Vaters her zu Hülfe, - im Grunde eine Vorbestimmung zu einem frühen
Tode. Die Krankheit löste mich langsam heraus: sie ersparte mir jeden
Bruch, jeden gewaltthätigen und anstössigen Schritt. Ich habe kein
Wohlwollen damals eingebüsst und viel noch hinzugewonnen. Die
Krankheit gab mir insgleichen ein Recht zu einer vollkommnen Umkehr
aller meiner Gewohnheiten; sie erlaubte, sie gebot mir Vergessen; sie
beschenkte mich mit der Nöthigung zum Stillliegen, zum Müssiggang, zum
Warten und Geduldigsein... Aber das heisst ja denken!... Meine Augen
allein machten ein Ende mit aller Bücherwürmerei, auf deutsch:
Philologie: ich war vom "Buch" erlöst, ich las jahrelang Nichts mehr -
die grösste Wohlthat, die ich mir je erwiesen habe! - Jenes unterste
Selbst, gleichsam verschüttet, gleichsam still geworden unter einem
beständigen Hören-Müssen auf andre Selbste (- und das heisst ja
lesen!) erwachte langsam, schüchtern, zweifelhaft, - aber endlich
redete es wieder. Nie habe ich so viel Glück an mir gehabt, als in
den kränksten und schmerzhaftesten Zeiten meines Lebens: man hat nur
die "Morgenröthe" oder etwa den "Wanderer und seinen Schatten" sich
anzusehn, um zu begreifen, was diese "Rückkehr zu mir" war: eine
höchste Art von Genesung selbst!... Die andre folgte bloss daraus.


5.

Menschliches, Allzumenschliches, dies Denkmal einer rigorösen
Selbstzucht, mit der ich bei mir allem eingeschleppten "höheren
Schwindel", "Idealismus", "schönen Gefühl", und andren Weiblichkeiten
ein jähes Ende bereitete, wurde in allen Hauptsachen in Sorrent
niedergeschrieben; es bekam seinen Schluss, seine endgültige Form
in einem Basler Winter, unter ungleich ungünstigeren Verhältnissen
als denen in Sorrent. Im Grunde hat Herr Peter Gast, damals an der
Basler Universität studirend und mir sehr zugethan, das Buch auf
dem Gewissen. Ich diktirte, den Kopf verbunden und schmerzhaft, er
schrieb ab, er corrigirte auch, - er war im Grunde der eigentliche
Schriftsteller, während ich bloss der Autor war. Als das Buch endlich
fertig mir zu Händen kam - zur tiefen Verwunderung eines Schwerkranken
-, sandte ich, unter Anderem, auch nach Bayreuth zwei Exemplare. Durch
ein Wunder von Sinn im Zufall kam gleichzeitig bei mir ein schönes
Exemplar des Parsifal-Textes an, mit Wagners Widmung an mich "seinem
theuren Freunde Friedrich Nietzsche, Richard Wagner, Kirchenrath". -
Diese Kreuzung der zwei Bücher - mir war's, als ob ich einen ominösen
Ton dabei hörte. Klang es nicht, als ob sich Degen kreuzten?...
Jedenfalls empfanden wir es beide so: denn wir schwiegen beide. - Um
diese Zeit erschienen die ersten Bayreuther Blätter: ich begriff,
wozu es höchste Zeit gewesen war. - Unglaublich! Wagner war fromm
geworden...


6.

Wie ich damals (1876) über mich dachte, mit welcher ungeheuren
Sicherheit ich meine Aufgabe und das Welthistorische an ihr in der
Hand hielt, davon legt das ganze Buch, vor Allem aber eine sehr
ausdrückliche Stelle Zeugniss ab: nur dass ich, mit der bei mir
instinktiven Arglist, auch hier wieder das Wörtchen "ich" umgieng und
dies Mal nicht Schopenhauer oder Wagner, sondern einen meiner Freunde,
den ausgezeichneten Dr. Paul Rée, mit einer welthistorischen Glorie
überstrahlte - zum Glück ein viel zu feines Thier, als dass... Andre
waren weniger fein: ich habe die Hoffnungslosen unter meinen Lesern,
zum Beispiel den typischen deutschen Professor, immer daran erkannt,
dass sie, auf diese Stelle hin, das ganze Buch als höheren Réealismus
verstehn zu müssen glaubten... In Wahrheit enthielt es den Widerspruch
gegen fünf, sechs Sätze meines Freundes: man möge darüber die Vorrede
zur Genealogie der Moral nachlesen. - Die Stelle lautet: welches
ist doch der Hauptsatz, zu dem einer der kühnsten und kältesten
Denker, der Verfasser des Buchs "über den Ursprung der moralischen
Empfindungen" (lisez: Nietzsche, der erste Immoralist) vermöge seiner
ein- und durchschneidenden Analysen des menschlichen Handelns gelangt
ist? "Der moralische Mensch steht der intelligiblen Welt nicht
näher als der physische - denn es giebt keine intelligible Welt..."
Dieser Satz, hart und schneidig geworden unter dem Hammerschlag
der historischen Erkenntniss (lisez: Umwerthung aller Werthe) kann
vielleicht einmal, in irgend welcher Zukunft - 1890! - als die Axt
dienen, welche dem "metaphysischen Bedürfniss" der Menschheit an
die Wurzel gelegt wird, - ob mehr zum Segen oder zum Fluche der
Menschheit, wer wüsste das zu sagen? Aber jedenfalls als ein Satz der
erheblichsten Folgen, fruchtbar und furchtbar zugleich und mit jenem
Doppelblick in die Welt sehend, welchen alle grossen Erkenntnisse
haben...



Morgenröthe.

Gedanken über die Moral als Vorurtheil.

1.

Mit diesem Buche beginnt mein Feldzug gegen die Moral. Nicht dass es
den geringsten Pulvergeruch an sich hätte: - man wird ganz andre und
viel lieblichere Gerüche an ihm wahrnehmen, gesetzt, dass man einige
Feinheit in den Nüstern hat. Weder grosses, noch auch kleines
Geschütz: ist die Wirkung des Buchs negativ, so sind es seine Mittel
um so weniger, diese Mittel, aus denen die Wirkung wie ein Schluss,
nicht wie ein Kanonenschuss folgt. Dass man von dem Buche Abschied
nimmt mit einer scheuen Vorsicht vor Allem, was bisher unter dem Namen
Moral zu Ehren und selbst zur Anbetung gekommen ist, steht nicht im
Widerspruch damit, dass im ganzen Buch kein negatives Wort vorkommt,
kein Angriff, keine Bosheit, - dass es vielmehr in der Sonne liegt,
rund, glücklich, einem Seegethier gleich, das zwischen Felsen sich
sonnt. Zuletzt war ich's selbst, dieses Seegethier: fast jeder Satz
des Buchs ist erdacht, er schlüpft in jenem Felsen-Wirrwarr nahe bei
Genua, wo ich allein war und noch mit dem Meere Heimlichkeiten hatte.
Noch jetzt wird mir, bei einer zufälligen Berührung dieses Buchs,
fast jeder Satz zum Zipfel, an dem ich irgend etwas Unvergleichliches
wieder aus der Tiefe ziehe: seine ganze Haut zittert von zarten
Schaudern der Erinnerung. Die Kunst, die es voraus hat, ist keine
kleine darin, Dinge, die leicht und ohne Geräusch vorbeihuschen,
Augenblicke, die ich göttliche Eidechsen nenne, ein wenig fest zu
machen - nicht etwa mit der Grausamkeit jenes jungen Griechengottes,
der das arme Eidechslein einfach anspiesste, aber immerhin doch mit
etwas Spitzem, mit der Feder... "Es giebt so viele Morgenröthen, die
noch nicht geleuchtet haben" - diese indische Inschrift steht auf der
Thür zu diesem Buche. Wo sucht sein Urheber jenen neuen Morgen, jenes
bisher noch unentdeckte zarte Roth, mit dem wieder ein Tag - ah, eine
ganze Reihe, eine ganze Welt neuer Tage! - anhebt? In einer Umwerthung
aller Werthe, in einem Loskommen von allen Moralwerthen, in einem
Jasagen und Vertrauen-haben zu Alledem, was bisher verboten,
verachtet, verflucht worden ist. Dies jasagende Buch strömt sein
Licht, seine Liebe, seine Zärtlichkeit auf lauter schlimme Dinge aus,
es giebt ihnen "die Seele", das gute Gewissen, das hohe Recht und
Vorrecht auf Dasein wieder zurück. Die Moral wird nicht angegriffen,
sie kommt nur nicht mehr in Betracht... Dies Buch schliesst mit einem
"Oder?", - es ist das einzige Buch, das mit einem "Oder?" schliesst...


2.

Meine Aufgabe, einen Augenblick höchster Selbstbesinnung der
Menschheit vorzubereiten, einen grossen Mittag, wo sie zurückschaut
und hinausschaut, wo sie aus der Herrschaft des Zufalls und der
Priester heraustritt und die Frage des warum?, des wozu? zum ersten
Male als Ganzes stellt -, diese Aufgabe folgt mit Nothwendigkeit aus
der Einsicht, dass die Menschheit nicht von selber auf dem rechten
Wege ist, dass sie durchaus nicht göttlich regiert wird, dass vielmehr
gerade unter ihren heiligsten Werthbegriffen der Instinkt der
Verneinung, der Verderbniss, der décadence-Instinkt verführerisch
gewaltet hat. Die Frage nach der Herkunft der moralischen Werthe ist
deshalb für mich eine Frage ersten Ranges, weil sie die Zukunft der
Menschheit bedingt. Die Forderung, man solle glauben, dass Alles
im Grunde in den besten Händen ist, dass ein Buch, die Bibel, eine
endgültige Beruhigung über die göttliche Lenkung und Weisheit im
Geschick der Menschheit giebt, ist, zurückübersetzt in die Realität,
der Wille, die Wahrheit über das erbarmungswürdige Gegentheil davon
nicht aufkommen zu lassen, nämlich, dass die Menschheit bisher in den
schlechtesten Händen war, dass sie von den Schlechtweggekommenen,
den Arglistig-Rachsüchtigen, den sogenannten "Heiligen", diesen
Weltverleumdern und Menschenschändern, regiert worden ist. Das
entscheidende Zeichen, an dem sich ergiebt, dass der Priester (-
eingerechnet die versteckten Priester, die Philosophen) nicht nur
innerhalb einer bestimmten religiösen Gemeinschaft, sondern überhaupt
Herr geworden ist, dass die décadence-Moral, der Wille zum Ende, als
Moral an sich gilt, ist der unbedingte Werth, der dem Unegoistischen
und die Feindschaft, die dem Egoistischen überall zu Theil wird. Wer
über diesen Punkt mit mir uneins ist, den halte ich für inficirt...
Aber alle Welt ist mit mir uneins... Für einen Physiologen lässt
ein solcher Werth-Gegensatz gar keinen Zweifel. Wenn innerhalb des
Organismus das geringste Organ in noch so kleinem Maasse nachlässt,
seine Selbsterhaltung, seinen Kraftersatz, seinen, "Egoismus" mit
vollkommner Sicherheit durchzusetzen, so entartet das Ganze. Der
Physiologe verlangt Ausschneidung des entartenden Theils, er verneint
jede Solidarität mit dem Entartenden, er ist am fernsten vom Mitleiden
mit ihm. Aber der Priester will gerade die Entartung des Ganzen, der
Menschheit: darum conservirt er das Entartende - um diesen Preis
beherrscht er sie... Welchen Sinn haben jene Lügenbegriffe, die
Hülfsbegriffe der Moral, "Seele", "Geist", "freier Wille", "Gott",
wenn nicht den, die Menschheit physiologisch zu ruiniren?... Wenn man
den Ernst von der Selbsterhaltung, Kraftsteigerung des Leibes, das
heisst des Lebens ablenkt, wenn man aus der Bleichsucht ein Ideal, aus
der Verachtung des Leibes "das Heil der Seele" construirt, was ist das
Anderes, als ein Recept zur décadence? - Der Verlust an Schwergewicht,
der Widerstand gegen die natürlichen Instinkte, die "Selbstlosigkeit"
mit Einem Worte - das hiess bisher Moral... Mit der "Morgenröthe" nahm
ich zuerst den Kampf gegen die Entselbstungs-Moral auf. -



Die fröhliche Wissenschaft.

("la gaya scienza")

Die "Morgenröthe" ist ein jasagendes Buch, tief, aber hell und gütig.
Dasselbe gilt noch einmal und im höchsten Grade von der gaya scienza:
fast in jedem Satz derselben halten sich Tiefsinn und Muthwillen
zärtlich an der Hand. Ein Vers, welcher die Dankbarkeit für den
wunderbarsten Monat Januar ausdrückt, den ich erlebt habe - das ganze
Buch ist sein Geschenk - verräth zur Genüge, aus welcher Tiefe heraus
hier die "Wissenschaft" fröhlich geworden ist:

    Der du mit dem Flammenspeere
    Meiner Seele Eis zertheilt,
    Dass sie brausend nun zum Meere
    Ihrer höchsten Hoffnung eilt:
    Heller stets und stets gesunder,
    Frei im liebevollsten Muss
    Also preist sie deine Wunder,
    Schönster Januarius!

Was hier "höchste Hoffnung" heisst, wer kann darüber im Zweifel sein,
der als Schluss des vierten Buchs die diamantene Schönheit der ersten
Worte des Zarathustra aufglänzen sieht? - Oder der die granitnen Sätze
am Ende des dritten Buchs liest, mit denen sich ein Schicksal für alle
Zeiten zum ersten Male in Formeln fasst? - Die Lieder des Prinzen
Vogelfrei, zum besten Theil in Sicilien gedichtet, erinnern ganz
ausdrücklich an den provencialischen Begriff der "gaya scienza", an
jene Einheit von Sänger, Ritter und Freigeist, mit der sich jene
wunderbare Frühkultur der Provencalen gegen alle zweideutigen
Culturen abhebt; das allerletzte Gedicht zumal, "anden Mistral",
ein ausgelassenes Tanzlied, in dem, mit Verlaub! über die Moral
hinweggetanzt wird, ist ein vollkommner Provençalismus. -



Also sprach Zarathustra.

Ein Buch für Alle und Keinen.

1.

Ich erzähle nunmehr die Geschichte des Zarathustra. Die
Grundconception des Werks, der Ewige-Wiederkunfts-Gedanke, diese
höchste Formel der Bejahung, die überhaupt erreicht werden kann
-, gehört in den August des Jahres 1881: er ist auf ein Blatt
hingeworfen, mit der Unterschrift: "6000 Fuss jenseits von Mensch und
Zeit". Ich gieng an jenem Tage am See von Silvaplana durch die Wälder;
bei einem mächtigen pyramidal aufgethürmten Block unweit Surlei machte
ich Halt. Da kam mir dieser Gedanke. - Rechne ich von diesem Tage ein
paar Monate zurück, so finde ich, als Vorzeichen, eine plötzliche und
im Tiefsten entscheidende Veränderung meines Geschmacks, vor Allem in
der Musik. Man darf vielleicht den ganzen Zarathustra unter die Musik
rechnen; - sicherlich war eine Wiedergeburt in der Kunst zu hören,
eine Vorausbedingung dazu. In einem kleinen Gebirgsbade unweit
Vicenza, Recoaro, wo ich den Frühling des Jahrs 1881 verbrachte,
entdeckte ich, zusammen mit meinem maëstro und Freunde Peter Gast,
einem gleichfalls "Wiedergebornen", dass der Phönix Musik mit
leichterem und leuchtenderem Gefieder, als er je gezeigt, an uns
vorüberflog. Rechne ich dagegen von jenem Tage an vorwärts, bis
zur plötzlichen und unter den unwahrscheinlichsten Verhältnissen
eintretenden Niederkunft im Februar 1883 - die Schlusspartie,
dieselbe, aus der ich im Vorwort ein paar Sätze citirt habe,
wurde genau in der heiligen Stunde fertig gemacht, in der Richard
Wagner in Venedig starb - so ergeben sich achtzehn Monate für die
Schwangerschaft. Diese Zahl gerade von achtzehn Monaten dürfte den
Gedanken nahelegen, unter Buddhisten wenigstens, dass ich im Grunde
ein Elephanten-Weibchen bin. - In die Zwischenzeit gehört die "gaya
scienza", die hundert Anzeichen der Nähe von etwas Unvergleichlichem
hat; zuletzt giebt sie den Anfang des Zarathustra selbst noch, sie
giebt im vorletzten Stück des vierten Buchs den Grundgedanken des
Zarathustra. - Insgleichen gehört in diese Zwischenzeit jener Hymnus
auf das Leben (für gemischten Chor und Orchester), dessen Partitur
vor zwei Jahren bei E. W. Fritzsch in Leipzig erschienen ist: ein
vielleicht nicht unbedeutendes Symptom für den Zustand dieses Jahres,
wo das ja sagende Pathos par excellence, von mir das tragische Pathos
genannt, im höchsten Grade mir innewohnte. Man wird ihn später einmal
zu meinem Gedächtniss singen. - Der Text, ausdrücklich bemerkt, weil
ein Missverständniss darüber im Umlauf ist, ist nicht von mir: er ist
die erstaunliche Inspiration einer jungen Russin, mit der ich damals
befreundet war, des Fräulein Lou von Salomé. Wer den letzten Worten
des Gedichts überhaupt einen Sinn zu entnehmen weiss, wird errathen,
warum ich es vorzog und bewunderte: sie haben Grösse. Der Schmerz gilt
nicht als Einwand gegen das Leben: "Hast du kein Glück mehr übrig mir
zu geben, wohlan! noch hast du deine Pein..." Vielleicht hat auch
meine Musik an dieser Stelle Grösse. (Letzte Note der Oboe cis nicht
c. Druckfehler.) - Den darauf folgenden Winter lebte ich in jener
anmuthig stillen Bucht von Rapallo unweit Genua, die sich zwischen
Chiavari und dem Vorgebirge Porto fino einschneidet. Meine Gesundheit
war nicht die beste; der Winter kalt und über die Maassen regnerisch;
ein kleines Albergo, unmittelbar am Meer gelegen, so dass die hohe
See nachts den Schlaf unmöglich machte, bot ungefähr in Allem das
Gegentheil vom Wünschenswerthen. Trotzdem und beinahe zum Beweis
meines Satzes, dass alles Entscheidende "trotzdem", entsteht, war es
dieser Winter und diese Ungunst der Verhältnisse, unter denen mein
Zarathustra entstand. - Den Vormittag stieg ich in südlicher Richtung
auf der herrlichen Strasse nach Zoagli hin in die Höhe, an Pinien
vorbei und weitaus das Meer überschauend; des Nachmittags, so oft es
nur die Gesundheit erlaubte, umgieng ich die ganze Bucht von Santa
Margherita bis hinter nach Porto fino. Dieser Ort und diese Landschaft
ist durch die grosse Liebe, welche der unvergessliche deutsche Kaiser
Friedrich der Dritte für sie fühlte, meinem Herzen noch näher gerückt;
ich war zufällig im Herbst 1886 wieder an dieser Küste, als er zum
letzten Mal diese kleine vergessne Welt von Glück besuchte. - Auf
diesen beiden Wegen fiel mir der ganze erste Zarathustra ein, vor
Allem Zarathustra selber, als Typus: richtiger, er überfiel mich...


2.

Um diesen Typus zu verstehn, muss man sich zuerst seine physiologische
Voraussetzung klar machen: sie ist das, was ich die grosse Gesundheit
nenne. Ich weiss diesen Begriff nicht besser, nicht persönlicher
zu erläutern, als ich es schon gethan habe, in einem der
Schlussabschnitte des fünften Buchs der "gaya scienza". "Wir Neuen,
Namenlosen, Schlechtverständlichen - heisst es daselbst - wir
Frühgeburten einer noch unbewiesenen Zukunft, wir bedürfen zu einem
neuen Zwecke auch eines neuen Mittels, nämlich einer neuen Gesundheit,
einer stärkeren gewitzteren zäheren verwegneren lustigeren, als alle
Gesundheiten bisher waren. Wessen Seele darnach dürstet, den ganzen
Umfang der bisherigen Werthe und Wünschbarkeiten erlebt und alle
Küsten dieses idealischen `Mittelmeers` umschifft zu haben, wer aus
den Abenteuern der eigensten Erfahrung wissen will, wie es einem
Eroberer und Entdecker des Ideals zu Muthe ist, insgleichen einem
Künstler, einem Heiligen, einem Gesetzgeber, einem Weisen, einem
Gelehrten, einem Frommen, einem Göttlich-Abseitigen alten Stils:
der hat dazu zu allererst Eins nöthig, die grosse Gesundheit - eine
solche, welche man nicht nur hat, sondern auch beständig noch erwirbt
und erwerben muss, weil man sie immer wieder preisgiebt, preisgeben
muss... Und nun, nachdem wir lange dergestalt unterwegs waren, wir
Argonauten des Ideals, muthiger vielleicht als klug ist und Oft genug
schiffbrüchig und zu Schaden gekommen, aber, wie gesagt, gesünder als
man es uns erlauben möchte, gefährlich gesund, immer wieder gesund,
- will es. uns scheinen, als ob wir, zum Lohn dafür, ein noch
unentdecktes Land vor uns haben, dessen Grenzen noch Niemand abgesehn
hat, ein jenseits aller bisherigen Länder und Winkel des Ideals, eine
Welt so überreich an Schönem, Fremdem, Fragwürdigem, Furchtbarem und
Göttlichem, dass unsre Neugierde sowohl als unser Besitzdurst ausser
sich gerathen sind - ach, dass wir nunmehr durch Nichts mehr zu
ersättigen sind!... Wie könnten wir uns, nach solchen Ausblicken
und mit einem solchen Heisshunger in Wissen und Gewissen, noch am
gegenwärtigen Menschen. genügen lassen? Schlimm genug, aber es ist
unvermeidlich, dass wir seinen würdigsten Zielen und Hoffnungen nun
mit einem übel aufrecht erhaltenen Ernste zusehn und vielleicht
nicht einmal mehr zusehn... Ein andres Ideal läuft vor uns her, ein
wunderliches, versucherisches, gefahrenreiches Ideal, zu dem wir
Niemanden überreden möchten, weil wir Niemandem so leicht das Recht
darauf zugestehn: das Ideal eines Geistes, der naiv, das heisst
ungewollt und aus überströmender Fülle und Mächtigkeit mit Allem
spielt, was bisher heilig, gut, unberührbar, göttlich hiess; für den
das Höchste, woran das Volk billigerweise sein Werthmaass hat, bereits
so viel wie Gefahr, Verfall, Erniedrigung oder, mindestens, wie
Erholung, Blindheit, zeitweiliges Selbstvergessen bedeuten würde; das
Ideal eines menschlich-übermenschlichen Wohlseins und Wohlwollens,
welches oft genug unmenschlich erscheinen wird, zum Beispiel, wenn
es sich neben den ganzen bisherigen Erdenernst, neben alle bisherige
Feierlichkeit in Gebärde, Wort, Klang, Blick, Moral und Aufgabe wie
deren leibhafteste unfreiwillige Parodie hinstellt - und mit dem,
trotzalledem, vielleicht der grosse Ernst erst anhebt, das eigentliche
Fragezeichen erst gesetzt wird, das Schicksal der Seele sich wendet,
der Zeiger rückt, die Tragödie beginnt."


3.

- Hat jemand, Ende des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, einen deutlichen
Begriff davon, was Dichter starker Zeitalter Inspiration nannten?
Im andren Falle will ich's beschreiben. Mit dem geringsten Rest von
Aberglauben in sich würde man in der That die Vorstellung, bloss
Incarnation, bloss Mundstück, bloss medium übermächtiger Gewalten zu
sein, kaum abzuweisen wissen. Der Begriff Offenbarung, in dem Sinn,
dass plötzlich, mit unsäglicher Sicherheit und Feinheit, Etwas
sichtbar, hörbar wird, Etwas, das Einen im Tiefsten erschüttert und
umwirft, beschreibt einfach den Thatbestand. Man hört, man sucht
nicht; man nimmt, man fragt nicht, wer da giebt; wie ein Blitz
leuchtet ein Gedanke auf, mit Nothwendigkeit, in der Form ohne Zögern,
- ich habe nie eine Wahl gehabt. Eine Entzükkung, deren ungeheure
Spannung sich mitunter in einen Thränenstrom auslöst, bei der der
Schritt unwillkürlich bald stürmt, bald langsam wird; ein vollkommnes
Ausser-sich-sein mit dem distinktesten Bewusstsein einer Unzahl feiner
Schauder und Überrieselungen bis in die Fusszehen; eine Glückstiefe,
in der das Schmerzlichste und Düsterste nicht als Gegensatz wirkt,
sondern als bedingt, als herausgefordert, sondern als eine nothwendige
Farbe innerhalb eines solchen Lichtüberflusses; ein Instinkt
rhythmischer Verhältnisse, der weite Räume von Formen überspannt - die
Länge, das Bedürfniss nach einem weitgespannten Rhythmus ist beinahe
das Maass für die Gewalt der Inspiration, eine Art Ausgleich gegen
deren Druck und Spannung... Alles geschieht im höchsten Grade
unfreiwillig, aber wie in einem Sturme von Freiheits-Gefühl, von
Unbedingtsein, von Macht, von Göttlichkeit... Die Unfreiwilligkeit des
Bildes, des Gleichnisses ist das Merkwürdigste; man hat keinen Begriff
mehr, was Bild, was Gleichniss ist, Alles bietet sich als der nächste,
der richtigste, der einfachste Ausdruck. Es scheint wirklich, um an
ein Wort Zarathustra's zu erinnern, als ob die Dinge selber herankämen
und sich zum Gleichnisse anböten (- "hier kommen alle Dinge liebkosend
zu deiner Rede und schmeicheln dir: denn sie wollen auf deinem Rücken
reiten. Auf jedem Gleichniss reitest du hier zu jeder Wahrheit. Hier
springen dir alles Seins Worte und Wort-Schreine auf; alles Sein will
hier Wort werden, alles Werden will von dir reden lernen -"). Dies
ist meine Erfahrung von Inspiration; ich zweifle nicht, dass man
Jahrtausende zurückgehn muss, um jemanden zu finden, der mir sagen
darf "es ist auch die meine".


4.

Ich lag ein Paar Wochen hinterdrein in Genua krank. Dann folgte ein
schwermüthiger Frühling in Rom, wo ich das Leben hinnahm - es war
nicht leicht. Im Grunde verdross mich dieser für den Dichter des
Zarathustra unanständigste Ort der Erde, den ich nicht freiwillig
gewählt hatte, über die Maassen; ich versuchte loszukommen, - ich
wollte nach Aquila, dem Gegenbegriff von Rom, aus Feindschaft
gegen Rom gegründet, wie ich einen Ort dereinst gründen werde, die
Erinnerung an einen Atheisten und Kirchenfeind comme il faut, an einen
meiner Nächstverwandten, den grossen Hohenstaufen-Kaiser Friedrich den
Zweiten. Aber es war ein Verhängniss bei dem Allen: ich musste wieder
zurück. Zuletzt gab ich mich mit der piazza Barberini zufrieden,
nachdem mich meine Mühe um eine anti-christliche Gegend müde gemacht
hatte. Ich fürchte, ich habe einmal, um schlechten Gerüchen möglichst
aus dem Wege zu gehn, im palazzo del Quirinale selbst nachgefragt, ob
man nicht ein stilles Zimmer für einen Philosophen habe. - Auf einer
loggia hoch über der genannten piazza, von der aus man Rom übersieht
und tief unten die fontana rauschen hört, wurde jenes einsamste Lied
gedichtet, das je gedichtet worden ist, das Nachtlied; um diese
Zeit gieng immer eine Melodie von unsäglicher Schwermuth um mich
herum, deren Refrain ich in den Worten wiederfand "todt vor
Unsterblichkeit..." Im Sommer, heimgekehrt zur heiligen Stelle, wo der
erste Blitz des Zarathustra-Gedankens mir geleuchtet hatte, fand ich
den zweiten Zarathustra. Zehn Tage genügten; ich habe in keinem Falle,
weder beim ersten, noch beim dritten und letzten mehr gebraucht. Im
Winter darauf, unter dem halkyonischen Himmel Nizza's, der damals
zum ersten Male in mein Leben hineinglänzte, fand ich den dritten
Zarathustra - und war fertig. Kaum ein Jahr, für's Ganze gerechnet.
Viele verborgne Flecke und Höhen aus der Landschaft Nizza's sind mir
durch unvergessliche Augenblicke geweiht; jene entscheidende Partie,
welche den Titel "von alten und neuen Tafeln" trägt, wurde im
beschwerlichsten Aufsteigen von der Station zu dem wunderbaren
maurischen Felsenneste Eza gedichtet, - die Muskel-Behendheit war
bei mir immer am grössten, wenn die schöpferische Kraft am reichsten
floss. Der Leib ist begeistert: lassen wir die "Seele" aus dem
Spiele... Man hat mich oft tanzen sehn können; ich konnte damals, ohne
einen Begriff von Ermüdung, sieben, acht Stunden auf Bergen unterwegs
sein. Ich schlief gut, ich lachte viel -, ich war von einer
vollkomm[n]en Rüstigkeit und Geduld.


5.

Abgesehn von diesen Zehn-Tage-Werken waren die Jahre während und vor
Allem nach dem Zarathustra ein Nothstand ohne Gleichen. Man büsst
es theuer, unsterblich zu sein: man stirbt dafür mehrere Male bei
Lebzeiten. - Es giebt Etwas, das ich die rancune des Grossen nenne:
alles Grosse, ein Werk, eine That, wendet sich, einmal vollbracht,
unverzüglich gegen den, der sie that. Ebendamit, dass er sie that, ist
er nunmehr schwach - er hält seine That nicht mehr aus, er sieht ihr
nicht mehr in's Gesicht. Etwas hinter sich zu haben, das man nie
wollen durfte, Etwas, worin der Knoten im Schicksal der Menschheit
eingeknüpft ist - und es nunmehr auf sich haben!... Es zerdrückt
beinahe.. - Die rancune des Grossen! - Ein Andres ist die schauerliche
Stille, die man um sich hört. Die Einsamkeit hat sieben Häute; es geht
Nichts mehr hindurch. Man kommt zu Menschen, man begrüsst Freunde:
neue Öde, kein Blick grüsst mehr. Im besten Falle eine Art Revolte.
Eine solche Revolte erfuhr ich, in sehr verschiednem Grade, aber fast
von Jedermann, der mir nahe stand; es scheint, dass Nichts tiefer
beleidigt als plötzlich eine Distanz merken zu lassen, - die vornehmen
Naturen, die nicht zu leben wissen, ohne zu verehren, sind selten. -
Ein Drittes ist die absurde Reizbarkeit der Haut gegen kleine Stiche,
eine Art Hülflosigkeit vor allem Kleinen. Diese scheint mir in der
ungeheuren Verschwendung aller Defensiv-Kräfte bedingt, die jede
schöpferische That, jede That aus dem Eigensten, Innersten, Untersten
heraus zur Voraussetzung hat. Die kleinen Defensiv-Vermögen sind damit
gleichsam ausgehängt; es fliesst ihnen keine Kraft mehr zu. - Ich wage
noch anzudeuten, dass man schlechter verdaut, ungern sich bewegt,
den Frostgefühlen, auch dem Misstrauen allzu offen steht, - dem
Misstrauen, das in vielen Fällen bloss ein ätiologischer Fehlgriff
ist. In einem solchen Zustande empfand ich einmal die Nähe einer
Kuhheerde, durch Wiederkehr milderer, menschenfreundlicherer Gedanken,
noch bevor ich sie sah: das hat Wärme in sich...


6.

Dieses Werk steht durchaus für sich. Lassen wir die Dichter bei Seite:
es ist vielleicht überhaupt nie Etwas aus einem gleichen Überfluss
von Kraft heraus gethan worden. Mein Begriff "dionysisch" wurde
hier höchste That; an ihr gemessen erscheint der ganze Rest von
menschlichem Thun als arm und bedingt. Dass ein Goethe, ein
Shakespeare nicht einen Augenblick in dieser ungeheuren Leidenschaft
und Höhe zu athmen wissen würde, dass Dante, gegen Zarathustra
gehalten, bloss ein Gläubiger ist und nicht Einer, der die Wahrheit
erst schafft, ein weltregierender Geist, ein Schicksal dass die
Dichter des Veda Priester sind und nicht einmal würdig, die
Schuhsohlen eines Zarathustra zu lösen, das ist Alles das Wenigste und
giebt keinen Begriff von der Distanz, von der azurnen Einsamkeit, in
der dies Werk lebt. Zarathustra hat ein ewiges Recht zu sagen: "ich
schliesse Kreise um mich und heilige Grenzen; immer Wenigere steigen
mit mir auf immer höhere Berge, - ich baue ein Gebirge aus immer
heiligeren Bergen." Man rechne den Geist und die Güte aller grossen
Seelen in Eins: alle zusammen wären nicht im Stande, Eine Rede
Zarathustras hervorzubringen. Die Leiter ist ungeheuer, auf der er
auf und nieder steigt; er hat weiter gesehn, weiter gewollt, weiter
gekonnt, als irgend ein Mensch. Er widerspricht mit jedem Wort, dieser
jasagendste aller Geister; in ihm sind alle Gegensätze zu einer
neuen Einheit gebunden. Die höchsten und die untersten Kräfte der
menschlichen Natur, das Süsseste, Leichtfertigste und Furchtbarste
strömt aus Einem Born mit unsterblicher Sicherheit hervor. Man weiss
bis dahin nicht, was Höhe, was Tiefe ist; man weiss noch weniger,
was Wahrheit ist. Es ist kein Augenblick in dieser Offenbarung der
Wahrheit, der schon vorweggenommen, von Einem der Grössten errathen
worden wäre. Es giebt keine Weisheit, keine Seelen-Erforschung, keine
Kunst zu reden vor Zarathustra; das Nächste, das Alltäglichste redet
hier von unerhörten Dingen. Die Sentenz von Leidenschaft zitternd; die
Beredsamkeit Musik geworden; Blitze vorausgeschleudert nach bisher
unerrathenen Zukünften. Die mächtigste Kraft zum Gleichniss, die
bisher da war, ist arm und Spielerei gegen diese Rückkehr der Sprache
zur Natur der Bildlichkeit. - Und wie Zarathustra herabsteigt und
zu Jedem das Gütigste sagt! Wie er selbst seine Widersacher, die
Priester, mit zarten Händen anfasst und mit ihnen an ihnen leidet!
- Hier ist in jedem Augenblick der Mensch überwunden, der Begriff
"Übermensch" ward hier höchste Realität, - in einer unendlichen Ferne
liegt alles das, was bisher gross am Menschen hiess, unter ihm. Das
Halkyonische, die leichten Füsse, die Allgegenwart von Bosheit und
Übermuth und was sonst Alles typisch ist für den Typus Zarathustra.
ist nie geträumt worden als wesentlich zur Grösse. Zarathustra fühlt
sich gerade in diesem Umfang an Raum, in dieser Zugänglichkeit zum
Entgegengesetzten als die höchste Art alles Seienden; und wenn man
hört, wie er diese definirt, so wird man darauf verzichten, nach
seinem Gleichniss zu suchen.

- die Seele, welche die längste Leiter hat und am tiefsten hinunter
kann,

die umfänglichste Seele, welche am weitesten in sich laufen und irren
und schweifen kann,

die nothwendigste, welche sich mit Lust in den Zufall stürzt,

die seiende Seele, welche ins Werden, die habende, welche ins Wollen
und Verlangen will -

die sich selber fliehende, welche sich selber in weitesten Kreisen
einholt,

die weiseste Seele, welcher die Narrheit am süssesten zuredet,

die sich selber liebendste, in der alle Dinge ihr Strömen und
Wiederströmen und Ebbe und Fluth haben - -

Aber das ist der Begriff des Dionysos selbst. Eben dahin führt eine
andre Erwägung. Das psychologische Problem im Typus des Zarathustra
ist, wie der, welcher in einem unerhörten Grade Nein sagt, Nein thut,
zu Allem, wozu man bisher Ja sagte, trotzdem der Gegensatz eines
neinsagenden Geistes sein kann; wie der das Schwerste von Schicksal,
ein Verhängniss von Aufgabe tragende Geist trotzdem der leichteste
und jenseitigste sein kann - Zarathustra ist ein Tänzer -; wie der,
welcher die härteste, die furchtbarste Einsicht in die Realität hat,
welcher den "abgründlichsten Gedanken" gedacht hat, trotzdem darin
keinen Einwand gegen das Dasein, selbst nicht gegen dessen ewige
Wiederkunft findet, - vielmehr einen Grund noch hinzu, das ewige Ja
zu allen Dingen selbst zu sein, "das ungeheure unbegrenzte Ja- und
Amen-sagen"... "In alle Abgründe trage ich noch mein segnendes
Jasagen"... Aber das ist der Begriff des Dionysos noch einmal.


7.

- Welche Sprache wird ein solcher Geist reden, wenn er mit sich
allein redet? Die Sprache des Dithyrambus. Ich bin der Erfinder des
Dithyrambus. Man höre, wie Zarathustra vor Sonnenaufgang (III, 18)
mit sich redet: ein solches smaragdenes Glück, eine solche göttliche
Zärtlichkeit hatte noch keine Zunge vor mir. Auch die tiefste
Schwermuth eines solchen Dionysos wird noch Dithyrambus; ich nehme,
zum Zeichen, das Nachtlied, die unsterbliche Klage, durch die
Überfülle von Licht und Macht, durch seine Sonnen-Natur, verurtheilt
zu sein, nicht zu lieben.

Nacht ist es: nun reden lauter alle springenden Brunnen. Und auch
meine Seele ist ein springender Brunnen.

Nacht ist es: nun erst erwachen alle Lieder der Liebenden. Und auch
meine Seele ist das Lied eines Liebenden.

Ein Ungestilltes, Unstillbares ist in mir, das will laut werden. Eine
Begierde nach Liebe ist in mir, die redet selber die Sprache der
Liebe.

Licht bin ich: ach dass ich Nacht wäre! Aber dies ist meine
Einsamkeit, dass ich von Licht umgürtet bin.

Ach, dass ich dunkel wäre und nächtig! Wie wollte ich an den Brüsten
des Lichts saugen!

Und euch selber wollte ich noch segnen, ihr kleinen Funkelsterne und
Leuchtwürmer droben! - und selig sein ob eurer Licht-Geschenke.

Aber ich lebe in meinem eignen Lichte, ich trinke die Flammen in mich
zurück, die aus mir brechen.

Ich kenne das Glück des Nehmenden nicht; und oft träumte mir davon,
dass Stehlen noch seliger sein müsse als Nehmen.

Das ist meine Armuth, dass meine Hand niemals ausruht vom Schenken;
das ist mein Neid, dass ich wartende Augen sehe und die erhellten
Nächte der Sehnsucht.

Oh Unseligkeit aller Schenkenden! Oh Verfinsterung meiner Sonne! Oh
Begierde nach Begehren! Oh Heisshunger in der Sättigung!

Sie nehmen von mir: aber rühre ich noch an ihre Seele? Eine Kluft ist
zwischen Nehmen und Geben; und die kleinste Kluft ist am letzten zu
überbrücken.

Ein Hunger wächst aus meiner Schönheit: wehethun möchte ich denen,
welchen ich leuchte, berauben möchte ich meine Beschenkten, - also
hungere ich nach Bosheit.

Die Hand zurückziehend, wenn sich schon ihr die Hand entgegenstreckt;
dem Wasserfall gleich, der noch im Sturze zögert: also hungere ich
nach Bosheit.

Solche Rache sinnt meine Fülle aus, solche Tücke quillt aus meiner
Einsamkeit.

Mein Glück im Schenken erstarb im Schenken, meine Tugend wurde ihrer
selber müde an ihrem Überflusse!

Wer immer schenkt, dessen Gefahr ist, dass er die Scham verliere;
wer immer austheilt, dessen Hand und Herz hat Schwielen vor lauter
Austheilen.

Mein Auge quillt nicht mehr über vor der Scham der Bittenden; meine
Hand wurde zu hart für das Zittern gefüllter Hände.

Wohin kam die Thräne meinem Auge und der Flaum meinem Herzen? Oh
Einsamkeit aller Schenkenden! Oh Schweigsamkeit aller Leuchtenden!

Viel Sonnen kreisen im öden Raume: zu Allem, was dunkel ist, reden sie
mit ihrem Lichte - mir schweigen sie.

Oh dies ist die Feindschaft des Lichts gegen Leuchtendes:
erbarmungslos wandelt es seine Bahnen.

Unbillig gegen Leuchtendes im tiefsten Herzen, kalt gegen Sonnen -
also wandelt jede Sonne.

Einem Sturme gleich wandeln die Sonnen ihre Bahnen, ihrem
unerbittlichen Willen folgen sie, das ist ihre Kälte.

Oh ihr erst seid es, ihr Dunklen, ihr Nächtigen, die ihr Wärme schafft
aus Leuchtendem! Oh ihr erst trinkt euch Milch und Labsal aus des
Lichtes Eutern!

Ach, Eis ist um mich, meine Hand verbrennt sich an Eisigem! Ach, Durst
ist in mir, der schmachtet nach eurem Durste.

Nacht ist es: ach dass ich Licht sein muss! Und Durst nach Nächtigem!
Und Einsamkeit!

Nacht ist es: nun bricht wie ein Born aus mir mein Verlangen, - nach
Rede verlangt mich.

Nacht ist es: nun reden lauter alle springenden Brunnen. Und auch
meine Seele ist ein springender Brunnen.

Nacht ist es: nun erwachen alle Lieder der Liebenden. Und auch meine
Seele ist das Lied eines Liebenden. -


8.

Dergleichen ist nie gedichtet, nie gefühlt, nie gelitten worden:
so leidet ein Gott, ein Dionysos. Die Antwort auf einen solchen
Dithyrambus der Sonnen-Vereinsamung im Lichte wäre Ariadne... Wer
weiss ausser mir, was Ariadne ist!... Von allen solchen Räthseln hatte
Niemand bisher die Lösung, ich zweifle, dass je jemand auch hier
nur Räthsel sah. - Zarathustra bestimmt einmal, mit Strenge, seine
Aufgabe - es ist auch die meine -, dass man sich über den Sinn nicht
vergreifen kann: er ist ja sagend bis zur Rechtfertigung, bis zur
Erlösung auch alles Vergangenen.

Ich wandle unter Menschen als unter Bruchstücken der Zukunft: jener
Zukunft, die ich schaue.

Und das ist all mein Dichten und Trachten, dass ich in Eins dichte und
zusammentrage, was Bruchstück ist und Räthsel und grauser Zufall.

Und wie ertrüge ich es Mensch zu sein, wenn der Mensch nicht auch
Dichter und Räthselrather und Erlöser des Zufalls wäre?

Die Vergangnen zu erlösen und alles "Es war" umzuschaffen in ein "So
wollte ich es!" das hiesse mir erst Erlösung.

An einer andren Stelle bestimmt er so streng als möglich, was für ihn
allein "der Mensch" sein kann - kein Gegenstand der Liebe oder gar des
Mitleidens - auch über den grossen Ekel am Menschen ist Zarathustra
Herr geworden: der Mensch ist ihm eine Unform, ein Stoff, ein
hässlicher Stein, der des Bildners bedarf.

Nicht-mehr-wollen und Nicht-mehr-schätzen und Nicht-mehr-schaffen: oh
dass diese grosse Müdigkeit mir stets ferne bleibe!

Auch im Erkennen fühle ich nur meines Willens Zeuge- und Werdelust;
und wenn Unschuld in meiner Erkenntniss ist, so geschieht dies, weil
Wille zur Zeugung in ihr ist.

Hinweg von Gott und Göttern lockte mich dieser Wille: was wäre denn zu
schaffen, wenn Götter - da wären?

Aber zum Menschen treibt er mich stets von Neuem, mein inbrünstiger
Schaffens-Wille; so treibt's den Hammer hin zum Steine.

Ach, ihr Menschen, im Steine schläft mir ein Bild, das Bild der
Bilder! Ach, dass es im härtesten, hässlichsten Steine schlafen muss!

Nun wüthet mein Hammer grausam gegen sein Gefängniss. Vom Steine
stäuben Stücke: was schiert mich das!

Vollenden will ich's, denn ein Schatten kam zu mir, - aller Dinge
Stillstes und Leichtestes kam einst zu mir!

Des Übermenschen Schönheit kam zu mir als Schatten: was gehen mich
noch - die Götter an!...

Ich hebe einen letzten Gesichtspunkt hervor: der unterstrichne Vers
giebt den Anlass hierzu. Für eine dionysische Aufgabe gehört die Härte
des Hammers, die Lust selbstam Vernichten in entscheidender Weise
zu den Vorbedingungen. Der Imperativ "werdet hart!", die unterste
Gewissheit darüber, dass alle Schaffenden hart sind, ist das
eigentliche Abzeichen einer dionysischen Natur. -



Jenseits von Gut und Böse.

Vorspiel einer Philosophie der Zukunft.

1.

Die Aufgabe für die nunmehr folgenden Jahre war so streng als möglich
vorgezeichnet. Nachdem der jasagende Theil meiner Aufgabe gelöst war,
kam die neinsagende, neinthuende Hälfte derselben an die Reihe: die
Umwerthung der bisherigen Werthe selbst, der grosse Krieg, - die
Heraufbeschwörung eines Tags der Entscheidung. Hier ist eingerechnet
der langsame Umblick nach Verwandten, nach Solchen, die aus der Stärke
heraus Zum Vernichten mir die Hand bieten würden. - Von da an sind
alle meine Schriften Angelhaken: vielleicht verstehe ich mich so gut
als jemand auf Angeln?... Wenn Nichts sich fieng, so liegt die Schuld
nicht an mir. Die Fische fehlten...


2.

Dies Buch (1886) ist in allem Wesentlichen eine Kritik der Modernität,
die modernen Wissenschaften, die modernen Künste, selbst die
moderne Politik nicht ausgeschlossen, nebst Fingerzeigen zu einem
Gegensatz-Typus, der so wenig modern als möglich ist, einem vornehmen,
einem jasagenden Typus. Im letzteren Sinne ist das Buch eine Schule
des gentilhomme, der Begriff geistiger und radikaler genommen als er
je genommen worden ist. Man muss Muth im Leibe haben, ihn auch nur
auszuhalten, man muss das Fürchten nicht gelernt haben... Alle die
Dinge, worauf das Zeitalter stolz ist, werden als Widerspruch zu
diesem Typus empfunden, als schlechte Manieren beinahe, die berühmte
"Objektivität" zum Beispiel, das "Mitgefühl mit allem Leidenden",
der "historische Sinn" mit seiner Unterwürfigkeit vor fremdem
Geschmack, mit seinem Auf-dem-Bauch-liegen vor petits faits, die
"Wissenschaftlichkeit". - Erwägt man, dass das Buch nach dem
Zarathustra folgt, so erräth man vielleicht auch das diätetische
régime, dem es eine Entstehung verdankt. Das Auge, verwöhnt durch eine
ungeheure Nöthigung fern zu sehn - Zarathustra ist weitsichtiger noch
als der Czar -, wird hier gezwungen, das Nächste, die Zeit, das Um-uns
scharf zu fassen. Man wird in allen Stücken, vor Allem auch in der
Form, eine gleiche willkürliche Abkehr von den Instinkten finden,
aus denen ein Zarathustra möglich wurde. Das Raffinement in Form,
in Absicht, in der Kunst des Schweigens, ist im Vordergrunde,
die Psychologie wird mit eingeständlicher Härte und Grausamkeit
gehandhabt, - das Buch entbehrt jedes gutmüthigen Worts... Alles
das erholt: wer erräth zuletzt, welche Art Erholung eine solche
Verschwendung von Güte, wie der Zarathustra ist, nöthig macht?...
Theologisch geredet - man höre zu, denn ich rede selten als Theologe
- war es Gott selber, der sich als Schlange am Ende seines Tagewerks
unter den Baum der Erkenntniss legte: er erholte sich so davon, Gott
zu sein... Er hatte Alles zu schön gemacht... Der Teufel ist bloss der
Müssiggang Gottes an jedem siebenten Tage...



Genealogie der Moral.

Eine Streitschrift.

Die drei Abhandlungen, aus denen diese Genealogie besteht, sind
vielleicht in Hinsicht auf Ausdruck, Absicht und Kunst der
Überraschung, das Unheimlichste, was bisher geschrieben worden ist.
Dionysos ist, man weiss es, auch der Gott der Finsterniss. - Jedes Mal
ein Anfang, der irre führen soll, kühl, wissenschaftlich, ironisch
selbst, absichtlich Vordergrund, absichtlich hinhaltend. Allmählich
mehr Unruhe; vereinzeltes Wetterleuchten; sehr unangenehme Wahrheiten
aus der Ferne her mit dumpfem Gebrumm laut werdend, - bis endlich ein
tempo feroce erreicht ist, wo Alles mit ungeheurer Spannung vorwärts
treibt. Am Schluss jedes Mal, unter vollkommen schauerlichen
Detonationen, eine neue Wahrheit zwischen dicken Wolken sichtbar.
- Die Wahrheit der ersten Abhandlung ist die Psychologie des
Christenthums: die Geburt des Christenthums aus dem Geiste des
Ressentiment, nicht, wie wohl geglaubt, wird, aus dem "Geiste",
- eine Gegenbewegung ihrem Wesen nach, der grosse Aufstand gegen
die Herrschaft vornehmer Werthe. Die zweite Abhandlung giebt die
Psychologie des Gewissens: dasselbe ist nicht, wie wohl geglaubt
wird, "die Stimme Gottes im Menschen", - es ist der Instinkt der
Grausamkeit, der sich rückwärts wendet, nachdem er nicht mehr nach
aussen hin sich entladen kann. Die Grausamkeit als einer der ältesten
und unwegdenkbarsten Cultur-Untergründe hier zum ersten Male ans Licht
gebracht. Die dritte Abhandlung giebt die Antwort auf die Frage, woher
die ungeheure Macht des asketischen Ideals, des Priester-Ideals,
stammt, obwohl dasselbe das schädliche Ideal par excellence, ein Wille
zum Ende, ein décadence-Ideal ist. Antwort: nicht, weil Gott hinter
den Priestern thätig ist, was wohl geglaubt wird, sondern faute
de mieux, - weil es das einzige Ideal bisher war, weil es keinen
Concurrenten hatte. "Denn der Mensch will lieber noch das Nichts
wollen als nicht wollen"... Vor allem fehlte ein Gegen-Ideal - bis auf
Zarathustra. - Man hat mich verstanden. Drei entscheidende Vorarbeiten
eines Psychologen für eine Umwerthung aller Werthe. - Dies Buch
enthält die erste Psychologie des Priesters.



Götzen-Dämmerung.

Wie man mit dem Hammer philosophirt.

1.

Diese Schrift von noch nicht 150 Seiten, heiter und verhängnissvoll
im Ton, ein Dämon, welcher lacht -, das Werk von so wenig Tagen, dass
ich Anstand nehme, ihre Zahl zu nennen, ist unter Büchern überhaupt
die Ausnahme: es giebt nichts Substanzenreicheres, Unabhängigeres,
Umwerfenderes, - Böseres. Will man sich kurz einen Begriff davon
geben, wie vor mir Alles auf dem Kopfe stand, so mache man den Anfang
mit dieser Schrift. Das, was Götze auf dem Titelblatt heisst, ist ganz
einfach das, was bisher Wahrheit genannt wurde. Götzen- Dämmerung -
auf deutsch: es geht zu Ende mit der alten Wahrheit...


2.

Es giebt keine Realität, keine "Idealität", die in dieser
Schrift nicht berührt würde (- berührt: was für ein vorsichtiger
Euphemismus!...) Nicht bloss die ewigen Götzen, auch die
allerjüngsten, folglich altersschwächsten. Die "modernen Ideen" zum
Beispiel. Ein grosser Wind bläst zwischen den Bäumen, und überall
fallen Früchte nieder - Wahrheiten. Es ist die Verschwendung eines
allzureichen Herbstes darin: man stolpert über Wahrheiten, man tritt
selbst einige todt, - es sind ihrer zu viele...

Was man aber in die Hände bekommt, das ist nichts Fragwürdiges mehr,
das sind Entscheidungen. Ich erst habe den Maassstab für "Wahrheiten"
in der Hand, ich kann erst entscheiden. Wie als ob in mir ein zweites
Bewusstsein gewachsen wäre, wie als ob sich in mir "der Wille" ein
Licht angezündet hätte über die schiefe Bahn, auf der er bisher
abwärts lief... Die schiefe Bahn - man nannte sie den Weg zur
"Wahrheit"... Es ist zu Ende mit allem "dunklen Drang", der gute
Mensch gerade war sich am wenigsten des rechten Wegs bewusst...
Und allen Ernstes, Niemand wusste vor mir den rechten Weg, den Weg
aufwärts: erst von mir an giebt es wieder Hoffnungen, Aufgaben,
vorzuschreibende Wege der Cultur - ich bin deren froher Botschafter...
Eben damit bin ich auch ein Schicksal. - -


3.

Unmittelbar nach Beendigung des eben genannten Werks und ohne auch nur
einen Tag zu verlieren, griff ich die ungeheure Aufgabe der Umwerthung
an, in einem souverainen Gefühl von Stolz, dem Nichts gleichkommt,
jeden Augenblick meiner Unsterblichkeit gewiss und Zeichen für Zeichen
mit der Sicherheit eines Schicksals in eherne Tafeln grabend. Das
Vorwort entstand am 3. September 1888: als ich Morgens, nach dieser
Niederschrift, ins Freie trat, fand ich den schönsten Tag vor mir,
den das Oberengadin mir je gezeigt hat - durchsichtig, glühend in den
Farben, alle Gegensätze, alle Mitten zwischen Eis und Süden in sich
schliessend. - Erst am 20. September verliess ich Sils-Maria, durch
Überschwemmungen zurückgehalten, Zuletzt bei weitem der einzige Gast
dieses wunderbaren Orts, dem meine Dankbarkeit das Geschenk eines
unsterblichen Namens machen will. Nach einer Reise mit Zwischenfällen,
sogar mit einer Lebensgefahr im überschwemmten Como, das ich erst tief
in der Nacht erreichte, kam ich am Nachmittag des 21. in Turin an,
meinem bewiesenen Ort, meiner Residenz von nun an. Ich nahm die
gleiche Wohnung wieder, die ich im Frühjahr innegehabt hatte, via
Carlo Alberto 6, III, gegenüber dem mächtigen palazzo Carignano, in
dem Vittore Emanuele geboren ist, mit dem Blick auf die piazza Carlo
Alberto und drüber hinaus aufs Hügelland. Ohne Zögern und ohne mich
einen Augenblick abziehn zu lassen, gieng ich wieder an die Arbeit: es
war nur das letzte Viertel des Werks noch abzuthun. Am 30, September
grosser Sieg; Beendigung der Umwerthung; Müssiggang eines Gottes
am Po entlang. Am gleichen Tage schrieb ich noch das Vorwort zur
"Götzen-Dämmerung", deren Druckbogen zu corrigiren meine Erholung im
September gewesen war. - Ich habe nie einen solchen Herbst erlebt,
auch nie Etwas der Art auf Erden für möglich gehalten, - ein Claude
Lorrain ins Unendliche gedacht, jeder Tag von gleicher unbändiger
Vollkommenheit.



Der Fall Wagner.

Ein Musikanten-Problem.

1.

Um dieser Schrift gerecht zu werden, muss man am Schicksal der
Musik wie an einer offnen Wunde leiden. - Woran ich leide, wenn
ich am Schicksal der Musik leide? Daran, dass die Musik um ihren
weltverklärenden, jasagenden Charakter gebracht worden ist, - dass sie
décadence-Musik und nicht mehr die Flöte des Dionysos ist... Gesetzt
aber, dass man dergestalt die Sache der Musik wie seine eigene Sache,
wie seine eigene Leidensgeschichte fühlt, so wird man diese Schrift
voller Rücksichten und über die Maassen mild finden. In solchen
Fällen heiter sein und sich gutmüthig mit verspotten - ridendo dicere
severum, wo das verum dicere jede Härte rechtfertigen würde - ist die
Humanität selbst. Wer zweifelt eigentlich daran, dass ich, als der
alte Artillerist, der ich bin, es in der Hand habe, gegen Wagner mein
schweres Geschütz aufzufahren? - Ich hielt alles Entscheidende in
dieser Sache bei mir zurück, - ich habe Wagner geliebt. - Zuletzt
liegt ein Angriff auf einen feineren "Unbekannten", den nicht leicht
ein Anderer erräth, im Sinn und Wege meiner Aufgabe - oh ich habe noch
ganz andre "Unbekannte" aufzudecken als einen Cagliostro der Musik
- noch mehr freilich ein Angriff auf die in geistigen Dingen immer
träger und instinktärmer, immer ehrlicher werdende deutsche Nation,
die mit einem beneidenswerthen Appetit fortfährt, sich von Gegensätzen
zu nähren und den "Glauben" so gut wie die Wissenschaftlichkeit,
die "christliche Liebe" so gut wie den Antisemitismus, den Willen
zur Macht (zum "Reich") so gut wie das évangile des humbles
ohne Verdauungsbeschwerden hinunterschluckt... Dieser Mangel an
Partei zwischen Gegensätzen! diese stomachische Neutralität und
"Selbstlosigkeit"! Dieser gerechte Sinn des deutschen Gaumens, der
Allem gleiche Rechte giebt, - der Alles schmackhaft findet... Ohne
allen Zweifel, die Deutschen sind Idealisten... Als ich das letzte Mal
Deutschland besuchte, fand ich den deutschen Geschmack bemüht, Wagnern
und dem Trompeter von Säckingen gleiche Rechte zuzugestehn; ich
selber war eigenhändig Zeuge, wie man in Leipzig, zu Ehren eines der
echtesten und deutschesten Musiker, im alten Sinne des Wortes deutsch,
keines blossen Reichsdeutschen, es Meister Heinrich Schütz einen
Liszt-Verein gründete, mit dem Zweck der Pflege und Verbreitung
listiger Kirchenmusik... Ohne allen Zweifel, die Deutschen sind
Idealisten...


2.

Aber hier soll mich Nichts hindern, grob zu werden und den Deutschen
ein paar harte Wahrheiten zu sagen: wer thut es sonst? - Ich rede von
ihrer Unzucht in historicis. Nicht nur, dass den deutschen Historikern
der grosse Blick für den Gang, für die Werthe der Cultur gänzlich
abhanden gekommen ist, dass sie allesammt Hanswürste der Politik (oder
der Kirche -) sind: dieser grosse Blick ist selbst von ihnen in Acht
gethan. Man muss vorerst "deutsch" sein, "Rasse" sein, dann kann man
über alle Werthe und Unwerthe in historicis entscheiden - man setzt
sie fest... "Deutsch" ist ein Argument, "Deutschland, Deutschland über
Alles" ein Princip, die Germanen sind die "sittliche Weltordnung"
in der Geschichte; im Verhältniss zum imperium romanum die Träger
der Freiheit, im Verhältniss zum achtzehnten Jahrhundert die
Wiederhersteller der Moral, des "kategorischen Imperativs",... Es
giebt eine reichsdeutsche Geschichtsschreibung, es giebt, fürchte ich,
selbst eine antisemitische, - es giebt eine Hof-Geschichtsschreibung
und Herr von Treitschke schämt sich nicht... Jüngst machte ein
Idioten-Urtheil in historicis, ein Satz des zum Glück verblichenen
ästhetischen Schwaben Vischer, die Runde durch die deutschen Zeitungen
als eine "Wahrheit", zu der jeder Deutsche Ja sagen müsse: "Die
Renaissance und die Reformation, Beide zusammen machen erst ein Ganzes
- die aesthetische Wiedergeburt und die sittliche Wiedergeburt." - Bei
solchen Sätzen geht es mit meiner Geduld zu Ende, und ich spüre Lust,
ich fühle es selbst als Pflicht, den Deutschen einmal zu sagen, was
sie Alles schon auf dem Gewissen haben. Alle grossen Cultur-Verbrechen
von vier Jahrhunderten haben sie auf dem Gewissen!... Und immer
aus dem gleichen Grunde, aus ihrer innerlichsten Feigheit vor der
Realität, die auch die Feigheit vor der Wahrheit ist, aus ihrer bei
ihnen Instinkt gewordnen Unwahrhaftigkeit, aus "Idealismus"... Die
Deutschen haben Europa um die Ernte, um den Sinn der letzten grossen
Zeit, der Renaissance-Zeit, gebracht, in einem Augenblicke, wo eine
höhere Ordnung der Werthe, wo die vornehmen, die zum Leben jasagenden,
die Zukunft-verbürgenden Werthe am Sitz der entgegengesetzten, der
Niedergangs-Werthe zum Sieg gelangt waren - und bis in die Instinkte
der dort Sitzenden hinein! Luther, dies Verhängniss von Mönch, hat
die Kirche, und, was tausend Mal schlimmer ist, das Christenthum
wiederhergestellt, im Augenblick, wo es unterlag... Das Christenthum,
diese Religion gewordne Verneinung des Willens zum Leben!... Luther,
ein unmöglicher Mönch, der, aus Gründen seiner "Unmöglichkeit",
die Kirche angriff und sie - folglich! - wiederherstellte... Die
Katholiken hätten Gründe, Lutherfeste zu feiern, Lutherspiele zu
dichten... Luther - und die "sittliche Wiedergeburt"! Zum Teufel mit
aller Psychologie! Ohne Zweifel, die Deutschen sind Idealisten. Die
Deutschen haben zwei Mal, als eben mit ungeheurer Tapferkeit und
Selbstüberwindung eine rechtschaffne, eine unzweideutige, eine
vollkommen wissenschaftliche Denkweise erreicht war, Schleichwege zum
alten "Ideal", Versöhnungen zwischen Wahrheit und "Ideal", im Grunde
Formeln für ein Recht auf Ablehnung der Wissenschaft, für ein Recht
auf Lüge zu finden gewusst. Leibniz und Kant - diese zwei grössten
Hemmschuhe der intellektuellen Rechtschaffenheit Europa's! -
Die Deutschen haben endlich, als auf der Brücke zwischen zwei
décadence-Jahrhunderten eine force majeure von Genie und Wille
sichtbar wurde, stark genug, aus Europa eine Einheit, eine politische
und wirtschaftliche Einheit, zum Zweck der Erdregierung zu schaffen,
mit ihren "Freiheits-Kriegen" Europa um den Sinn, um das Wunder von
Sinn in der Existenz Napoleon's gebracht, - sie haben damit Alles,
was kam, was heute da ist, auf dem Gewissen, diese culturwidrigste
Krankheit und Unvernunft, die es giebt, den Nationalismus, diese
névrose nationale, an der Europa krank ist, diese Verewigung der
Kleinstaaterei Europas, der kleinen Politik: sie haben Europa selbst
um seinen Sinn, um seine Vernunft - sie haben es in eine Sackgasse
gebracht. - Weiss jemand ausser mir einen Weg aus dieser Sackgasse?...
Eine Aufgabe gross genug, die Völker wieder zu binden?...


3.

- Und zuletzt, warum sollte ich meinem Verdacht nicht Worte geben? Die
Deutschen werden auch in meinem Falle wieder Alles versuchen, um aus
einem ungeheuren Schicksal eine Maus zu gebären. Sie haben sich bis
jetzt an mir compromittirt, ich zweifle, dass sie es in Zukunft besser
machen. - Ah was es mich verlangt, hier ein schlechter Prophet zu
sein!... Meine natürlichen Leser und Hörer sind jetzt schon Russen,
Skandinavier und Franzosen, - werden sie es immer mehr sein? -
Die Deutschen sind in die Geschichte der Erkenntniss mit lauter
zweideutigen Namen eingeschrieben, sie haben immer nur "unbewusste"
Falschmünzer hervorgebracht (- Fichte, Schelling, Schopenhauer, Hegel,
Schleiermacher gebührt dies Wort so gut wie Kant und Leibniz, es sind
Alles blosse Schleiermacher -): sie sollen nie die Ehre haben, dass
der erste rechtschaffne Geist in der Geschichte des Geistes, der
Geist, in dem die Wahrheit zu Gericht kommt über die Falschmünzerei
von vier Jahrtausenden, mit dem deutschen Geiste in Eins gerechnet
wird. Der "deutsche Geist" ist meine schlechte Luft: ich athme schwer
in der Nähe dieser Instinkt gewordnen Unsauberkeit in psychologicis,
die jedes Wort, jede Miene eines Deutschen verräth. Sie haben nie ein
siebzehntes Jahrhundert harter Selbstprüfung durchgemacht wie die
Franzosen, ein La Rochefoucauld, ein Descartes sind hundert Mal in
Rechtschaffenheit den ersten Deutschen überlegen, - sie haben bis
heute keinen Psychologen gehabt. Aber Psychologie ist beinahe der
Maassstab der Reinlichkeit oder Unreinlichkeit einer Rasse... Und wenn
man nicht einmal reinlich ist, wie sollte man Tiefe haben? Man kommt
beim Deutschen, beinahe wie beim Weibe, niemals auf den Grund, er
hat keinen: das ist Alles. Aber damit ist man noch nicht einmal
flach. - Das, was in Deutschland "tief" heisst, ist genau diese
Instinkt-Unsauberkeit gegen sich, von der ich eben rede: man will über
sich nicht im Klaren sein. Dürfte ich das Wort "deutsch" nicht als
internationale Münze für diese psychologische Verkommenheit in
Vorschlag bringen? - In diesem Augenblick zum Beispiel nennt es der
deutsche Kaiser seine "christliche Pflicht", die Sklaven in Afrika
zu befreien: unter uns andren Europäern hiesse das dann einfach
"deutsch"... Haben die Deutschen auch nur Ein Buch hervorgebracht, das
Tiefe hätte? Selbst der Begriff dafür, was tief an einem Buch ist,
geht ihnen ab. Ich habe Gelehrte kennen gelernt, die Kant für tief
hielten; am preussischen Hofe, fürchte ich, hält man Herrn von
Treitschke für tief. Und wenn ich Stendhal gelegentlich als tiefen
Psychologen rühme, ist es mir mit deutschen Universitätsprofessoren
begegnet, dass sie mich den Namen buchstabieren liessen...


4.

- Und warum sollte ich nicht bis ans Ende gehn? Ich liebe es, reinen
Tisch zu machen. Es gehört selbst zu meinem Ehrgeiz, als Verächter
der Deutschen par excellence zu gelten. Mein Misstrauen gegen den
deutschen Charakter habe ich schon mit sechsundzwanzig Jahren
ausgedrückt (dritte Unzeitgemässe S. 71) - die Deutschen sind für mich
unmöglich. Wenn ich mir eine Art Mensch ausdenke, die allen meinen
Instinkten zuwiderläuft, so wird immer ein Deutscher daraus. Das
Erste, worauf hin ich mir einen Menschen "nierenprüfe", ist, ob er ein
Gefühl für Distanz im Leibe hat, ob er überall Rang, Grad, Ordnung
zwischen Mensch und Mensch sieht, ob er distinguirt damit ist man
gentilhomme; in jedem andren Fall gehört man rettungslos unter den
weitherzigen, ach! so gutmüthigen Begriff der canaille. Aber die
Deutschen sind canaille - ach! sie sind so gutmüthig... Man erniedrigt
sich durch den Verkehr mit Deutschen: der Deutsche stellt gleich...
Rechne ich meinen Verkehr mit einigen Künstlern, vor Allem mit Richard
Wagner ab, so habe ich keine gute Stunde mit Deutschen verlebt...
Gesetzt, dass der tiefste Geist aller Jahrtausende unter Deutschen
erschiene, irgend eine Retterin des Capitols würde wähnen, ihre sehr
unschöne Seele käme zum Mindesten ebenso in Betracht... Ich halte
diese Rasse nicht aus, mit der man immer in schlechter Gesellschaft
ist, die keine Finger für nuances hat - wehe mir! ich bin eine nuance
-, die keinen esprit in den Füssen hat und nicht einmal gehen kann...
Die Deutschen haben zuletzt gar keine Füsse, sie haben bloss Beine...
Den Deutschen geht jeder Begriff davon ab, wie gemein sie sind, aber
das ist der Superlativ der Gemeinheit, - sie schämen sich nicht
einmal, bloss Deutsche zu sein... Sie reden über Alles mit, sie halten
sich selbst für entscheidend, ich fürchte, sie haben selbst über mich
entschieden... - Mein ganzes Leben ist der Beweis de rigueur für diese
Sätze. Umsonst, dass ich in ihm nach einem Zeichen von Takt, von
délicatesse gegen mich suche. Von Juden ja, noch nie von Deutschen.
Meine Art will es, dass ich gegen Jedermann mild und wohlwollend bin
ich habe ein Recht dazu, keine Unterschiede zu machen dies hindert
nicht, dass ich die Augen offen habe. Ich nehme Niemanden aus, am
wenigsten meine Freunde, - ich hoffe zuletzt, dass dies meiner
Humanität gegen sie keinen Abbruch gethan hat! Es giebt fünf, sechs
Dinge, aus denen ich mir immer eine Ehrensache gemacht habe. -
Trotzdem bleibt wahr, dass ich fast jeden Brief, der mich seit Jahren
erreicht, als einen Cynismus empfinde: es liegt mehr Cynismus im
Wohlwollen gegen mich als in irgend welchem Hass... Ich sage es jedem
meiner Freunde ins Gesicht, dass er es nie der Mühe für werth genug
hielt, irgend eine meiner Schriften zu studieren; ich errathe aus den
kleinsten Zeichen, dass sie nicht einmal wissen, was drin steht. Was
gar meinen Zarathustra anbetrifft, wer von meinen Freunden hätte mehr
darin gesehn als eine unerlaubte, zum Glück vollkommen gleichgültige
Anmaassung?... Zehn Jahre: und Niemand in Deutschland hat sich eine
Gewissensschuld daraus gemacht, meinen Namen gegen das absurde
Stillschweigen zu vertheidigen, unter dem er vergraben lag: ein
Ausländer, ein Däne war es, der zuerst dazu genug Feinheit des
Instinkts und Muth hatte, der sich über meine angeblichen Freunde
empörte... An welcher deutschen Universität wären heute Vorlesungen
über meine Philosophie möglich, wie sie letztes Frühjahr der damit
noch einmal mehr bewiesene Psycholog Dr. Georg Brandes in Kopenhagen
gehalten hat? - Ich selber habe nie an Alledem gelitten; das
Nothwendige verletzt mich nicht; amor fati ist meine innerste Natur.
Dies schliesst aber nicht aus, dass ich die Ironie liebe, sogar die
welthistorische Ironie. Und so habe ich, zwei Jahre ungefähr vor
dem zerschmetternden Blitzschlag der Umwerthung, der die Erde in
Convulsionen versetzen wird, den "Fall Wagner" in die Welt geschickt:
die Deutschen sollten sich noch einmal unsterblich an mir vergreifen
und verewigen! es ist gerade noch Zeit dazu! - Ist das erreicht? - Zum
Entzücken, meine Herrn Germanen! Ich mache Ihnen mein Compliment...
Soeben schreibt mir noch, damit auch die Freunde nicht fehlen,
eine alte Freundin, sie lache jetzt über mich... Und dies in einem
Augenblicke, wo eine unsägliche Verantwortlichkeit auf mir liegt, - wo
kein Wort zu zart, kein Blick ehrfurchtsvoll genug gegen' mich sein
kann. Denn ich trage das Schicksal der Menschheit auf der Schulter. -



Warum ich ein Schicksal bin.

1.

Ich kenne mein Loos. Es wird sich einmal an meinen Namen die
Erinnerung an etwas Ungeheures anknüpfen, - an eine Krisis, wie es
keine auf Erden gab, an die tiefste GewissensCollision, an eine
Entscheidung heraufbeschworen gegen Alles, was bis dahin geglaubt,
gefordert, geheiligt worden war. Ich bin kein Mensch, ich bin Dynamit.
- Und mit Alledem ist Nichts in mir von einem Religionsstifter -
Religionen sind Pöbel-Affairen, ich habe nöthig, mir die Hände nach
der Berührung mit religiösen Menschen zu waschen... Ich will keine
"Gläubigen", ich denke, ich bin zu boshaft dazu, um an mich selbst zu
glauben, ich rede niemals zu Massen... Ich habe eine erschreckliche
Angst davor, dass man mich eines Tags heilig spricht: man wird
errathen, weshalb ich dies Buch vorher herausgebe, es soll verhüten,
dass man Unfug mit mir treibt... Ich will kein Heiliger sein, lieber
noch ein Hanswurst... Vielleicht bin ich ein Hanswurst... Und trotzdem
oder vielmehr nicht trotzdem denn es gab nichts Verlogneres bisher
als Heilige - redet aus mir die Wahrheit. - Aber meine Wahrheit ist
furchtbar: denn man hiess bisher die Lüge Wahrheit. - Umwerthung aller
Werthe: das ist meine Formel für einen Akt höchster Selbstbesinnung
der Menschheit, der in mir Fleisch und Genie geworden ist. Mein Loos
will, dass ich der erste anständige Mensch sein muss, dass ich mich
gegen die Verlogenheit von Jahrtausenden im Gegensatz weiss... Ich
erst habe die Wahrheit entdeckt, dadurch dass ich zuerst die Lüge
als Lüge empfand - roch... Mein Genie ist in meinen Nüstern... Ich
widerspreche, wie nie widersprochen worden ist und bin trotzdem der
Gegensatz eines neinsagenden Geistes. Ich bin ein froher Botschafter,
wie es keinen gab ich kenne Aufgaben von einer Höhe, dass der Begriff
dafür bisher gefehlt hat; erst von mir an giebt es wieder Hoffnungen.
Mit Alledem bin ich nothwendig auch der Mensch des Verhängnisses.
Denn wenn die Wahrheit mit der Lüge von Jahrtausenden in Kampf tritt,
werden wir Erschütterungen haben, einen Krampf von Erdbeben, eine
Versetzung von Berg und Thal, wie dergleichen nie geträumt worden
ist. Der Begriff Politik ist dann gänzlich in einen Geisterkrieg
aufgegangen, alle Machtgebilde der alten Gesellschaft sind in die Luft
gesprengt - sie ruhen allesamt auf der Lüge: es wird Kriege geben,
wie es noch keine auf Erden gegeben hat. Erst von mir an giebt es auf
Erden grosse Politik.


2.

Will man eine Formel für ein solches Schicksal, das Mensch wird? - Sie
steht in meinem Zarathustra.

- und wer ein Schöpfer sein will im Guten und Bösen, der muss ein
Vernichter erst sein und Werthe zerbrechen.

Also gehört das höchste Böse zur höchsten Güte: diese aber ist die
schöpferische.

Ich bin bei weitem der furchtbarste Mensch, den es bisher gegeben hat;
dies schliesst nicht aus, dass ich der wohlthätigste sein werde. Ich
kenne die Lust am Vernichten in einem Grade, die meiner Kraft zum
Vernichten gemäss ist, - in Beidem gehorche ich meiner dionysischen
Natur, welche das Neinthun nicht vom Jasagen zu trennen weiss. Ich bin
der erste Immoralist: damit bin ich der Vernichter par excellence. -


3.

Man hat mich nicht gefragt, man hätte mich fragen sollen, was
gerade in meinem Munde, im Munde des ersten Immoralisten, der Name
Zarathustra bedeutet: denn was die ungeheure Einzigkeit jenes
Persers in der Geschichte ausmacht, ist gerade dazu das Gegentheil.
Zarathustra hat zuerst im Kampf des Guten und des Bösen das
eigentliche Rad im Getriebe der Dinge gesehn, - die Übersetzung der
Moral in's Metaphysische, als Kraft, Ursache, Zweck an sich, ist
sein Werk. Aber diese Frage wäre im Grunde bereits die Antwort.
Zarathustra, schuf diesen verhängnissvollsten Irrthum, die Moral:
folglich muss er auch der Erste sein, der ihn erkennt. Nicht nur,
dass er hier länger und mehr Erfahrung hat als sonst ein Denker -
die ganze Geschichte ist ja die Experimental-Widerlegung vom Satz
der sogenannten "sittlichen Weltordnung" -: das Wichtigere ist,
Zarathustra ist wahrhaftiger als sonst ein Denker. Seine Lehre und
sie allein hat die Wahrhaftigkeit als oberste Tugend - das heisst den
Gegensatz zur Feigheit des "Idealisten", der vor der Realität die
Flucht ergreift, Zarathustra hat mehr Tapferkeit im Leibe als
alle Denker zusammengenommen. Wahrheit reden und gut mit Pfeilen
schiessen, das ist die persische Tugend. - Versteht man mich?... Die
Selbstüberwindung der Moral aus Wahrhaftigkeit, die Selbstüberwindung
des Moralisten in seinen Gegensatz - in mich - das bedeutet in meinem
Munde der Name Zarathustra.


4.

Im Grunde sind es zwei Verneinungen, die mein Wort Immoralist in sich
schliesst. Ich verneine einmal einen Typus Mensch, der bisher als der
höchste galt, die Guten, die Wohlwollenden, Wohltäthigen; ich verneine
andrerseits eine Art Moral, welche als Moral an sich in Geltung und
Herrschaft gekommen ist, die décadence-Moral, handgreiflicher geredet,
die christliche Moral. Es wäre erlaubt, den zweiten Widerspruch als
den entscheidenderen anzusehn, da die Überschätzung der Güte und des
Wohlwollens, ins Grosse gerechnet, mir bereits als Folge der décadence
gilt, als Schwäche-Symptom, als unverträglich mit einem aufsteigenden
und jasagenden Leben: im Jasagen ist Verneinen und Vernichten
Bedingung. - Ich bleibe zunächst bei der Psychologie des guten
Menschen stehn. Um abzuschätzen, was ein Typus Mensch werth ist, muss
man den Preis nachrechnen, den seine Erhaltung kostet, - muss man
seine Existenzbedingungen kennen. Die Existenz-Bedingung der Guten ist
die Lüge -: anders ausgedrückt, das Nicht-sehn-wollen um jeden Preis,
wie im Grunde die Realität beschaffen ist, nämlich nicht der Art, um
jeder Zeit wohlwollende Instinkte herauszufordern, noch weniger der
Art, um sich ein Eingreifen von kurzsichtigen gutmüthigen Händen
jeder Zeit gefallen zu lassen. Die Nothstände aller Art überhaupt
als Einwand, als Etwas, das man abschaffen muss, betrachten, ist die
niaiserie par excellence, ins Grosse gerechnet, ein wahres Unheil in
seinen Folgen, ein Schicksal von Dummheit -, beinahe so dumm, als es
der Wille wäre, das schlechte Wetter abzuschaffen - aus Mitleiden etwa
mit den armen Leuten... In der grossen Ökonomie des Ganzen sind die
Furchtbarkeiten der Realität (in den Affekten, in den Begierden,
im Willen zur Macht) in einem unausrechenbaren Maasse nothwendiger
als jene Form des kleinen Glücks, die sogenannte "Güte"; man
muss sogar nachsichtig sein, um der letzteren, da sie in der
Instinkt-Verlogenheit bedingt ist, überhaupt einen Platz zu
gönnen. Ich werde einen grossen Anlass haben, die über die Maassen
unheimlichen Folgen des Optimismus, dieser Ausgeburt der homines
optimi, für die ganze Geschichte zu beweisen. Zarathustra, der Erste,
der begriff, dass der Optimist ebenso décadent ist wie der Pessimist
und vielleicht schädlicher, sagt: gute Menschen reden nie die
Wahrheit. Falsche Küsten und Sicherheiten lehrten euch die Guten;
in Lügen der Guten wart ihr geboren und geborgen. Alles ist in den
Grund hinein verlogen und verbogen durch die Guten. Die Welt ist zum
Glück nicht auf Instinkte hin gebaut, dass gerade bloss gutmüthiges
Heerdengethier darin sein enges Glück fände; zu fordern, dass Alles
"guter Mensch", Heerdenthier, blauäugig, wohlwollend, "schöne Seele"
- oder, wie Herr Herbert Spencer es wünscht, altruistisch werden
solle, hiesse dem Dasein seinen grossen Charakter nehmen, hiesse
die Menschheit castriren und auf eine armselige Chineserei
herunterbringen. - Und dies hat man versucht! .. Dies eben hiess man
Moral... In diesem Sinne nennt Zarathustra die Guten bald "die letzten
Menschen", bald den "Anfang vom Ende"; vor Allem empfindet er sie als
die schädlichste Art Mensch, weil sie ebenso auf Kosten der Wahrheit
als auf Kosten der Zukunft ihre Existenz durchsetzen.

Die Guten - die können nicht schaffen, die sind immer der Anfang vom
Ende -

- sie kreuzigen den, der neue Werthe auf neue Tafeln schreibt, sie
opfern sich die Zukunft, sie kreuzigen alle Menschen-Zukunft!

Die Guten - die waren immer der Anfang vom Ende...

Und was auch für Schaden die Welt-Verleumder thun mögen, der Schaden
der Guten ist der schädlichste Schaden.


5.

Zarathustra, der erste Psycholog der Guten, ist - folglich ein Freund
der Bösen. Wenn eine décadence-Art Mensch zum Rang der höchsten Art
aufgestiegen ist, so konnte dies nur auf Kosten ihrer Gegensatz-Art
geschehn, der starken und lebensgewissen Art Mensch. Wenn das
Heerdenthier im Glanze der reinsten Tugend strahlt, so muss
der Ausnahme-Mensch zum Bösen heruntergewerthet sein. Wenn die
Verlogenheit um jeden Preis das Wort "Wahrheit" für ihre Optik
in Anspruch nimmt, so muss der eigentlich Wahrhaftige unter den
schlimmsten Namen wiederzufinden sein. Zarathustra lässt hier keinen
Zweifel: er sagt, die Erkenntniss der Guten, der "Besten" gerade sei
es gewesen, was ihm Grausen vor dem Menschen überhaupt gemacht habe;
aus diesem Widerwillen seien ihm die Flügel gewachsen, "fortzuschweben
in ferne Zukünfte", - er verbirgt es nicht, dass sein Typus Mensch,
ein relativ übermenschlicher Typus, gerade im Verhältniss zu den Guten
übermenschlich ist, dass die Guten und Gerechten seinen Übermenschen
Teufel nennen würden...

Ihr höchsten Menschen, denen mein Auge begegnete, das ist mein Zweifel
an euch und mein heimliches Lachen: ich rathe, ihr würdet meinen
Übermenschen - Teufel heissen!

So fremd seid ihr dem Grossen mit eurer Seele, dass euch der
Übermensch furchtbar sein würde in seiner Güte...

An dieser Stelle und nirgends wo anders muss man den Ansatz machen,
um zu begreifen, was Zarathustra will: diese Art Mensch, die er
concipirt, concipirt die Realität, wie sie ist: sie ist stark genug
dazu -, sie ist ihr nicht entfremdet, entrückt, sie ist sie selbst,
sie hat all deren Furchtbares und Fragwürdiges auch noch in sich,
damit erst kann der Mensch Grösse haben...


6.

- Aber ich habe auch noch in einem andren Sinne das Wort Immoralist
zum Abzeichen, zum Ehrenzeichen für mich gewählt; ich bin stolz
darauf, dies Wort zu haben, das mich gegen die ganze Menschheit
abhebt. Niemand noch hat die christliche Moral als unter sich gefühlt:
dazu gehörte eine Höhe, ein Fernblick, eine bisher ganz unerhörte
psychologische Tiefe und Abgründlichkeit. Die christliche Moral war
bisher die Circe aller Denker, - sie standen in ihrem Dienst. - Wer
ist vor mir eingestiegen in die Höhlen, aus denen der Gifthauch dieser
Art von Ideal - der Weltverleumdung! - emporquillt? Wer hat auch nur
zu ahnen gewagt, dass es Höhlen sind? Wer war überhaupt vor mir unter
den Philosophen Psycholog und nicht vielmehr dessen Gegensatz "höherer
Schwindler" "Idealist"? Es gab vor mir noch gar keine Psychologie.
- Hier der Erste zu sein kann ein Fluch sein, es ist jedenfalls ein
Schicksal: denn man verachtet auch als der Erste... Der Ekel am
Menschen ist meine Gefahr...


7.

Hat man mich verstanden? - Was mich abgrenzt, was mich bei Seite
stellt gegen den ganzen Rest der Menschheit, das ist, die christliche
Moral entdeckt zu haben. Deshalb war ich eines Worts bedürftig, das
den Sinn einer Herausforderung an Jedermann enthält. Hier nicht eher
die Augen aufgemacht zu haben gilt mir als die grösste Unsauberkeit,
die die Menschheit auf dem Gewissen hat, als Instinkt gewordner
Selbstbetrug, als grundsätzlicher Wille, jedes Geschehen, jede
Ursächlichkeit, jede Wirklichkeit nicht zu sehen, als Falschmünzerei
in psychologicis bis zum Verbrechen. Die Blindheit vor dem
Christenthum ist das Verbrechen par excellence - das Verbrechen am
Leben... Die Jahrtausende, die Völker, die Ersten und die Letzten,
die Philosophen und die alten Weiber - fünf, sechs Augenblicke der
Geschichte abgerechnet, mich als siebenten - in diesem Punkte sind sie
alle einander würdig. Der Christ war bisher das "moralische Wesen",
ein. Curiosum ohne Gleichen - und, als "moralisches Wesen", absürder,
verlogner, eitler, leichtfertiger, sich selber nachtheiliger als auch
der grösste Verächter der Menschheit es sich träumen lassen könnte.
Die christliche Moral - die bösartigste Form des Willens zur Lüge, die
eigentliche Circe der Menschheit: Das, was sie verdorben hat. Es ist
nicht der Irrthum als Irrthum, was Mich bei diesem Anblick entsetzt,
nicht der Jahrtausende lange Mangel an "gutem Willen", an Zucht, an
Anstand, an Tapferkeit im Geistigen, der sich in seinem Sieg verräth:
- es ist der Mangel an Natur, es ist der vollkommen schauerliche
Thatbestand, dass die Widernatur selbst als Moral die höchsten Ehren
empfieng und als Gesetz, als kategorischer Imperativ, über der
Menschheit hängen blieb!... In diesem Maasse sich vergreifen, nicht
als Einzelner, nicht als Volk, sondern als Menschheit!... Dass man die
allerersten Instinkte des Leben[s] verachten lehrte; dass man eine
"Seele", einen "Geist" erlog, um den Leib zu Schanden zu machen; dass
man in der Voraussetzung des Lebens, in der Geschlechtlichkeit, etwas
Unreines empfinden lehrt; dass man in der tiefsten Nothwendigkeit
zum Gedeihen, in der strengen Selbstsucht (- das Wort schon
ist verleumderisch! -) das böse Princip sucht; dass man
umgekehrt in dem typischen Abzeichen des Niedergangs und der
Instinkt-Widersprüchlichkeit, im "Selbstlosen", im Verlust an
Schwergewicht, in der "Entpersönlichung" und "Nächstenliebe" (-
Nächstensucht!) den höheren Werth, was sage ich! den Werth an sich
sieht!... Wie! wäre die Menschheit selber in décadence? war sie
es immer? - Was feststeht, ist, dass ihr nur Décadence-Werthe als
oberste Werthe gelehrt worden sind. Die Entselbstungs-Moral ist die
Niedergangs-Moral par excellence, die Thatsache "ich gehe zu Grunde",
in den Imperativ übersetzt: "ihr sollt alle zu Grunde gehn" - und
nicht nur in den Imperativ!... Diese einzige Moral, die bisher gelehrt
worden ist, die Entselbstungs-Moral, verräth einen Willen zum Ende,
sie verneint im untersten Grunde das Leben. - Hier bliebe die
Möglichkeit offen, dass nicht die Menschheit in Entartung sei, sondern
nur jene parasitische Art Mensch, die des Priesters, die mit der
Moral sich zu ihren Werth-Bestimmern emporgelogen hat, - die in der
christlichen Moral ihr Mittel zur Macht errieth... Und in der That,
das ist meine Einsicht: die Lehrer, die Führer der Menschheit,
Theologen insgesammt, waren insgesammt auch décadents: daher die
Umwerthung aller Werthe ins Lebensfeindliche, daher die Moral...
Definition der Moral: Moral - die Idiosynkrasie von décadents, mit
der Hinterabsicht, sich am Leben zu rächen - und mit Erfolg. Ich lege
Werth auf diese Definition. -


8.

- Hat man mich verstanden? - Ich habe eben kein Wort gesagt, das ich
nicht schon vor fünf Jahren durch den Mund Zarathustras gesagt hätte.
- Die Entdeckung der christlichen Moral ist ein Ereigniss, das
nicht seines Gleichen hat, eine wirkliche Katastrophe. Wer über sie
aufklärt, ist eine force majeure, ein Schicksal, - er bricht die
Geschichte der Menschheit in zwei Stücke. Man lebt vor ihm, man lebt
nach ihm... Der Blitz der Wahrheit traf gerade das, was bisher am
Höchsten stand: wer begreift, was da vernichtet wurde, mag zusehn,
ob er überhaupt noch Etwas in den Händen hat. Alles, was bisher
"Wahrheit" hiess, ist als die schädlichste, tückischste,
unterirdischste Form der Lüge erkannt; der heilige Vorwand, die
Menschheit zu "verbessern" als die List, das Leben selbst auszusaugen,
blutarm zu machen. Moral als Vampyrismus... Wer die Moral entdeckt,
hat den Unwerth aller Werthe mit entdeckt, an die man glaubt oder
geglaubt hat; er sieht in den verehrtesten, in den selbst heilig
gesprochnen Typen des Menschen nichts Ehrwürdiges mehr, er sieht die
verhängnissvollste Art von Missgeburten darin, verhängnissvoll, weil
sie fascinirten... Der Begriff "Gott" erfunden als Gegensatz-Begriff
zum Leben, - in ihm alles Schädliche, Vergiftende, Verleumderische,
die ganze Todfeindschaft gegen das Leben in eine entsetzliche Einheit
gebracht! Der Begriff "Jenseits", "wahre Welt" erfunden, um die
einzige Welt zu entwerthen, die es giebt, - um kein Ziel, keine
Vernunft, keine Aufgabe für unsre Erden-Realität übrig zu behalten!
Der Begriff "Seele", "Geist", zuletzt gar noch "unsterbliche Seele",
erfunden, um den Leib zu verachten, um ihn krank - "heilig" - zu
machen, um allen Dingen, die Ernst im Leben verdienen, den Fragen von
Nahrung, Wohnung, geistiger Diät, Krankenbehandlung, Reinlichkeit,
Wetter, einen schauerlichen Leichtsinn entgegenzubringen! Statt der
Gesundheit das "Heil der Seele" - will sagen eine folie circulaire
zwischen Busskrampf und Erlösungs-Hysterie! Der Begriff "Sünde"
erfunden sammt dem zugehörigen Folter-Instrument, dem Begriff "freier
Wille", um die Instinkte zu verwirren, um das Misstrauen gegen
die Instinkte zur zweiten Natur zu machen! Im Begriff des
"Selbstlosen", des "Sich-selbst-Verleugnenden" das eigentliche
décadence-Abzeichen, das Gelockt-werden vom Schädlichen, das
Seinen-Nutzen-nicht-mehr-finden-können, die Selbst-Zerstörung zum
Werthzeichen überhaupt gemacht, zur "Pflicht", zur "Heiligkeit", zum
"Göttlichen" im Menschen! Endlich - es ist das Furchtbarste - im
Begriff des guten Menschen die Partei alles Schwachen, Kranken,
Missrathnen, An-sich-selber-Leidenden genommen, alles dessen, was
zu Grunde gehn soll -, das Gesetz der Selektion gekreuzt, ein Ideal
aus dem Widerspruch gegen den stolzen und wohlgerathenen, gegen den
jasagenden, gegen den zukunftsgewissen, zukunftverbürgenden Menschen
gemacht - dieser heisst nunmehr der Böse... Und das Alles wurde
geglaubt als Moral! - Ecrasez l'infâme!--


9.

- Hat man mich verstanden? - Dionysos gegen den Gekreuzigten...


================================================================================
[The Case of Wagner (바그너의 경우)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Also sprach Zarathustra: Ein Buch für Alle und Keinen
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Also sprach Zarathustra: Ein Buch für Alle und Keinen

Author: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche


        
Release date: January 1, 2005 [eBook #7205]
                Most recently updated: February 12, 2023

Language: German

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/7205

Credits: Peter Bellen


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALSO SPRACH ZARATHUSTRA: EIN BUCH FÜR ALLE UND KEINEN ***

cover




Also sprach Zarathustra

Ein Buch für Alle und Keinen

von Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche




Inhaltsverzeichnis


 Erster Theil
 Zarathustra’s Vorrede
 Die Reden Zarathustra’s
 Von den drei Verwandlungen
 Von den Lehrstühlen der Tugend
 Von den Hinterweltlern
 Von den Verächtern des Leibes
 Von den Freuden- und Leidenschaften
 Vom bleichen Verbrecher
 Vom Lesen und Schreiben
 Vom Baum am Berge
 Von den Predigern des Todes
 Vom Krieg und Kriegsvolke
 Vom neuen Götzen
 Von den Fliegen des Marktes
 Von der Keuschheit
 Vom Freunde
 Von tausend und Einem Ziele
 Von der Nächstenliebe
 Vom Wege des Schaffenden
 Von alten und jungen Weiblein
 Vom Biss der Natter
 Von Kind und Ehe
 Vom freien Tode
 Von der schenkenden Tugend

 Zweiter Theil
 Das Kind mit dem Spiegel
 Auf den glückseligen Inseln
 Von den Mitleidigen
 Von den Priestern
 Von den Tugendhaften
 Vom Gesindel
 Von den Taranteln
 Von den berühmten Weisen
 Das Nachtlied
 Das Tanzlied
 Das Grablied
 Von der Selbst-Überwindung
 Von den Erhabenen
 Vom Lande der Bildung
 Von der unbefleckten Erkenntniss
 Von den Gelehrten
 Von den Dichtern
 Von grossen Ereignissen
 Der Wahrsager
 Von der Erlösung
 Von der Menschen-Klugheit
 Die stillste Stunde

 Dritter Theil
 Der Wanderer
 Vom Gesicht und Räthsel
 Von der Seligkeit wider Willen
 Vor Sonnen-Aufgang
 Von der verkleinernden Tugend
 Auf dem Ölberge
 Vom Vorübergehen
 Von den Abtrünnigen
 Die Heimkehr
 Von den drei Bösen
 Vom Geist der Schwere
 Von alten und neuen Tafeln
 Der Genesende
 Von der grossen Sehnsucht
 Das andere Tanzlied
 Die sieben Siegel (Oder: das Ja- und Amen-Lied)

 Vierter und letzter Theil
 Das Honig-Opfer
 Der Nothschrei
 Gespräch mit den Königen
 Der Blutegel
 Der Zauberer
 Ausser Dienst
 Der hässlichste Mensch
 Der freiwillige Bettler
 Der Schatten
 Mittags
 Die Begrüssung
 Das Abendmahl
 Vom höheren Menschen
 Das Lied der Schwermuth
 Von der Wissenschaft
 Unter Töchtern der Wüste
 Die Erweckung
 Das Eselsfest
 Das Nachtwandler-Lied
 Das Zeichen




Erster Theil


Zarathustra’s Vorrede.

1.

Als Zarathustra dreissig Jahr alt war, verliess er seine Heimat und den
See seiner Heimat und ging in das Gebirge. Hier genoss er seines
Geistes und seiner Einsamkeit und wurde dessen zehn Jahr nicht müde.
Endlich aber verwandelte sich sein Herz,—und eines Morgens stand er mit
der Morgenröthe auf, trat vor die Sonne hin und sprach zu ihr also:

„Du grosses Gestirn! Was wäre dein Glück, wenn du nicht Die hättest,
welchen du leuchtest!

Zehn Jahre kamst du hier herauf zu meiner Höhle: du würdest deines
Lichtes und dieses Weges satt geworden sein, ohne mich, meinen Adler
und meine Schlange.

Aber wir warteten deiner an jedem Morgen, nahmen dir deinen Überfluss
ab und segneten dich dafür.

Siehe! Ich bin meiner Weisheit überdrüssig, wie die Biene, die des
Honigs zu viel gesammelt hat, ich bedarf der Hände, die sich
ausstrecken.

Ich möchte verschenken und austheilen, bis die Weisen unter den
Menschen wieder einmal ihrer Thorheit und die Armen einmal ihres
Reichthums froh geworden sind.

Dazu muss ich in die Tiefe steigen: wie du des Abends thust, wenn du
hinter das Meer gehst und noch der Unterwelt Licht bringst, du
überreiches Gestirn!

Ich muss, gleich dir, _untergehen_, wie die Menschen es nennen, zu
denen ich hinab will.

So segne mich denn, du ruhiges Auge, das ohne Neid auch ein
allzugrosses Glück sehen kann!

Segne den Becher, welcher überfliessen will, dass das Wasser golden aus
ihm fliesse und überallhin den Abglanz deiner Wonne trage!

Siehe! Dieser Becher will wieder leer werden, und Zarathustra will
wieder Mensch werden.“

—Also begann Zarathustra’s Untergang.

2.

Zarathustra stieg allein das Gebirge abwärts und Niemand begegnete ihm.
Als er aber in die Wälder kam, stand auf einmal ein Greis vor ihm, der
seine heilige Hütte verlassen hatte, um Wurzeln im Walde zu suchen. Und
also sprach der Greis zu Zarathustra:

Nicht fremd ist mir dieser Wanderer: vor manchem Jahre gieng er hier
vorbei. Zarathustra hiess er; aber er hat sich verwandelt. Damals
trugst du deine Asche zu Berge: willst du heute dein Feuer in die
Thäler tragen? Fürchtest du nicht des Brandstifters Strafen?

Ja, ich erkenne Zarathustra. Rein ist sein Auge, und an seinem Munde
birgt sich kein Ekel. Geht er nicht daher wie ein Tänzer?

Verwandelt ist Zarathustra, zum Kind ward Zarathustra, ein Erwachter
ist Zarathustra: was willst du nun bei den Schlafenden?

Wie im Meere lebtest du in der Einsamkeit, und das Meer trug dich.
Wehe, du willst an’s Land steigen? Wehe, du willst deinen Leib wieder
selber schleppen?

Zarathustra antwortete: „Ich liebe die Menschen.“

Warum, sagte der Heilige, gieng ich doch in den Wald und die Einöde?
War es nicht, weil ich die Menschen allzu sehr liebte?

Jetzt liebe ich Gott: die Menschen liebe ich nicht. Der Mensch ist mir
eine zu unvollkommene Sache. Liebe zum Menschen würde mich umbringen.

Zarathustra antwortete: „Was sprach ich von Liebe! Ich bringe den
Menschen ein Geschenk.“

Gieb ihnen Nichts, sagte der Heilige. Nimm ihnen lieber Etwas ab und
trage es mit ihnen—das wird ihnen am wohlsten thun: wenn er dir nur
wohlthut!

Und willst du ihnen geben, so gieb nicht mehr, als ein Almosen, und
lass sie noch darum betteln!

„Nein, antwortete Zarathustra, ich gebe kein Almosen. Dazu bin ich
nicht arm genug.“

Der Heilige lachte über Zarathustra und sprach also: So sieh zu, dass
sie deine Schätze annehmen! Sie sind misstrauisch gegen die Einsiedler
und glauben nicht, dass wir kommen, um zu schenken.

Unsre Schritte klingen ihnen zu einsam durch die Gassen. Und wie wenn
sie Nachts in ihren Betten einen Mann gehen hören, lange bevor die
Sonne aufsteht, so fragen sie sich wohl: wohin will der Dieb?

Gehe nicht zu den Menschen und bleibe im Walde! Gehe lieber noch zu den
Thieren! Warum willst du nicht sein, wie ich,—ein Bär unter Bären, ein
Vogel unter Vögeln?

„Und was macht der Heilige im Walde?“ fragte Zarathustra.

Der Heilige antwortete: Ich mache Lieder und singe sie, und wenn ich
Lieder mache, lache, weine und brumme ich: also lobe ich Gott.

Mit Singen, Weinen, Lachen und Brummen lobe ich den Gott, der mein Gott
ist. Doch was bringst du uns zum Geschenke?

Als Zarathustra diese Worte gehört hatte, grüsste er den Heiligen und
sprach: „Was hätte ich euch zu geben! Aber lasst mich schnell davon,
dass ich euch Nichts nehme!“—Und so trennten sie sich von einander, der
Greis und der Mann, lachend, gleichwie zwei Knaben lachen.

Als Zarathustra aber allein war, sprach er also zu seinem Herzen:
„Sollte es denn möglich sein! Dieser alte Heilige hat in seinem Walde
noch Nichts davon gehört, dass _Gott todt_ ist!“—

3.

Als Zarathustra in die nächste Stadt kam, die an den Wäldern liegt,
fand er daselbst viel Volk versammelt auf dem Markte: denn es war
verheissen worden, das man einen Seiltänzer sehen solle. Und
Zarathustra sprach also zum Volke:

Ich lehre euch den Übermenschen. Der Mensch ist Etwas, das überwunden
werden soll. Was habt ihr gethan, ihn zu überwinden?

„Alle Wesen bisher schufen etwas über sich hinaus: und ihr wollt die
Ebbe dieser großen Flut sein und lieber noch zum Thiere zurückgehen, als
den Menschen zu überwinden?“

Was ist der Affe für den Menschen? Ein Gelächter oder eine schmerzliche
Scham. Und ebendas soll der Mensch für den Übermenschen sein: ein
Gelächter oder eine schmerzliche Scham.

Ihr habt den Weg vom Wurme zum Menschen gemacht, und Vieles ist in euch
noch Wurm. Einst wart ihr Affen, und auch jetzt ist der Mensch mehr
Affe, als irgend ein Affe.

Wer aber der Weiseste von euch ist, der ist auch nur ein Zwiespalt und
Zwitter von Pflanze und von Gespenst. Aber heisse ich euch zu
Gespenstern oder Pflanzen werden?

Seht, ich lehre euch den Übermenschen!

Der Übermensch ist der Sinn der Erde. Euer Wille sage: der Übermensch
_sei_ der Sinn der Erde!

Ich beschwöre euch, meine Brüder, _bleibt der Erde treu_ und glaubt
Denen nicht, welche euch von überirdischen Hoffnungen reden!
Giftmischer sind es, ob sie es wissen oder nicht.

Verächter des Lebens sind es, Absterbende und selber Vergiftete, deren
die Erde müde ist: so mögen sie dahinfahren!

Einst war der Frevel an Gott der grösste Frevel, aber Gott starb, und
damit auch diese Frevelhaften. An der Erde zu freveln ist jetzt das
Furchtbarste und die Eingeweide des Unerforschlichen höher zu achten,
als der Sinn der Erde!

Einst blickte die Seele verächtlich auf den Leib: und damals war diese
Verachtung das Höchste:—sie wollte ihn mager, grässlich, verhungert. So
dachte sie ihm und der Erde zu entschlüpfen.

Oh diese Seele war selbst noch mager, grässlich und verhungert: und
Grausamkeit war die Wollust dieser Seele!

Aber auch ihr noch, meine Brüder, sprecht mir: was kündet euer Leib von
eurer Seele? Ist eure Seele nicht Armuth und Schmutz und ein
erbärmliches Behagen?

Wahrlich, ein schmutziger Strom ist der Mensch. Man muss schon ein Meer
sein, um einen schmutzigen Strom aufnehmen zu können, ohne unrein zu
werden.

Seht, ich lehre euch den Übermenschen: der ist diess Meer, in ihm kann
eure grosse Verachtung untergehn.

Was ist das Grösste, das ihr erleben könnt? Das ist die Stunde der
grossen Verachtung. Die Stunde, in der euch auch euer Glück zum Ekel
wird und ebenso eure Vernunft und eure Tugend.

Die Stunde, wo ihr sagt: „Was liegt an meinem Glücke! Es ist Armuth und
Schmutz, und ein erbärmliches Behagen. Aber mein Glück sollte das
Dasein selber rechtfertigen!“

Die Stunde, wo ihr sagt: „Was liegt an meiner Vernunft! Begehrt sie
nach Wissen wie der Löwe nach seiner Nahrung? Sie ist Armuth und
Schmutz und ein erbärmliches Behagen!“

Die Stunde, wo ihr sagt: „Was liegt an meiner Tugend! Noch hat sie mich
nicht rasen gemacht. Wie müde bin ich meines Guten und meines Bösen!
Alles das ist Armuth und Schmutz und ein erbärmliches Behagen!“

Die Stunde, wo ihr sagt: „Was liegt an meiner Gerechtigkeit! Ich sehe
nicht, dass ich Gluth und Kohle wäre. Aber der Gerechte ist Gluth und
Kohle!“

Die Stunde, wo ihr sagt: „Was liegt an meinem Mitleiden! Ist nicht
Mitleid das Kreuz, an das Der genagelt wird, der die Menschen liebt?
Aber mein Mitleiden ist keine Kreuzigung.“

Spracht ihr schon so? Schriet ihr schon so? Ach, dass ich euch schon so
schreien gehört hatte!

Nicht eure Sünde—eure Genügsamkeit schreit gen Himmel, euer Geiz selbst
in eurer Sünde schreit gen Himmel!

Wo ist doch der Blitz, der euch mit seiner Zunge lecke? Wo ist der
Wahnsinn, mit dem ihr geimpft werden müsstet?

Seht, ich lehre euch den Übermenschen: der ist dieser Blitz, der ist
dieser Wahnsinn!—

Als Zarathustra so gesprochen hatte, schrie Einer aus dem Volke: „Wir
hörten nun genug von dem Seiltänzer; nun lasst uns ihn auch sehen!“ Und
alles Volk lachte über Zarathustra. Der Seiltänzer aber, welcher
glaubte, dass das Wort ihm gälte, machte sich an sein Werk.

4.

Zarathustra aber sahe das Volk an und wunderte sich. Dann sprach er
also:

Der Mensch ist ein Seil, geknüpft zwischen Thier und Übermensch,—ein
Seil über einem Abgrunde.

Ein gefährliches Hinüber, ein gefährliches Auf-dem-Wege, ein
gefährliches Zurückblicken, ein gefährliches Schaudern und
Stehenbleiben.

Was gross ist am Menschen, das ist, dass er eine Brücke und kein Zweck
ist: was geliebt werden kann am Menschen, das ist, dass er ein
_Übergang_ und ein _Untergang_ ist.

Ich liebe Die, welche nicht zu leben wissen, es sei denn als
Untergehende, denn es sind die Hinübergehenden.

Ich liebe die grossen Verachtenden, weil sie die grossen Verehrenden
sind und Pfeile der Sehnsucht nach dem andern Ufer.

Ich liebe Die, welche nicht erst hinter den Sternen einen Grund suchen,
unterzugehen und Opfer zu sein: sondern die sich der Erde opfern, dass
die Erde einst der Übermenschen werde.

Ich liebe Den, welcher lebt, damit er erkenne, und welcher erkennen
will, damit einst der Übermensch lebe. Und so will er seinen Untergang.

Ich liebe Den, welcher arbeitet und erfindet, dass er dem Übermenschen
das Haus baue und zu ihm Erde, Thier und Pflanze vorbereite: denn so
will er seinen Untergang.

Ich liebe Den, welcher seine Tugend liebt: denn Tugend ist Wille zum
Untergang und ein Pfeil der Sehnsucht.

Ich liebe Den, welcher nicht einen Tropfen Geist für sich zurückbehält,
sondern ganz der Geist seiner Tugend sein will: so schreitet er als
Geist über die Brücke.

Ich liebe Den, welcher aus seiner Tugend seinen Hang und sein
Verhängniss macht: so will er um seiner Tugend willen noch leben und
nicht mehr leben.

Ich liebe Den, welcher nicht zu viele Tugenden haben will. Eine Tugend
ist mehr Tugend, als zwei, weil sie mehr Knoten ist, an den sich das
Verhängniss hängt.

Ich liebe Den, dessen Seele sich verschwendet, der nicht Dank haben
will und nicht zurückgiebt: denn er schenkt immer und will sich nicht
bewahren.

Ich liebe Den, welcher sich schämt, wenn der Würfel zu seinem Glücke
fällt und der dann fragt: bin ich denn ein falscher Spieler?—denn er
will zu Grunde gehen.

Ich liebe Den, welcher goldne Worte seinen Thaten voraus wirft und
immer noch mehr hält, als er verspricht: denn er will seinen Untergang.

Ich liebe Den, welcher die Zukünftigen rechtfertigt und die Vergangenen
erlöst: denn er will an den Gegenwärtigen zu Grunde gehen.

Ich liebe Den, welcher seinen Gott züchtigt, weil er seinen Gott liebt:
denn er muss am Zorne seines Gottes zu Grunde gehen.

Ich liebe Den, dessen Seele tief ist auch in der Verwundung, und der an
einem kleinen Erlebnisse zu Grunde gehen kann: so geht er gerne über
die Brücke.

Ich liebe Den, dessen Seele übervoll ist, so dass er sich selber
vergisst, und alle Dinge in ihm sind: so werden alle Dinge sein
Untergang.

Ich liebe Den, der freien Geistes und freien Herzes ist: so ist sein
Kopf nur das Eingeweide seines Herzens, sein Herz aber treibt ihn zum
Untergang.

Ich liebe alle Die, welche schwere Tropfen sind, einzeln fallend aus
der dunklen Wolke, die über den Menschen hängt: sie verkündigen, dass
der Blitz kommt, und gehn als Verkündiger zu Grunde.

Seht, ich bin ein Verkündiger des Blitzes und ein schwerer Tropfen aus
der Wolke: dieser Blitz aber heisst Übermensch.—

5.

Als Zarathustra diese Worte gesprochen hatte, sahe er wieder das Volk
an und schwieg. „Da stehen sie“, sprach er zu seinem Herzen, „da lachen
sie: sie verstehen mich nicht, ich bin nicht der Mund für diese Ohren.

Muss man ihnen erst die Ohren zerschlagen, dass sie lernen, mit den
Augen hören. Muss man rasseln gleich Pauken und Busspredigern? Oder
glauben sie nur dem Stammelnden?

Sie haben etwas, worauf sie stolz sind. Wie nennen sie es doch, was sie
stolz macht? Bildung nennen sie’s, es zeichnet sie aus vor den
Ziegenhirten.

Drum hören sie ungern von sich das Wort „Verachtung“. So will ich denn
zu ihrem Stolze reden.

So will ich ihnen vom Verächtlichsten sprechen: das aber ist der
_letzte Mensch_.“

Und also sprach Zarathustra zum Volke:

Es ist an der Zeit, dass der Mensch sich sein Ziel stecke. Es ist an
der Zeit, dass der Mensch den Keim seiner höchsten Hoffnung pflanze.

Noch ist sein Boden dazu reich genug. Aber dieser Boden wird einst arm
und zahm sein, und kein hoher Baum wird mehr aus ihm wachsen können.

Wehe! Es kommt die Zeit, wo der Mensch nicht mehr den Pfeil seiner
Sehnsucht über den Menschen hinaus wirft, und die Sehne seines Bogens
verlernt hat, zu schwirren!

Ich sage euch: man muss noch Chaos in sich haben, um einen tanzenden
Stern gebären zu können. Ich sage euch: ihr habt noch Chaos in euch.

Wehe! Es kommt die Zeit, wo der Mensch keinen Stern mehr gebären wird.
Wehe! Es kommt die Weit des verächtlichsten Menschen, der sich selber
nicht mehr verachten kann.

Seht! Ich zeige euch den _letzten Menschen_.

„Was ist Liebe? Was ist Schöpfung? Was ist Sehnsucht? Was ist Stern“—so
fragt der letzte Mensch und blinzelt.

Die Erde ist dann klein geworden, und auf ihr hüpft der letzte Mensch,
der Alles klein macht. Sein Geschlecht ist unaustilgbar, wie der
Erdfloh; der letzte Mensch lebt am längsten.

„Wir haben das Glück erfunden“—sagen die letzten Menschen und blinzeln.

Sie haben die Gegenden verlassen, wo es hart war zu leben: denn man
braucht Wärme. Man liebt noch den Nachbar und reibt sich an ihm: denn
man braucht Wärme.

Krankwerden und Misstrauen-haben gilt ihnen sündhaft: man geht achtsam
einher. Ein Thor, der noch über Steine oder Menschen stolpert!

Ein wenig Gift ab und zu: das macht angenehme Träume. Und viel Gift
zuletzt, zu einem angenehmen Sterben.

Man arbeitet noch, denn Arbeit ist eine Unterhaltung. Aber man sorgt,
dass die Unterhaltung nicht angreife.

Man wird nicht mehr arm und reich: Beides ist zu beschwerlich. Wer will
noch regieren? Wer noch gehorchen? Beides ist zu beschwerlich.

Kein Hirt und Eine Heerde! Jeder will das Gleiche, Jeder ist gleich:
wer anders fühlt, geht freiwillig in’s Irrenhaus.

„Ehemals war alle Welt irre“—sagen die Feinsten und blinzeln.

Man ist klug und weiss Alles, was geschehn ist: so hat man kein Ende zu
spotten. Man zankt sich noch, aber man versöhnt sich bald—sonst
verdirbt es den Magen.

Man hat sein Lüstchen für den Tag und sein Lüstchen für die Nacht: aber
man ehrt die Gesundheit.

„Wir haben das Glück erfunden“—sagen die letzten Menschen und blinzeln—

Und hier endete die erste Rede Zarathustra’s, welche man auch „die
Vorrede“ heisst: denn an dieser Stelle unterbrach ihn das Geschrei und
die Lust der Menge. „Gieb uns diesen letzten Menschen, oh
Zarathustra,—so riefen sie—mache uns zu diesen letzten Menschen! So
schenken wir dir den Übermenschen!“ Und alles Volk jubelte und
schnalzte mit der Zunge. Zarathustra aber wurde traurig und sagte zu
seinem Herzen:

Sie verstehen mich nicht: ich bin nicht der Mund für diese Ohren.

Zu lange wohl lebte ich im Gebirge, zu viel horchte ich auf Bäche und
Bäume: nun rede ich ihnen gleich den Ziegenhirten.

Unbewegt ist meine Seele und hell wie das Gebirge am Vormittag. Aber
sie meinen, ich sei kalt und ein Spötter in furchtbaren Spässen.

Und nun blicken sie mich an und lachen: und indem sie lachen, hassen
sie mich noch. Es ist Eis in ihrem Lachen.

6.

Da aber geschah Etwas, das jeden Mund stumm und jedes Auge starr
machte. Inzwischen nämlich hatte der Seiltänzer sein Werk begonnen: er
war aus einer kleiner Thür hinausgetreten und gieng über das Seil,
welches zwischen zwei Thürmen gespannt war, also, dass es über dem
Markte und dem Volke hieng. Als er eben in der Mitte seines Weges war,
öffnete sich die kleine Thür noch einmal, und ein bunter Gesell, einem
Possenreisser gleich, sprang heraus und gieng mit schnellen Schritten
dem Ersten nach. „Vorwärts, Lahmfuss, rief seine fürchterliche Stimme,
vorwärts Faulthier, Schleichhändler, Bleichgesicht! Dass ich dich nicht
mit meiner Ferse kitzle! Was treibst du hier zwischen Thürmen? In den
Thurm gehörst du, einsperren sollte man dich, einem Bessern, als du
bist, sperrst du die freie Bahn!“—Und mit jedem Worte kam er ihm näher
und näher: als er aber nur noch einen Schritt hinter ihm war, da
geschah das Erschreckliche, das jeden Mund stumm und jedes Auge starr
machte:—er stiess ein Geschrei aus wie ein Teufel und sprang über Den
hinweg, der ihm im Wege war. Dieser aber, als er so seinen Nebenbuhler
siegen sah, verlor dabei den Kopf und das Seil; er warf seine Stange
weg und schoss schneller als diese, wie ein Wirbel von Armen und
Beinen, in die Tiefe. Der Markt und das Volk glich dem Meere, wenn der
Sturm hineinfährt: Alles floh aus einander und übereinander, und am
meisten dort, wo der Körper niederschlagen musste.

Zarathustra aber blieb stehen, und gerade neben ihn fiel der Körper
hin, übel zugerichtet und zerbrochen, aber noch nicht todt. Nach einer
Weile kam dem Zerschmetterten das Bewusstsein zurück, und er sah
Zarathustra neben sich knieen. „Was machst du da? sagte er endlich, ich
wusste es lange, dass mir der Teufel ein Bein stellen werde. Nun
schleppt er mich zur Hölle: willst du’s ihm wehren?“

„Bei meiner Ehre, Freund, antwortete Zarathustra, das giebt es Alles
nicht, wovon du sprichst: es giebt keinen Teufel und keine Hölle. Deine
Seele wird noch schneller todt sein als dein Leib: fürchte nun Nichts
mehr!“

Der Mann blickte misstrauisch auf. „Wenn du die Wahrheit sprichst,
sagte er dann, so verliere ich Nichts, wenn ich das Leben verliere. Ich
bin nicht viel mehr als ein Thier, das man tanzen gelehrt hat, durch
Schläge und schmale Bissen.“

„Nicht doch, sprach Zarathustra; du hast aus der Gefahr deinen Beruf
gemacht, daran ist Nichts zu verachten. Nun gehst du an deinem Beruf zu
Grunde: dafür will ich dich mit meinen Händen begraben.“

Als Zarathustra diess gesagt hatte, antwortete der Sterbende nicht
mehr; aber er bewegte die Hand, wie als ob er die Hand Zarathustra’s
zum Danke suche.—

7.

Inzwischen kam der Abend, und der Markt barg sich in Dunkelheit: da
verlief sich das Volk, denn selbst Neugierde und Schrecken werden müde.
Zarathustra aber sass neben dem Todten auf der Erde und war in Gedanken
versunken: so vergass er die Zeit. Endlich aber wurde es Nacht, und ein
kalter Wind blies über den Einsamen. Da erhob sich Zarathustra und
sagte zu seinem Herzen:

Wahrlich, einen schönen Fischfang that heute Zarathustra! Keinen
Menschen fieng er, wohl aber einen Leichnam.

Unheimlich ist das menschliche Dasein und immer noch ohne Sinn: ein
Possenreisser kann ihm zum Verhängniss werden.

Ich will die Menschen den Sinn ihres Seins lehren: welcher ist der
Übermensch, der Blitz aus der dunklen Wolke Mensch.

Aber noch bin ich ihnen ferne, und mein Sinn redet nicht zu ihren
Sinnen. Eine Mitte bin ich noch den Menschen zwischen einem Narren und
einem Leichnam.

Dunkel ist die Nacht, dunkel sind die Wege Zarathustra’s. Komm, du
kalter und steifer Gefährte! Ich trage dich dorthin, wo ich dich mit
meinen Händen begrabe.

8.

Als Zarathustra diess zu seinem Herzen gesagt hatte, lud er den
Leichnam auf seinem Rücken und machte sich auf den Weg. Und noch nicht
war er hundert Schritte gegangen, da schlich ein Mensch an ihn heran
und flüsterte ihm in’s Ohr—und siehe! Der, welcher redete, war der
Possenreisser vom Thurme. „Geh weg von dieser Stadt, oh Zarathustra,
sprach er; es hassen dich hier zu Viele. Es hassen dich die Guten und
Gerechten und sie nennen dich ihren Feind und Verächter; es hassen dich
die Gläubigen des rechten Glaubens, und sie nennen dich die Gefahr der
Menge. Dein Glück war es, dass man über dich lachte: und wahrlich, du
redetest gleich einem Possenreisser. Dein Glück war es, dass du dich
dem todten Hunde geselltest; als du dich so erniedrigtest, hast du dich
selber für heute errettet. Geh aber fort aus dieser Stadt—oder morgen
springe ich über dich hinweg, ein Lebendiger über einen Todten.“ Und
als er diess gesagt hatte, verschwand der Mensch; Zarathustra aber
gieng weiter durch die dunklen Gassen.

Am Thore der Stadt begegneten ihm die Todtengräber: sie leuchteten ihm
mit der Fackel in’s Gesicht, erkannten Zarathustra und spotteten sehr
über ihn. „Zarathustra trägt den todten Hund davon: brav, dass
Zarathustra zum Todtengräber wurde! Denn unsere Hände sind zu reinlich
für diesen Braten. Will Zarathustra wohl dem Teufel seinen Bissen
stehlen? Nun wohlan! Und gut Glück zur Mahlzeit! Wenn nur nicht der
Teufel ein besserer Dieb ist, als Zarathustra! —er stiehlt die Beide,
er frisst sie Beide!“ Und sie lachten mit einander und steckten die
Köpfe zusammen.

Zarathustra sagte dazu kein Wort und gieng seines Weges. Als er zwei
Stunden gegangen war, an Wäldern und Sümpfen vorbei, da hatte er zu
viel das hungrige Geheul der Wölfe gehört, und ihm selber kam der
Hunger. So blieb er an einem einsamen Hause stehn, in dem ein Licht
brannte.

Der Hunger überfällt mich, sagte Zarathustra, wie ein Räuber. In
Wäldern und Sümpfen überfällt mich mein Hunger und in tiefer Nacht.

Wunderliche Launen hat mein Hunger. Oft kommt er mir erst nach der
Mahlzeit, und heute kam er den ganzen Tag nicht: wo weilte er doch?

Und damit schlug Zarathustra an das Thor des Hauses. Ein alter Mann
erschien; er trug das Licht und fragte: „Wer kommt zu mir und zu meinem
schlimmen Schlafe?“

„Ein Lebendiger und ein Todter, sagte Zarathustra. Gebt mir zu essen
und zu trinken, ich vergass es am Tage. Der, welcher den Hungrigen
speiset, erquickt seine eigene Seele: so spricht die Weisheit.“

Der Alte gieng fort, kam aber gleich zurück und bot Zarathustra Brod
und Wein. „Eine böse Gegend ist’s für Hungernde, sagte er; darum wohne
ich hier. Thier und Mensch kommen zu mir, dem Einsiedler. Aber heisse
auch deinen Gefährten essen und trinken, er ist müder als du.“
Zarathustra antwortete: „Todt ist mein Gefährte, ich werde ihn
schwerlich dazu überreden.“ „Das geht mich Nichts an, sagte der Alte
mürrisch; wer an meinem Hause anklopft, muss auch nehmen, was ich ihm
biete. Esst und gehabt euch wohl!“—

Darauf gieng Zarathustra wieder zwei Stunden und vertraute dem Wege und
dem Lichte der Sterne: denn er war ein gewohnter Nachtgänger und liebte
es, allem Schlafenden in’s Gesicht zu sehn. Als aber der Morgen graute,
fand sich Zarathustra in einem tiefen Walde, und kein Weg zeigte sich
ihm mehr. Da legte er den Todten in einen hohlen Baum sich zu
Häupten—denn er wollte ihn vor den Wölfen schützen—und sich selber auf
den Boden und das Moos. Und alsbald schlief er ein, müden Leibes, aber
mit einer unbewegten Seele.

8.

Lange schlief Zarathustra, und nicht nur die Morgenröthe gieng über
sein Antlitz, sondern auch der Vormittag. Endlich aber that sein Auge
sich auf: verwundert sah Zarathustra in den Wald und die Stille,
verwundert sah er in sich hinein. Dann erhob er sich schnell, wie ein
Seefahrer, der mit Einem Male Land sieht, und jauchzte: denn er sah
eine neue Wahrheit. Und also redete er dann zu seinem Herzen:

Ein Licht gieng mir auf: Gefährten brauche ich und lebendige,—nicht
todte Gefährten und Leichname, die ich mit mir trage, wohin ich will.

Sondern lebendige Gefährten brauche ich, die mir folgen, weil sie sich
selber folgen wollen—und dorthin, wo ich will.

Ein Licht gieng mir auf: nicht zum Volke rede Zarathustra, sondern zu
Gefährten! Nicht soll Zarathustra einer Heerde Hirt und Hund werden!

Viele wegzulocken von der Heerde—dazu kam ich. Zürnen soll mir Volk und
Heerde: Räuber will Zarathustra den Hirten heissen.

Hirten sage ich, aber sie nennen sich die Guten und Gerechten. Hirten
sage ich: aber sie nennen sich die Gläubigen des rechten Glaubens.

Siehe die Guten und Gerechten! Wen hassen sie am meisten? Den, der
zerbricht ihre Tafeln der Werthe, den Brecher, den Verbrecher:—das aber
ist der Schaffende.

Siehe die Gläubigen aller Glauben! Wen hassen sie am meisten? Den, der
zerbricht ihre Tafeln der Werthe, den Brecher, den Verbrecher:—das aber
ist der Schaffende.

Gefährten sucht der Schaffende und nicht Leichname, und auch nicht
Heerden und Gläubige. Die Mitschaffenden sucht der Schaffende, Die,
welche neue Werthe auf neue Tafeln schreiben.

Gefährten sucht der Schaffende, und Miterntende: denn Alles steht bei
ihm reif zur Ernte. Aber ihm fehlen die hundert Sicheln: so rauft er
Ähren aus und ist ärgerlich.

Gefährten sucht der Schaffende, und solche, die ihre Sicheln zu wetzen
wissen. Vernichter wird man sie heissen und Verächter des Guten und
Bösen. Aber die Erntenden sind es und die Feiernden.

Mitschaffende sucht Zarathustra, Miterntende und Mitfeiernde sucht
Zarathustra: was hat er mit Heerden und Hirten und Leichnamen zu
schaffen!

Und du, mein erster Gefährte, gehab dich wohl! Gut begrub ich dich in
deinem hohlen Baume, gut barg ich dich vor den Wölfen.

Aber ich scheide von dir, die Zeit ist um. Zwischen Morgenröthe und
Morgenröthe kam mir eine neue Wahrheit.

Nicht Hirt soll ich sein, nicht Todtengräber. Nicht reden einmal will
ich wieder mit dem Volke; zum letzten Male sprach ich zu einem Todten.

Den Schaffenden, den Erntenden, den Feiernden will ich mich zugesellen:
den Regenbogen will ich ihnen zeigen und alle die Treppen des
Übermenschen.

Den Einsiedlern werde ich mein Lied singen und den Zweisiedlern; und
wer noch Ohren hat für Unerhörtes, dem will ich sein Herz schwer machen
mit meinem Glücke.

Zu meinem Ziele will ich, ich gehe meinen Gang; über die Zögernden und
Saumseligen werde ich hinwegspringen. Also sei mein Gang ihr Untergang!

10.

Diess hatte Zarathustra zu seinem Herzen gesprochen, als die Sonne im
Mittag stand: da blickte er fragend in die Höhe—denn er hörte über sich
den scharfen Ruf eines Vogels. Und siehe! Ein Adler zog in weiten
Kreisen durch die Luft, und an ihm hieng eine Schlange, nicht einer
Beute gleich, sondern einer Freundin: denn sie hielt sich um seinen
Hals geringelt.

„Es sind meine Thiere!“ sagte Zarathustra und freute sich von Herzen.

„Das stolzeste Thier unter der Sonne und das klügste Thier unter der
Sonne—sie sind ausgezogen auf Kundschaft.

Erkunden wollen sie, ob Zarathustra noch lebe. Wahrlich, lebe ich noch?

Gefährlicher fand ich’s unter Menschen als unter Thieren, gefährlicher
Wege geht Zarathustra. Mögen mich meine Thiere führen!“

Als Zarathustra diess gesagt hatte, gedachte er der Worte des Heiligen
im Walde, seufzte und sprach also zu seinem Herzen:

Möchte ich klüger sein! Möchte ich klug von Grund aus sein, gleich
meiner Schlange!

Aber Unmögliches bitte ich da: so bitte ich denn meinen Stolz, dass er
immer mit meiner Klugheit gehe!

Und wenn mich einst meine Klugheit verlässt:—ach, sie liebt es,
davonzufliegen!—möge mein Stolz dann noch mit meiner Thorheit fliegen!

—Also begann Zarathustra’s Untergang.


Die Reden Zarathustra’s


Von den drei Verwandlungen

Drei Verwandlungen nenne ich euch des Geistes: wie der Geist zum Kamele
wird, und zum Löwen das Kameel, und zum Kinde zuletzt der Löwe.

Vieles Schwere giebt es dem Geiste, dem starken, tragsamen Geiste, dem
Ehrfurcht innewohnt: nach dem Schweren und Schwersten verlangt seine
Stärke.

Was ist schwer? so fragt der tragsame Geist, so kniet er nieder, dem
Kameele gleich, und will gut beladen sein.

Was ist das Schwerste, ihr Helden? so fragt der tragsame Geist, dass
ich es auf mich nehme und meiner Stärke froh werde.

Ist es nicht das: sich erniedrigen, um seinem Hochmuth wehe zu thun?
Seine Thorheit leuchten lassen, um seiner Weisheit zu spotten?

Oder ist es das: von unserer Sache scheiden, wenn sie ihren Sieg
feiert? Auf hohe Berge steigen, um den Versucher zu versuchen?

Oder ist es das: sich von Eicheln und Gras der Erkenntniss nähren und
um der Wahrheit willen an der Seele Hunger leiden?

Oder ist es das: krank sein und die Tröster heimschicken und mit Tauben
Freundschaft schliessen, die niemals hören, was du willst?

Oder ist es das: in schmutziges Wasser steigen, wenn es das Wasser der
Wahrheit ist, und kalte Frösche und heisse Kröten nicht von sich
weisen?

Oder ist es das: Die lieben, die uns verachten, und dem Gespenste die
Hand reichen, wenn es uns fürchten machen will?

Alles diess Schwerste nimmt der tragsame Geist auf sich: dem Kameele
gleich, das beladen in die Wüste eilt, also eilt er in seine Wüste.

Aber in der einsamsten Wüste geschieht die zweite Verwandlung: zum
Löwen wird hier der Geist, Freiheit will er sich erbeuten und Herr sein
in seiner eignen Wüste.

Seinen letzten Herrn sucht er sich hier: feind will er ihm werden und
seinem letzten Gotte, um Sieg will er mit dem grossen Drachen ringen.

Welches ist der grosse Drache, den der Geist nicht mehr Herr und Gott
heissen mag? „Du-sollst“ heisst der grosse Drache. Aber der Geist des
Löwen sagt „Ich will“.

„Du-sollst“ liegt ihm am Wege, goldfunkelnd, ein Schuppenthier, und auf
jeder Schuppe glänzt golden „Du-sollst!“

Tausendjährige Werthe glänzen an diesen Schuppen, und also spricht der
mächtigste aller Drachen „aller Werth der Dinge—der glänzt an mir.“

„Aller Werth ward schon geschaffen, und aller geschaffene Werth—das bin
ich. Wahrlich, es soll kein „Ich will“ mehr geben!“ Also spricht der
Drache.

Meine Brüder, wozu bedarf es des Löwen im Geiste? Was genügt nicht das
lastbare Thier, das entsagt und ehrfürchtig ist?

Neue Werthe schaffen—das vermag auch der Löwe noch nicht: aber Freiheit
sich schaffen zu neuem Schaffen—das vermag die Macht des Löwen.

Freiheit sich schaffen und ein heiliges Nein auch vor der Pflicht:
dazu, meine Brüder bedarf es des Löwen.

Recht sich nehmen zu neuen Werthen—das ist das furchtbarste Nehmen für
einen tragsamen und ehrfürchtigen Geist. Wahrlich, ein Rauben ist es
ihm und eines raubenden Thieres Sache.

Als sein Heiligstes liebte er einst das „Du-sollst“: nun muss er Wahn
und Willkür auch noch im Heiligsten finden, dass er sich Freiheit raube
von seiner Liebe: des Löwen bedarf es zu diesem Raube.

Aber sagt, meine Brüder, was vermag noch das Kind, das auch der Löwe
nicht vermochte? Was muss der raubende Löwe auch noch zum Kinde werden?

Unschuld ist das Kind und Vergessen, ein Neubeginnen, ein Spiel, ein
aus sich rollendes Rad, eine erste Bewegung, ein heiliges Ja-sagen.

Ja, zum Spiele des Schaffens, meine Brüder, bedarf es eines heiligen
Ja-sagens: _seinen_ Willen will nun der Geist, _seine_ Welt gewinnt
sich der Weltverlorene.

Drei Verwandlungen nannte ich euch des Geistes: wie der Geist zum
Kameele ward, und zum Löwen das Kameel, und der Löwe zuletzt zum Kinde.
—

Also sprach Zarathustra. Und damals weilte er in der Stadt, welche
genannt wird: die bunte Kuh.


Von den Lehrstühlen der Tugend

Man rühmte Zarathustra einen Weisen, der gut vom Schlafe und von der
Tugend zu reden wisse: sehr werde er geehrt und gelohnt dafür, und alle
Jünglinge sässen vor seinem Lehrstuhle. Zu ihm gieng Zarathustra, und
mit allen Jünglingen sass er vor seinem Lehrstuhle. Und also sprach der
Weise:

Ehre und Scham vor dem Schlafe! Das ist das Erste! Und Allen aus dem
Wege gehn, die schlecht schlafen und Nachts wachen!

Schamhaft ist noch der Dieb vor dem Schlafe: stets stiehlt er sich
leise durch die Nacht. Schamlos aber ist der Wächter der Nacht,
schamlos trägt er sein Horn.

Keine geringe Kunst ist schlafen: es thut schon Noth, den ganzen Tag
darauf hin zu wachen.

Zehn Mal musst du des Tages dich selber überwinden: das macht eine gute
Müdigkeit und ist Mohn der Seele.

Zehn Mal musst du dich wieder dir selber versöhnen; denn Überwindung
ist Bitterniss, und schlecht schläft der Unversöhnte.

Zehn Wahrheiten musst du des Tages finden: sonst suchst du noch des
Nachts nach Wahrheit, und deine Seele blieb hungrig.

Zehn Mal musst du lachen am Tage und heiter sein: sonst stört dich der
Magen in der Nacht, dieser Vater der Trübsal.

Wenige wissen das: aber man muss alle Tugenden haben, um gut zu
schlafen. Werde ich falsch Zeugniss reden? Werde ich ehebrechen?

Werde ich mich gelüsten lassen meines Nächsten Magd? Das Alles vertrüge
sich schlecht mit gutem Schlafe.

Und selbst wenn man alle Tugenden hat, muss man sich noch auf Eins
verstehn: selber die Tugenden zur rechten Zeit schlafen schicken.

Dass sie sich nicht mit einander zanken, die artigen Weiblein! Und über
dich, du Unglückseliger!

Friede mit Gott und dem Nachbar: so will es der gute Schlaf. Und Friede
auch noch mit des Nachbars Teufel! Sonst geht er bei dir des Nachts um.

Ehre der Obrigkeit und Gehorsam, und auch der krummen Obrigkeit! So
will es der gute Schlaf. Was kann ich dafür, dass die Macht gerne auf
krummen Beinen Wandelt?

Der soll mir immer der beste Hirt heissen, der sein Schaf auf die
grünste Aue führt: so verträgt es sich mit dem gutem Schlafe.

Viel Ehren will ich nicht, noch grosse Schätze: das entzündet die Milz.
Aber schlecht schläft es sich ohne einen guten Namen und einen kleinen
Schatz.

Eine kleine Gesellschaft ist mir willkommener als eine böse: doch muss
sie gehn und kommen zur rechten Zeit. So verträgt es sich mit gutem
Schlafe.

Sehr gefallen mir auch die Geistig-Armen: sie fördern den Schlaf. Selig
sind die, sonderlich, wenn man ihnen immer Recht giebt.

Also läuft der Tag dem Tugendsamen. Kommt nun die Nacht, so hüte ich
mich wohl, den Schlaf zu rufen! Nicht will er gerufen sein, der Schlaf,
der der Herr der Tugenden ist!

Sondern ich denke, was ich des Tages gethan und gedacht. Wiederkäuend
frage ich mich, geduldsam gleich einer Kuh: welches waren doch deine
zehn Überwindungen?

Und welches waren die zehn Versöhnungen und die zehn Wahrheiten und die
zehn Gelächter, mit denen sich mein Herz gütlich that?

Solcherlei erwägend und gewiegt von vierzig Gedanken, überfällt mich
auf einmal der Schlaf, der Ungerufne, der Herr der Tugenden.

Der Schlaf klopft mir auf meine Auge: da wird es schwer. Der Schlaf
berührt mir den Mund: da bleibt er offen.

Wahrlich, auf weichen Sohlen kommt er mir, der liebste der Diebe, und
stiehlt mir meine Gedanken: dumm stehe ich da wie dieser Lehrstuhl.

Aber nicht lange mehr stehe ich dann: da liege ich schon.—

Als Zarathustra den Weisen also sprechen hörte, lachte er bei sich im
Herzen: denn ihm war dabei ein Licht aufgegangen. Und also sprach er zu
seinem Herzen:

Ein Narr ist mir dieser Weise da mit seinen vierzig Gedanken: aber ich
glaube, dass er sich wohl auf das Schlafen versteht.

Glücklich schon, wer in der Nähe dieses Weisen wohnt! Solch ein Schlaf
steckt an, noch durch eine dicke Wand hindurch steckt er an.

Ein Zauber wohnt selbst in seinem Lehrstuhle. Und nicht vergebens
sassen die Jünglinge vor dem Prediger der Tugend.

Seine Weisheit heisst: wachen, um gut zu schlafen. Und wahrlich, hätte
das Leben keinen Sinn und müsste ich Unsinn wählen, so wäre auch mir
diess der wählenswürdigste Unsinn.

Jetzo verstehe ich klar, was einst man vor Allem suchte, wenn man
Lehrer der Tugend suchte. Guten Schlaf suchte man sich und mohnblumige
Tugenden dazu!

Allen diesen gelobten Weisen der Lehrstühle war Weisheit der Schlaf
ohne Träume: sie kannten keinen bessern Sinn des Lebens.

Auch noch heute wohl giebt es Einige, wie diesen Prediger der Tugend,
und nicht immer so Ehrliche: aber ihre Zeit ist um. Und nicht mehr
lange stehen sie noch: da liegen sie schon.

Selig sind diese Schläfrigen: denn sie sollen bald einnicken.—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Hinterweltlern

Einst warf auch Zarathustra seinen Wahn jenseits des Menschen, gleich
allen Hinterweltlern. Eines leidenden und zerquälten Gottes Werk schien
mir da die Welt.

Traum schien mir da die Welt und Dichtung eines Gottes; farbiger Rauch
vor den Augen eines göttlich Unzufriednen.

Gut und böse und Lust und Leid und Ich und Du—farbiger Rauch dünkte
mich’s vor schöpferischen Augen. Wegsehn wollte der Schöpfer von
sich,—da schuf er die Welt.

Trunkne Lust ist’s dem Leidenden, wegzusehn von seinem Leiden und sich
zu verlieren. Trunkne Lust Und Selbst-sich-Verlieren dünkte mich einst
die Welt.

Diese Welt, die ewig unvollkommene, eines ewigen Widerspruches Abbild
und unvollkommnes Abbild—eine trunkne Lust ihrem unvollkommnen
Schöpfer:—also dünkte mich einst die Welt.

Also warf auch ich einst meinen Wahn jenseits des Menschen, gleich
allen Hinterweltlern. Jenseits des Menschen in Wahrheit?

Ach, ihr Brüder, dieser Gott, den ich schuf, war Menschen-Werk und
-Wahnsinn, gleich allen Göttern!

Mensch war er, und nur ein armes Stück Mensch und Ich: aus der eigenen
Asche und Gluth kam es mir, dieses Gespenst, und wahrlich! Nicht kam es
mir von Jenseits!

Was geschah, meine Brüder? Ich überwand mich, den Leidenden, ich trug
meine eigne Asche zu Berge, eine hellere Flamme erfand ich mir. Und
siehe! Da _wich_ das Gespenst von mir!

Leiden wäre es mir jetzt und Qual dem Genesenen, solche Gespenster zu
glauben: Leiden wäre es mir jetzt und Erniedrigung. Also rede ich zu
den Hinterweltlern.

Leiden war’s und Unvermögen—das schuf alle Hinterwelten; und jener
kurze Wahnsinn des Glücks, den nur der Leidendste erfährt.

Müdigkeit, die mit Einem Sprunge zum Letzten will, mit einem
Todessprunge, eine arme unwissende Müdigkeit, die nicht einmal mehr
wollen will: die schuf alle Götter und Hinterwelten.

Glaubt es mir, meine Brüder! Der Leib war’s, der am Leibe
verzweifelte,—der tastete mit den Fingern des bethörten Geistes an die
letzten Wände.

Glaubt es mir, meine Brüder! Der Leib war’s, der an der Erde
verzweifelte,—der hörte den Bauch des Seins zu sich reden.

Und da wollte er mit dem Kopfe durch die letzten Wände, und nicht nur
mit dem Kopfe,—hinüber zu „jener Welt“.

Aber „jene Welt“ ist gut verborgen vor dem Menschen, jene entmenschte
unmenschliche Welt, die ein himmlisches Nichts ist; und der Bauch des
Seins redet gar nicht zum Menschen, es sei denn als Mensch.

Wahrlich, schwer zu beweisen ist alles Sein und schwer zum Reden zu
bringen. Sagt mir, ihr Brüder, ist nicht das Wunderlichste aller Dinge
noch am besten bewiesen?

Ja, diess Ich und des Ich’s Widerspruch und Wirrsal redet noch am
redlichsten von seinem Sein, dieses schaffende, wollende, werthende
Ich, welches das Maass und der Werth der Dinge ist.

Und diess redlichste Sein, das Ich—das redet vom Leibe, und es will
noch den Leib, selbst wenn es dichtet und schwärmt und mit zerbrochnen
Flügeln flattert.

Immer redlicher lernt es reden, das Ich: und je mehr es lernt, um so
mehr findet es Worte und Ehren für Leib und Erde.

Einen neuen Stolz lehrte mich mein Ich, den lehre ich die
Menschen:—nicht mehr den Kopf in den Sand der himmlischen Dinge zu
stecken, sondern frei ihn zu tragen, einen Erden-Kopf, der der Erde
Sinn schafft!

Einen neuen Willen lehre ich die Menschen: diesen Weg wollen, den
blindlings der Mensch gegangen, und gut ihn heissen und nicht mehr von
ihm bei Seite schleichen, gleich den Kranken und Absterbenden!

Kranke und Absterbende waren es, die verachteten Leib und Erde und
erfanden das Himmlische und die erlösenden Blutstropfen: aber auch noch
diese süssen und düstern Gifte nahmen sie von Leib und Erde!

Ihrem Elende wollten sie entlaufen, und die Sterne waren ihnen zu weit.
Da seufzten sie: „Oh dass es doch himmlische Wege gäbe, sich in ein
andres Sein und Glück zu schleichen!“—da erfanden sie sich ihre
Schliche und blutigen Tränklein!

Ihrem Leibe und dieser Erde nun entrückt wähnten sie sich, diese
Undankbaren. Doch wem dankten sie ihrer Entrückung Krampf und Wonne?
Ihrem Leibe und dieser Erde.

Milde ist Zarathustra den Kranken. Wahrlich, er zürnt nicht ihren Arten
des Trostes und Undanks. Mögen sie Genesende werden und Überwindende
und einen höheren Leib sich schaffen!

Nicht auch zürnt Zarathustra dem Genesenden, wenn er zärtlich nach
seinem Wahne blickt und Mitternachts um das Grab seines Gottes
schleicht: aber Krankheit und kranker Leib bleiben mir auch seine
Thränen noch.

Vieles krankhafte Volk gab es immer unter Denen, welche dichten und
gottsüchtig sind; wüthend hassen sie den Erkennenden und jene jüngste
der Tugenden, welche heisst: Redlichkeit.

Rückwärts blicken sie immer nach dunklen Zeiten: da freilich war Wahn
und Glaube ein ander Ding; Raserei der Vernunft war Gottähnlichkeit,
und Zweifel Sünde.

Allzugut kenne ich diese Gottähnlichen: sie wollen, dass an sie
geglaubt werde, und Zweifel Sünde sei. Allzugut weiss ich auch, woran
sie selber am besten glauben.

Wahrlich nicht an Hinterwelten und erlösende Blutstropfen: sondern an
den Leib glauben auch sie am besten, und ihr eigener Leib ist ihnen ihr
Ding an sich.

Aber ein krankhaftes Ding ist er ihnen: und gerne möchten sie aus der
Haut fahren. Darum horchen sie nach den Predigern des Todes und
predigen selber Hinterwelten.

Hört mir lieber, meine Brüder, auf die Stimme des gesunden Leibes: eine
redlichere und reinere Simme ist diess.

Redlicher redet und reiner der gesunde Leib, der vollkommne und
rechtwinklige: und er redet vom Sinn der Erde.

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Verächtern des Leibes

Den Verächtern des Leibes will ich mein Wort sagen. Nicht umlernen und
umlehren sollen sie mir, sondern nur ihrem eignen Leibe Lebewohl
sagen—und also stumm werden.

„Leib bin ich und Seele“ —so redet das Kind. Und warum sollte man nicht
wie die Kinder reden?

Aber der Erwachte, der Wissende sagt: Leib bin ich ganz und gar, und
Nichts ausserdem; und Seele ist nur ein Wort für ein Etwas am Leibe.

Der Leib ist eine grosse Vernunft, eine Vielheit mit Einem Sinne, ein
Krieg und ein Frieden, eine Heerde und ein Hirt.

Werkzeug deines Leibes ist auch deine kleine Vernunft, mein Bruder, die
du „Geist“ nennst, ein kleines Werk- und Spielzeug deiner grossen
Vernunft.

„Ich“ sagst du und bist stolz auf diess Wort. Aber das Grössere ist,
woran du nicht glauben willst,—dein Leib und seine grosse Vernunft: die
sagt nicht Ich, aber thut Ich.

Was der Sinn fühlt, was der Geist erkennt, das hat niemals in sich sein
Ende. Aber Sinn und Geist möchten dich überreden, sie seien aller Dinge
Ende: so eitel sind sie.

Werk- und Spielzeuge sind Sinn und Geist: hinter ihnen liegt noch das
Selbst. Das Selbst sucht auch mit den Augen der Sinne, es horcht auch
mit den Ohren des Geistes.

Immer horcht das Selbst und sucht: es vergleicht, bezwingt, erobert,
zerstört. Es herrscht und ist auch des Ich’s Beherrscher.

Hinter deinen Gedanken und Gefühlen, mein Bruder, steht ein mächtiger
Gebieter, ein unbekannter Weiser—der heisst Selbst. In deinem Leibe
wohnt er, dein Leib ist er.

Es ist mehr Vernunft in deinem Leibe, als in deiner besten Weisheit.
Und wer weiss denn, wozu dein Leib gerade deine beste Weisheit nöthig
hat?

Dein Selbst lacht über dein Ich und seine stolzen Sprünge. „Was sind
mir diese Sprünge und Flüge des Gedankens? sagt es sich. Ein Umweg zu
meinem Zwecke. Ich bin das Gängelband des Ich’s und der Einbläser
seiner Begriffe.“

Das Selbst sagt zum Ich: „hier fühle Schmerz!“ Und da leidet es und
denkt nach, wie es nicht mehr leide—und dazu eben _soll_ es denken.

Das Selbst sagt zum Ich: „hier fühle Lust!“ Da freut es sich und denkt
nach, wie es noch oft sich freue—und dazu eben _soll_ es denken.

Den Verächtern des Leibes will ich ein Wort sagen. Dass sie verachten,
das macht ihr Achten. Was ist es, das Achten und Verachten und Werth
und Willen schuf?

Das schaffende Selbst schuf sich Achten und Verachten, es schuf sich
Lust und Weh. Der schaffende Leib schuf sich den Geist als eine Hand
seines Willens.

Noch in eurer Thorheit und Verachtung, ihr Verächter des Leibes, dient
ihr eurem Selbst. Ich sage euch: euer Selbst selber will sterben und
kehrt sich vom Leben ab.

Nicht mehr vermag es das, was es am liebsten wilI:—über sich hinaus zu
schaffen. Das will es am liebsten, das ist seine ganze Inbrunst.

Aber zu spät ward es ihm jetzt dafür:—so will euer Selbst untergehn,
ihr Verächter des Leibes.

Untergehn will euer Selbst, und darum wurdet ihr zu Verächtern des
Leibes! Denn nicht mehr vermögt ihr über euch hinaus zu schaffen.

Und darum zürnt ihr nun dem Leben und der Erde. Ein ungewusster Neid
ist im scheelen Blick eurer Verachtung.

Ich gehe nicht euren Weg, ihr Verächter des Leibes! Ihr seid mir keine
Brücken zum Übermenschen!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Freuden- und Leidenschaften

Mein Bruder, wenn du eine Tugend hast, und es deine Tugend ist, so hast
du sie mit Niemandem gemeinsam.

Freilich, du willst sie bei Namen nennen und liebkosen; du willst sie
am Ohre zupfen und Kurzweil mit ihr treiben.

Und siehe! Nun hast du ihren Namen mit dem Volke gemeinsam und bist
Volk und Heerde geworden mit deiner Tugend!

Besser thätest du, zu sagen: „unaussprechbar ist und namenlos, was
meiner Seele Qual und Süsse macht und auch noch der Hunger meiner
Eingeweide ist.“

Deine Tugend sei zu hoch für die Vertraulichkeit der Namen: und musst
du von ihr reden, so schäme dich nicht, von ihr zu stammeln.

So sprich und stammle: „Das ist _mein_ Gutes, das liebe ich, so gefällt
es mir ganz, so allein will ich das Gute.

Nicht will ich es als eines Gottes Gesetz, nicht will ich es als eine
Menschen-Satzung und -Nothdurft: kein Wegweiser sei es mir für
Über-Erden und Paradiese.

Eine irdische Tugend ist es, die ich liebe: wenig Klugheit ist darin
und am wenigsten die Vernunft Aller.

Aber dieser Vogel baute bei mir sich das Nest: darum liebe und herze
ich ihn,—nun sitze er bei mir auf seinen goldnen Eiern.“

So sollst du stammeln und deine Tugend loben.

Einst hattest du Leidenschaften und nanntest sie böse. Aber jetzt hast
du nur noch deine Tugenden: die wuchsen aus deinen Leidenschaften.

Du legtest dein höchstes Ziel diesen Leidenschaften an’s Herz: da
wurden sie deine Tugenden und Freudenschaften.

Und ob du aus dem Geschlechte der Jähzornigen wärest oder aus dem der
Wollüstigen oder der Glaubens-Wüthigen oder der Rachsüchtigen:

Am Ende wurden alle deine Leidenschaften zu Tugenden und alle deine
Teufel zu Engeln.

Einst hattest du wilde Hunde in deinem Keller: aber am Ende
verwandelten sie sich zu Vögeln und lieblichen Sängerinnen.

Aus deinen Giften brautest du dir deinen Balsam; deine Kuh Trübsal
melktest du, —nun trinkst du die süsse Milch ihres Euters.

Und nichts Böses wächst mehr fürderhin aus dir, es sei denn das Böse,
das aus dem Kampfe deiner Tugenden wächst.

Mein Bruder, wenn du Glück hast, so hast du Eine Tugend und nicht mehr:
so gehst du leichter über die Brücke.

Auszeichnend ist es, viele Tugenden zu haben, aber ein schweres Loos;
und Mancher gieng in die Wüste und tödtete sich, weil er müde war,
Schlacht und Schlachtfeld von Tugenden zu sein.

Mein Bruder, ist Krieg und Schlacht böse? Aber nothwendig ist diess
Böse, nothwendig ist der Neid und das Misstrauen und die Verleumdung
unter deinen Tugenden.

Siehe, wie jede deiner Tugenden begehrlich ist nach dem Höchsten: sie
will deinen ganzen Geist, dass er _ihr_ Herold sei, sie will deine
ganze Kraft in Zorn, Hass und Liebe.

Eifersüchtig ist jede Tugend auf die andre, und ein furchtbares Ding
ist Eifersucht. Auch Tugenden können an der Eifersucht zu Grunde gehn.

Wen die Flamme der Eifersucht umringt, der wendet zuletzt, gleich dem
Scorpione, gegen sich selber den vergifteten Stachel.

Ach, mein Bruder, sahst du noch nie eine Tugend sich selber verleumden
und erstechen?

Der Mensch ist Etwas, das überwunden werden muss: und darum sollst du
deine Tugenden lieben,—denn du wirst an ihnen zu Grunde gehn.—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom bleichen Verbrecher

Ihr wollt nicht tödten, ihr Richter und Opferer, bevor das Thier nicht
genickt hat? Seht, der bleiche Verbrecher hat genickt: aus seinem Auge
redet die grosse Verachtung.

„Mein Ich ist Etwas, das überwunden werden soll: mein Ich ist mir die
grosse Verachtung des Menschen“ : so redet es aus diesem Auge.

Dass er sich selber richtete, war sein höchster Augenblick: lasst den
Erhabenen nicht wieder zurück in sein Niederes!

Es giebt keine Erlösung für Den, der so an sich selber leidet, es sei
denn der schnelle Tod.

Euer Tödten, ihr Richter, soll ein Mitleid sein und keine Rache. Und
indem ihr tödtet, seht zu, dass ihr selber das Leben rechtfertiget!

Es ist nicht genug, dass ihr euch mit Dem versöhnt, den ihr tödtet.
Eure Traurigkeit sei Liebe zum Übermenschen: so rechtfertigt ihr euer
Noch-Leben!

„Feind“ sollt ihr sagen, aber nicht „Bösewicht“; „Kranker“ sollt ihr
sagen, aber nicht „Schuft“; „Thor“ sollt ihr sagen, aber nicht
„Sünder“.

Und du, rother Richter, wenn du laut sagen wolltest, was du Alles schon
in Gedanken gethan hast: so würde Jedermann schreien: „Weg mit diesem
Unflath und Giftwurm!“

Aber ein Anderes ist der Gedanke, ein Anderes die That, ein Anderes das
Bild der That. Das Rad des Grundes rollt nicht zwischen ihnen.

Ein Bild machte diesen bleichen Menschen bleich. Gleichwüchsig war er
seiner That, als er sie that: aber ihr Bild ertrug er nicht, als sie
gethan war.

Immer sah er sich nun als Einer That Thäter. Wahnsinn heisse ich diess:
die Ausnahme verkehrte sich ihm zum Wesen.

Der Strich bannt die Henne; der Streich, den er führte, bannte seine
arme Vernunft—den Wahnsinn _nach_ der That heisse ich diess.

Hört, ihr Richter! Einen anderen Wahnsinn giebt es noch: und der ist
vor der That. Ach, ihr krocht mir nicht tief genug in diese Seele!

So spricht der rothe Richter: „was mordete doch dieser Verbrecher? Er
wollte rauben.“ Aber ich sage euch: seine Seele wollte Blut, nicht
Raub: er dürstete nach dem Glück des Messers!

Seine arme Vernunft aber begriff diesen Wahnsinn nicht und überredete
ihn. „Was liegt an Blut! sprach sie; willst du nicht zum Mindesten
einen Raub dabei machen? Eine Rache nehmen?“

Und er horchte auf seine arme Vernunft: wie Blei lag ihre Rede auf
ihm,—da raubte er, als er mordete. Er wollte sich nicht seines
Wahnsinns schämen.

Und nun wieder liegt das Blei seiner Schuld auf ihm, und wieder ist
seine arme Vernunft so steif, so gelähmt, so schwer.

Wenn er nur den Kopf schütteln könnte, so würde seine Last herabrollen:
aber wer schüttelt diesen Kopf?

Was ist dieser Mensch? Ein Haufen von Krankheiten, welche durch den
Geist in die Welt hinausgreifen: da wollen sie ihre Beute machen.

Was ist dieser Mensch? Ein Knäuel wilder Schlangen, welche selten bei
einander Ruhe haben,—da gehn sie für sich fort und suchen Beute in der
Welt.

Seht diesen armen Leib! Was er litt und begehrte, das deutete sich
diese arme Seele,—sie deutete es als mörderische Lust und Gier nach dem
Glück des Messers.

Wer jetzt krank wird, den überfällt das Böse, das jetzt böse ist: wehe
will er thun, mit dem, was ihm wehe thut. Aber es gab andre Zeiten und
ein andres Böses und Gutes.

Einst war der Zweifel böse und der Wille zum Selbst. Damals wurde der
Kranke zum Ketzer und zur Hexe: als Ketzer und Hexe litt er und wollte
leiden machen.

Aber diess will nicht in eure Ohren: euren Guten schade es, sagt ihr
mir. Aber was liegt mir an euren Guten!

Vieles an euren Guten macht mir Ekel, und wahrlich nicht ihr Böses.
Wollte ich doch, sie hätten einen Wahnsinn, an dem sie zu Grunde
giengen, gleich diesem bleichen Verbrecher!

Wahrlich, ich wollte, ihr Wahnsinn hiesse Wahrheit oder Treue oder
Gerechtigkeit: aber sie haben ihre Tugend, um lange zu leben und in
einem erbärmlichen Behagen.

Ich bin ein Geländer am Strome: fasse mich, wer mich fassen kann! Eure
Krücke aber bin ich nicht.—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom Lesen und Schreiben

Von allem Geschriebenen liebe ich nur Das, was Einer mit seinem Blute
schreibt. Schreibe mit Blut: und du wirst erfahren, dass Blut Geist
ist.

Es ist nicht leicht möglich, fremdes Blut zu verstehen: ich hasse die
lesenden Müssiggänger.

Wer den Leser kennt, der thut Nichts mehr für den Leser. Noch ein
Jahrhundert Leser—und der Geist selber wird stinken.

Dass Jedermann lesen lernen darf, verdirbt auf die Dauer nicht allein
das Schreiben, sondern auch das Denken.

Einst war der Geist Gott, dann wurde er zum Menschen und jetzt wird er
gar noch Pöbel.

Wer in Blut und Sprüchen schreibt, der will nicht gelesen, sondern
auswendig gelernt werden.

Im Gebirge ist der nächste Weg von Gipfel zu Gipfel: aber dazu musst du
lange Beine haben. Sprüche sollen Gipfel sein: und Die, zu denen
gesprochen wird, Grosse und Hochwüchsige.

Die Luft dünn und rein, die Gefahr nahe und der Geist voll einer
fröhlichen Bosheit: so passt es gut zu einander.

Ich will Kobolde um mich haben, denn ich bin muthig. Muth, der die
Gespenster verscheucht, schafft sich selber Kobolde,—der Muth will
lachen.

Ich empfinde nicht mehr mit euch: diese Wolke, die ich unter mir sehe,
diese Schwärze und Schwere, über die ich lache,—gerade das ist eure
Gewitterwolke.

Ihr seht nach Oben, wenn ihr nach Erhebung verlangt. Und ich sehe
hinab, weil ich erhoben bin.

Wer von euch kann zugleich lachen und erhoben sein?

Wer auf den höchsten Bergen steigt, der lacht über alle Trauer-Spiele
und Trauer-Ernste.

Muthig, unbekümmert, spöttisch, gewaltthätig—so will uns die Weisheit:
sie ist ein Weib und liebt immer nur einen Kriegsmann.

Ihr sagt mir: „das Leben ist schwer zu tragen.“ Aber wozu hättet ihr
Vormittags euren Stolz und Abends eure Ergebung?

Das Leben ist schwer zu tragen: aber so thut mir doch nicht so
zärtlich! Wir sind allesammt hübsche lastbare Esel und Eselinnen.

Was haben wir gemein mit der Rosenknospe, welche zittert, weil ihr ein
Tropfen Thau auf dem Leibe liegt?

Es ist wahr: wir lieben das Leben, nicht, weil wir an’s Leben, sondern
weil wir an’s Lieben gewöhnt sind.

Es ist immer etwas Wahnsinn in der Liebe. Es ist aber immer auch etwas
Vernunft im Wahnsinn.

Und auch mir, der ich dem Leben gut bin, scheinen Schmetterlinge und
Seifenblasen und was ihrer Art unter Menschen ist, am meisten vom
Glücke zu wissen.

Diese leichten thörichten zierlichen beweglichen Seelchen flattern zu
sehen—das verführt Zarathustra zu Thränen und Liedern.

Ich würde nur an einen Gott glauben, der zu tanzen verstünde.

Und als ich meinen Teufel sah, da fand ich ihn ernst, gründlich, tief,
feierlich: es war der Geist der Schwere,—durch ihn fallen alle Dinge.

Nicht durch Zorn, sondern durch Lachen tödtet man. Auf, lasst uns den
Geist der Schwere tödten!

Ich habe gehen gelernt: seitdem lasse ich mich laufen. Ich habe fliegen
gelernt: seitdem will ich nicht erst gestossen sein, um von der Stelle
zu kommen.

Jetzt bin ich leicht, jetzt fliege ich, jetzt sehe ich mich unter mir,
jetzt tanzt ein Gott durch mich.

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom Baum am Berge

Zarathustra’s Auge hatte gesehn, dass ein Jüngling ihm auswich. Und als
er eines Abends allein durch die Berge gieng, welche die Stadt
umschliessen, die genannt wird „die bunte Kuh“: siehe, da fand er im
Gehen diesen Jüngling, wie er an einen Baum gelehnt sass und müden
Blickes in das Thal schaute. Zarathustra fasste den Baum an, bei
welchem der Jüngling sass, und sprach also:

Wenn ich diesen Baum da mit meinen Händen schütteln wollte, ich würde
es nicht vermögen.

Aber der Wind, den wir nicht sehen, der quält und biegt ihn, wohin er
will. Wir werden am schlimmsten von unsichtbaren Händen gebogen und
gequält.

Da erhob sich der Jüngling bestürzt und sagte: „ich höre Zarathustra
und eben dachte ich an ihn.“ Zarathustra entgegnete:

„Was erschrickst du desshalb?—Aber es ist mit dem Menschen wie mit dem
Baume.

Je mehr er hinauf in die Höhe und Helle will, um so stärker streben
seine Wurzeln erdwärts, abwärts, in’s Dunkle, Tiefe,—in’s Böse.“

„Ja in’s Böse! rief der Jüngling. Wie ist es möglich, dass du meine
Seele entdecktest?“

Zarathustra lächelte und sprach: „Manche Seele wird man nie entdecken,
es sei denn, dass man sie zuerst erfindet.“ „Ja in’s Böse! rief der
Jüngling nochmals.

Du sagtest die Wahrheit, Zarathustra. Ich traue mir selber nicht mehr,
seitdem ich in die Höhe will, und Niemand traut mir mehr,—wie geschieht
diess doch?

Ich verwandele mich zu schnell: mein Heute widerlegt mein Gestern. Ich
überspringe oft die Stufen, wenn ich steige,—das verzeiht mir keine
Stufe.

Bin ich oben, so finde ich mich immer allein. Niemand redet mit mir,
der Frost der Einsamkeit macht mich zittern. Was will ich doch in der
Höhe?

Meine Verachtung und meine Sehnsucht wachsen mit einander; je höher ich
steige, um so mehr verachte ich Den, der steigt. Was will er doch in
der Höhe?

Wie schäme ich mich meines Steigens und Stolperns! Wie spotte ich
meines heftigen Schnaubens! Wie hasse ich den Fliegenden! Wie müde bin
ich in der Höhe!“

Hier schwieg der Jüngling. Und Zarathustra betrachtete den Baum, an dem
sie standen, und sprach also:

Dieser Baum steht einsam hier am Gebirge; er wuchs hoch hinweg über
Mensch und Thier.

Und wenn er reden wollte, er würde Niemanden haben, der ihn verstünde:
so hoch wuchs er.

Nun wartet er und wartet,—worauf wartet er doch? Er wohnt dem Sitze der
Wolken zu nahe: er wartet wohl auf den ersten Blitz?

Als Zarathustra diess gesagt hatte, rief der Jüngling mit heftigen
Gebärden: „Ja, Zarathustra, du sprichst die Wahrheit. Nach meinem
Untergange verlangte ich, als ich in die Höhe wollte, und du bist der
Blitz, auf den ich wartete! Siehe, was bin ich noch, seitdem du uns
erschienen bist? Der _Neid_ auf dich ist’s, der mich zerstört hat!“—So
sprach der Jüngling und weinte bitterlich. Zarathustra aber legte
seinen Arm um ihn und führte ihn mit sich fort.

Und als sie eine Weile mit einander gegangen waren, hob Zarathustra
also an zu sprechen:

Es zerreisst mir das Herz. Besser als deine Worte es sagen, sagt mir
dein Auge alle deine Gefahr.

Noch bist du nicht frei, du _suchst_ noch nach Freiheit. Übernächtig
machte dich dein Suchen und überwach.

In die freie Höhe willst du, nach Sternen dürstet deine Seele. Aber
auch deine schlimmen Triebe dürsten nach Freiheit.

Deine wilden Hunde wollen in die Freiheit; sie bellen vor Lust in ihrem
Keller, wenn dein Geist alle Gefängnisse zu lösen trachtet.

Noch bist du mir ein Gefangner, der sich Freiheit ersinnt: ach, klug
wird solchen Gefangnen die Seele, aber auch arglistig und schlecht.

Reinigen muss sich noch der Befreite des Geistes. Viel Gefängniss und
Moder ist noch in ihm zurück: rein muss noch sein Auge werden.

Ja, ich kenne deine Gefahr. Aber bei meiner Liebe und Hoffnung
beschwöre ich dich: wirf deine Liebe und Hoffnung nicht weg!

Edel fühlst du dich noch, und edel fühlen dich auch die Andern noch,
die dir gram sind und böse Blicke senden. Wisse, dass Allen ein Edler
im Wege steht.

Auch den Guten steht ein Edler im Wege: und selbst wenn sie ihn einen
Guten nennen, so wollen sie ihn damit bei Seite bringen.

Neues will der Edle schaffen und eine neue Tugend. Altes will der Gute,
und dass Altes erhalten bleibe.

Aber nicht das ist die Gefahr des Edlen, dass er ein Guter werde,
sondern ein Frecher, ein Höhnender, ein Vernichter.

Ach, ich kannte Edle, die verloren ihre höchste Hoffnung. Und nun
verleumdeten sie alle hohen Hoffnungen.

Nun lebten sie frech in kurzen Lüsten, und über den Tag hin warfen sie
kaum noch Ziele.

„Geist ist auch Wollust“—so sagten sie. Da zerbrachen ihrem Geiste die
Flügel: nun kriecht er herum und beschmutzt im Nagen.

Einst dachten sie Helden zu werden: Lüstlinge sind es jetzt. Ein Gram
und ein Grauen ist ihnen der Held.

Aber bei meiner Liebe und Hoffnung beschwöre ich dich: wirf den Helden
in deiner Seele nicht weg! Halte heilig deine höchste Hoffnung!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Predigern des Todes

Es giebt Prediger des Todes: und die Erde ist voll von Solchen, denen
Abkehr gepredigt werden muss vom Leben.

Voll ist die Erde von Überflüssigen, verdorben ist das Leben durch die
Viel-zu-Vielen. Möge man sie mit dem „ewigen Leben“  aus diesem Leben
weglocken!

„Gelbe“ : so nennt man die Prediger des Todes, oder „Schwarze“ . Aber
ich will sie euch noch in andern Farben zeigen.

Da sind die Fürchterlichen, welche in sich das Raubthier herumtragen
und keine Wahl haben, es sei denn Lüste oder Selbstzerfleischung. Und
auch ihre Lüste sind noch Selbstzerfleischung.

Sie sind noch nicht einmal Menschen geworden, diese Fürchterlichen:
mögen sie Abkehr predigen vom Leben und selber dahinfahren!

Da sind die Schwindsüchtigen der Seele: kaum sind sie geboren, so
fangen sie schon an zu sterben und sehnen sich nach Lehren der
Müdigkeit und Entsagung.

Sie wollen gerne todt sein, und wir sollten ihren Willen gut heissen!
Hüten wir uns, diese Todten zu erwecken und diese lebendigen Särge zu
versehren!

Ihnen begegnet ein Kranker oder ein Greis oder ein Leichnam; und gleich
sagen sie „das Leben ist widerlegt!“

Aber nur sie sind widerlegt und ihr Auge, welches nur das Eine Gesicht
sieht am Dasein.

Eingehüllt in dicke Schwermuth und begierig auf die kleinen Zufälle,
welche den Tod bringen: so warten sie und beissen die Zähne auf
einander.

Oder aber: sie greifen nach Zuckerwerk und spotten ihrer Kinderei
dabei: sie hängen an ihrem Strohhalm Leben und spotten, dass sie noch
an einem Strohhalm hängen.

Ihre Weisheit lautet: „ein Thor, der leben bleibt, aber so sehr sind
wir Thoren! Und das eben ist das Thörichtste am Leben!“—

„Das Leben ist nur Leiden“ —so sagen Andre und lügen nicht: so sorgt
doch, dass _ihr_ aufhört! So sorgt doch, dass das Leben aufhört,
welches nur Leiden ist!

Und also laute die Lehre eurer Tugend „du sollst dich selber tödten! Du
sollst dich selber davonstehlen!“—

„Wollust ist Sünde,—so sagen die Einen, welche den Tod predigen—lasst
uns bei Seite gehn und keine Kinder zeugen!“

„Gebären ist mühsam,—sagen dich Andern—wozu noch gebären? Man gebiert
nur Unglückliche!“ Und auch sie sind Prediger des Todes.

„Mitleid thut noth—so sagen die Dritten. Nehmt hin, was ich habe! Nehmt
hin, was ich bin! Um so weniger bindet mich das Leben!“

Wären sie Mitleidige von Grund aus, so würden sie ihren Nächsten das
Leben verleiden. Böse sein—das wäre ihre rechte Güte.

Aber sie wollen loskommen vom Leben: was schiert es sie, dass sie Andre
mit ihren Ketten und Geschenken noch fester binden!—

Und auch ihr, denen das Leben wilde Arbeit und Unruhe ist: seid ihr
nicht sehr müde des Lebens? Seid ihr nicht sehr reif für die Predigt
des Todes?

Ihr Alle, denen die wilde Arbeit lieb ist und das Schnelle, Neue,
Fremde,—ihr ertragt euch schlecht, euer Fleiss ist Flucht und Wille,
sich selber zu vergessen.

Wenn ihr mehr an das Leben glaubtet, würdet ihr weniger euch dem
Augenblicke hinwerfen. Aber ihr habt zum Warten nicht Inhalt genug in
euch—und selbst zur Faulheit nicht!

Überall ertönt die Stimme Derer, welche den Tod predigen: und die Erde
ist voll von Solchen, welchen der Tod gepredigt werden muss.

Oder „das ewige Leben“ : das gilt mir gleich,—wofern sie nur schnell
dahinfahren!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom Krieg und Kriegsvolke

Von unsern besten Feinden wollen wir nicht geschont sein, und auch von
Denen nicht, welche wir von Grund aus lieben. So lasst mich denn euch
die Wahrheit sagen!

Meine Brüder im Kriege! Ich liebe euch von Grund aus, ich bin und war
Euresgleichen. Und ich bin auch euer bester Feind. So lasst mich denn
euch die Wahrheit sagen!

Ich weiss um den Hass und Neid eures Herzens. Ihr seid nicht gross
genug, um Hass und Neid nicht zu kennen. So seid denn gross genug, euch
ihrer nicht zu schämen!

Und wenn ihr nicht Heilige der Erkenntniss sein könnt, so seid mir
wenigstens deren Kriegsmänner. Das sind die Gefährten und Vorläufer
solcher Heiligkeit.

Ich sehe viel Soldaten: möchte ich viel Kriegsmänner sehn! „Ein-form“
nennt man’s, was sie tragen: möge es nicht Ein-form sein, was sie damit
verstecken!

Ihr sollt mir Solche sein, deren Auge immer nach einem Feinde
sucht—nach _eurem_ Feinde. Und bei Einigen von euch giebt es einen Hass
auf den ersten Blick.

Euren Feind sollt ihr suchen, euren Krieg sollt ihr führen und für eure
Gedanken! Und wenn euer Gedanke unterliegt, so soll eure Redlichkeit
darüber noch Triumph rufen!

Ihr sollt den Frieden lieben als Mittel zu neuen Kriegen. Und den
kurzen Frieden mehr, als den langen.

Euch rathe ich nicht zur Arbeit, sondern zum Kampfe. Euch rathe ich
nicht zum Frieden, sondern zum Siege. Eure Arbeit sei ein Kampf, euer
Friede sei ein Sieg!

Man kann nur schweigen und stillsitzen, wenn man Pfeil und Bogen hat:
sonst schwätzt und zankt man. Euer Friede sei ein Sieg!

Ihr sagt, die gute Sache sei es, die sogar den Krieg heilige? Ich sage
euch: der gute Krieg ist es, der jede Sache heiligt.

Der Krieg und der Muth haben mehr grosse Dinge gethan, als die
Nächstenliebe. Nicht euer Mitleiden, sondern eure Tapferkeit rettete
bisher die Verunglückten.

Was ist gut? fragt ihr. Tapfer sein ist gut. Lasst die kleinen Mädchen
reden: „gut sein ist, was hübsch zugleich und rührend ist.“

Man nennt euch herzlos: aber euer Herz ist ächt, und ich liebe die
Scham eurer Herzlichkeit. Ihr schämt euch eurer Fluth, und Andre
schämen sich ihrer Ebbe.

Ihr seid hässlich? Nun wohlan, meine Brüder! So nehmt das Erhabne um
euch, den Mantel des Hässlichen!

Und wenn eure Seele gross wird, so wird sie übermüthig, und in eurer
Erhabenheit ist Bosheit. Ich kenne euch.

In der Bosheit begegnet sich der Übermüthige mit dem Schwächlinge. Aber
sie missverstehen einander. Ich kenne euch.

Ihr dürft nur Feinde haben, die zu hassen sind, aber nicht Feinde zum
Verachten. Ihr müsst stolz auf euern Feind sein: dann sind die Erfolge
eures Feindes auch eure Erfolge.

Auflehnung—das ist die Vornehmheit am Sclaven. Eure Vornehmheit sei
Gehorsam! Euer Befehlen selber sei ein Gehorchen!

Einem guten Kriegsmanne klingt „du sollst“ angenehmer, als „ich will“.
Und Alles, was euch lieb ist, sollt ihr euch erst noch befehlen lassen.

Eure Liebe zum Leben sei Liebe zu eurer höchsten Hoffnung: und eure
höchste Hoffnung sei der höchste Gedanke des Lebens!

Euren höchsten Gedanken aber sollt ihr euch von mir befehlen lassen—und
er lautet: der Mensch ist Etwas, das überwunden werden soll.

So lebt euer Leben des Gehorsams und des Krieges! Was liegt am
Lang-Leben! Welcher Krieger will geschont sein!

Ich schone euch nicht, ich liebe euch von Grund aus, meine Brüder im
Kriege!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom neuen Götzen

Irgendwo giebt es noch Völker und Heerden, doch nicht bei uns, meine
Brüder: da giebt es Staaten.

Staat? Was ist das? Wohlan! Jetzt thut mir die Ohren auf, denn jetzt
sage ich euch mein Wort vom Tode der Völker.

Staat heisst das kälteste aller kalten Ungeheuer. Kalt lügt es auch;
und diese Lüge kriecht aus seinem Munde: „Ich, der Staat, bin das
Volk.“

Lüge ist’s! Schaffende waren es, die schufen die Völker und hängten
einen Glauben und eine Liebe über sie hin: also dienten sie dem Leben.

Vernichter sind es, die stellen Fallen auf für Viele und heissen sie
Staat: sie hängen ein Schwert und hundert Begierden über sie hin.

Wo es noch Volk giebt, da versteht es den Staat nicht und hasst ihn als
bösen Blick und Sünde an Sitten und Rechten.

Dieses Zeichen gebe ich euch: jedes Volk spricht seine Zunge des Guten
und Bösen: die versteht der Nachbar nicht. Seine Sprache erfand es sich
in Sitten und Rechten.

Aber der Staat lügt in allen Zungen des Guten und Bösen; und was er
auch redet, er lügt—und was er auch hat, gestohlen hat er’s.

Falsch ist Alles an ihm; mit gestohlenen Zähnen beisst er, der Bissige.
Falsch sind selbst seine Eingeweide.

Sprachverwirrung des Guten und Bösen: dieses Zeichen gebe ich euch als
Zeichen des Staates. Wahrlich, den Willen zum Tode deutet dieses
Zeichen! Wahrlich, es winkt den Predigern des Todes!

Viel zu Viele werden geboren: für die Überflüssigen ward der Staat
erfunden!

Seht mir doch, wie er sie an sich lockt, die Viel-zu-Vielen! Wie er sie
schlingt und kaut und wiederkäut!

„Auf der Erde ist nichts Grösseres als ich: der ordnende Finger bin ich
Gottes“ —also brüllt das Unthier. Und nicht nur Langgeohrte und
Kurzgeäugte sinken auf die Kniee!

Ach, auch in euch, ihr grossen Seelen, raunt er seine düsteren Lügen!
Ach, er erräth die reichen Herzen, die gerne sich verschwenden!

Ja, auch euch erräth er, ihr Besieger des alten Gottes! Müde wurdet ihr
im Kampfe, und nun dient eure Müdigkeit noch dem neuen Götzen!

Helden und Ehrenhafte möchte er um sich aufstellen, der neue Götze!
Gerne sonnt er sich im Sonnenschein guter Gewissen,—das kalte Unthier!

Alles will er _euch_ geben, wenn _ihr_ ihn anbetet, der neue Götze:
also kauft er sich den Glanz eurer Tugend und den Blick eurer stolzen
Augen.

Ködern will er mit euch die Viel-zu-Vielen! Ja, ein Höllenkunststück
ward da erfunden, ein Pferd des Todes, klirrend im Putz göttlicher
Ehren!

Ja, ein Sterben für Viele ward da erfunden, das sich selber als Leben
preist: wahrlich, ein Herzensdienst allen Predigern des Todes!

Staat nenne ich’s, wo Alle Gifttrinker sind, Gute und Schlimme: Staat,
wo Alle sich selber verlieren, Gute und Schlimme: Staat, wo der
langsame Selbstmord Aller—„das Leben“  heisst.

Seht mir doch diese Überflüssigen! Sie stehlen sich die Werke der
Erfinder und die Schätze der Weisen: Bildung nennen sie ihren
Diebstahl—und Alles wird ihnen zu Krankheit und Ungemach!

Seht mir doch diese Überflüssigen! Krank sind sie immer, sie erbrechen
ihre Galle und nennen es Zeitung. Sie verschlingen einander und können
sich nicht einmal verdauen.

Seht mir doch diese Überflüssigen! Reichthümer erwerben sie und werden
ärmer damit. Macht wollen sie und zuerst das Brecheisen der Macht, viel
Geld,—diese Unvermögenden!

Seht sie klettern, diese geschwinden Affen! Sie klettern über einander
hinweg und zerren sich also in den Schlamm und die Tiefe.

Hin zum Throne wollen sie Alle: ihr Wahnsinn ist es,—als ob das Glück
auf dem Throne sässe! Oft sitzt der Schlamm auf dem Thron—und oft auch
der Thron auf dem Schlamme.

Wahnsinnige sind sie mir Alle und kletternde Affen und Überheisse. Übel
riecht mir ihr Götze, das kalte Unthier: übel riechen sie mir alle
zusammen, diese Götzendiener.

Meine Brüder, wollt ihr denn ersticken im Dunste ihrer Mäuler und
Begierden! Lieber zerbrecht doch die Fenster und springt in’s Freie!

Geht doch dem schlechten Geruche aus dem Wege! Geht fort von der
Götzendienerei der Überflüssigen!

Geht doch dem schlechten Geruche aus dem Wege! Geht fort von dem Dampfe
dieser Menschenopfer!

Frei steht grossen Seelen auch jetzt noch die Erde. Leer sind noch
viele Sitze für Einsame und Zweisame, um die der Geruch stiller Meere
weht.

Frei steht noch grossen Seelen ein freies Leben. Wahrlich, wer wenig
besitzt, wird um so weniger besessen: gelobt sei die kleine Armuth!

Dort, wo der Staat aufhört, da beginnt erst der Mensch, der nicht
überflüssig ist: da beginnt das Lied des Nothwendigen, die einmalige
und unersetzliche Weise.

Dort, wo der Staat _aufhört_,—so seht mir doch hin, meine Brüder! Seht
ihr ihn nicht, den Regenbogen und die Brücken des Übermenschen?—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Fliegen des Marktes

Fliehe, mein Freund, in deine Einsamkeit! Ich sehe dich betäubt vom
Lärme der grossen Männer und zerstochen von den Stacheln der kleinen.

Würdig wissen Wald und Fels mit dir zu schweigen. Gleiche wieder dem
Baume, den du liebst, dem breitästigen: still und aufhorchend hängt er
über dem Meere.

Wo die Einsamkeit aufhört, da beginnt der Markt; und wo der Markt
beginnt, da beginnt auch der Lärm der grossen Schauspieler und das
Geschwirr der giftigen Fliegen.

In der Welt taugen die besten Dinge noch Nichts, ohne Einen, der sie
erst aufführt: grosse Männer heisst das Volk diese Aufführer.

Wenig begreift das Volk das Grosse, das ist: das Schaffende. Aber Sinne
hat es für alle Aufführer und Schauspieler grosser Sachen.

Um die Erfinder von neuen Werthen dreht sich die Welt:—unsichtbar dreht
sie sich. Doch um die Schauspieler dreht sich das Volk und der Ruhm: so
ist es der Welt Lauf.

Geist hat der Schauspieler, doch wenig Gewissen des Geistes. Er glaubt
immer an Das, womit er am stärksten glauben macht,—glauben an _sich_
macht!

Morgen hat er einen neuen Glauben und übermorgen einen neueren. Rasche
Sinne hat er, gleich dem Volke, und veränderliche Witterungen.

Umwerfen—das heisst ihm: beweisen. Toll machen—das heisst ihm:
überzeugen. Und Blut gilt ihm als aller Gründe bester.

Eine Wahrheit, die nur in feine Ohren schlüpft, nennt er Lüge und
Nichts. Wahrlich, er glaubt nur an Götter, die grossen Lärm in der Welt
machen!

Voll von feierlichen Possenreissern ist der Markt—und das Volk rühmt
sich seiner grossen Männer! das sind ihm die Herrn der Stunde.

Aber die Stunde drängt sie: so drängen sie dich. Und auch von dir
wollen sie Ja oder Nein. Wehe, du willst zwischen Für und Wider deinen
Stuhl setzen?

Dieser Unbedingten und Drängenden halber sei ohne Eifersucht, du
Liebhaber der Wahrheit! Niemals noch hängte sich die Wahrheit an den
Arm eines Unbedingten.

Dieser Plötzlichen halber gehe zurück in deine Sicherheit: nur auf dem
Markt wird man mit Ja? oder Nein? überfallen.

Langsam ist das Erleben allen tiefen Brunnen: lange müssen sie warten,
bis sie wissen, _was_ in ihre Tiefe fiel.

Abseits vom Markte und Ruhme begiebt sich alles Grosse: abseits vom
Markte und Ruhme wohnten von je die Erfinder neuer Werthe.

Fliehe, mein Freund, in deine Einsamkeit: ich sehe dich von giftigen
Fliegen zerstochen. Fliehe dorthin, wo rauhe, starke Luft weht!

Fliehe in deine Einsamkeit! Du lebtest den Kleinen und Erbärmlichen zu
nahe. Fliehe vor ihrer unsichtbaren Rache! Gegen dich sind sie Nichts
als Rache.

Hebe nicht mehr den Arm gegen sie! Unzählbar sind sie, und es ist nicht
dein Loos, Fliegenwedel zu sein.

Unzählbar sind diese Kleinen und Erbärmlichen; und manchem stolzen Baue
gereichten schon Regentropfen und Unkraut zum Untergange.

Du bist kein Stein, aber schon wurdest du hohl von vielen Tropfen.
Zerbrechen und zerbersten wirst du mir noch von vielen Tropfen.

Ermüdet sehe ich dich durch giftige Fliegen, blutig geritzt sehe ich
dich an hundert Stellen; und dein Stolz will nicht einmal zürnen.

Blut möchten sie von dir in aller Unschuld, Blut begehren ihre
blutlosen Seelen —und sie stechen daher in aller Unschuld.

Aber, du Tiefer, du leidest zu tief auch an kleinen Wunden; und ehe du
dich noch geheilt hast, kroch dir der gleiche Giftwurm über die Hand.

Zu stolz bist du mir dafür, diese Naschhaften zu tödten. Hüte dich
aber, dass es nicht dein Verhängniss werde, all ihr giftiges Unrecht zu
tragen!

Sie summen um dich auch mit ihrem Lobe: Zudringlichkeit ist ihr Loben.
Sie wollen die Nähe deiner Haut und deines Blutes.

Sie schmeicheln dir wie einem Gotte oder Teufel; sie winseln vor dir
wie vor einem Gotte oder Teufel. Was macht es! Schmeichler sind es und
Winsler und nicht mehr.

Auch geben sie sich dir oft als Liebenswürdige. Aber das war immer die
Klugheit der Feigen. Ja, die Feigen sind klug!

Sie denken viel über dich mit ihrer engen Seele,—bedenklich bist du
ihnen stets! Alles, was viel bedacht wird, wird bedenklich.

Sie bestrafen dich für alle deine Tugenden. Sie verzeihen dir von Grund
aus nur —deine Fehlgriffe.

Weil du milde bist und gerechten Sinnes, sagst du: „unschuldig sind sie
an ihrem kleinen Dasein.“ Aber ihre enge Seele denkt: „Schuld ist alles
grosse Dasein.“

Auch wenn du ihnen milde bist, fühlen sie sich noch von dir verachtet;
und sie geben dir deine Wohlthat zurück mit versteckten Wehthaten.

Dein wortloser Stolz geht immer wider ihren Geschmack; sie frohlocken,
wenn du einmal bescheiden genug bist, eitel zu sein.

Das, was wir an einem Menschen erkennen, das entzünden wir an ihm auch.
Also hüte dich vor den Kleinen!

Vor dir fühlen sie sich klein, und ihre Niedrigkeit glimmt und glüht
gegen dich in unsichtbarer Rache.

Merktest du nicht, wie oft sie stumm wurden, wenn du zu ihnen tratest,
und wie ihre Kraft von ihnen gieng wie der Rauch von einem erlöschenden
Feuer?

Ja, mein Freund, das böse Gewissen bist du deinen Nächsten: denn sie
sind deiner unwerth. Also hassen sie dich und möchten gerne an deinem
Blute saugen.

Deine Nächsten werden immer giftige Fliegen sein; Das, was gross an dir
ist,—das selber muss sie giftiger machen und immer fliegenhafter.

Fliehe, mein Freund, in deine Einsamkeit und dorthin, wo eine rauhe,
starke Luft weht. Nicht ist es dein Loos, Fliegenwedel zu sein.—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von der Keuschheit

Ich liebe den Wald. In den Städten ist schlecht zu leben: da giebt es
zu Viele der Brünstigen.

Ist es nicht besser, in die Hände eines Mörders zu gerathen, als in die
Träume eines brünstigen Weibes?

Und seht mir doch diese Männer an: ihr Auge sagt es—sie wissen nichts
Besseres auf Erden, als bei einem Weibe zu liegen.

Schlamm ist auf dem Grunde ihrer Seele; und wehe, wenn ihr Schlamm gar
noch Geist hat!

Dass ihr doch wenigstens als Thiere vollkommen wäret! Aber zum Thiere
gehört die Unschuld.

Rathe ich euch, eure Sinne zu tödten? Ich rathe euch zur Unschuld der
Sinne.

Rathe ich euch zur Keuschheit? Die Keuschheit ist bei Einigen eine
Tugend, aber bei Vielen beinahe ein Laster.

Diese enthalten sich wohl: aber die Hündin Sinnlichkeit blickt mit Neid
aus Allem, was sie thun.

Noch in die Höhen ihrer Tugend und bis in den kalten Geist hinein folgt
ihnen diess Gethier und sein Unfrieden.

Und wie artig weiss die Hündin Sinnlichkeit um ein Stück Geist zu
betteln, wenn ihr ein Stuck Fleisch versagt wird!

Ihr liebt Trauerspiele und Alles, was das Herz zerbricht? Aber ich bin
misstrauisch gegen eure Hündin.

Ihr habt mir zu grausame Augen und blickt lüstern nach Leidenden. Hat
sich nicht nur eure Wollust verkleidet und heisst sich Mitleiden?

Und auch diess Gleichniss gebe ich euch: nicht Wenige, die ihren Teufel
austreiben wollten, fuhren dabei selber in die Säue.

Wem die Keuschheit schwer fällt, dem ist sie zu widerrathen: dass sie
nicht der Weg zur Hölle werde—das ist zu Schlamm und Brunst der Seele.

Rede ich von schmutzigen Dingen? Das ist mir nicht das Schlimmste.

Nicht, wenn die Wahrheit schmutzig ist, sondern wenn sie seicht ist,
steigt der Erkennende ungern in ihr Wasser.

Wahrlich, es giebt Keusche von Grund aus: sie sind milder von Herzen,
sie lachen lieber und reichlicher als ihr.

Sie lachen auch über die Keuschheit und fragen: „was ist Keuschheit!

Ist Keuschheit nicht Thorheit? Aber diese Thorheit kam zu uns und nicht
wir zur ihr.

Wir boten diesem Gaste Herberge und Herz: nun wohnt er bei uns,—mag er
bleiben, wie lange er will!“

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom Freunde

„Einer ist immer zu viel um mich“—also denkt der Einsiedler. „Immer
Einmal Eins—das giebt auf die Dauer Zwei!“

Ich und Mich sind immer zu eifrig im Gespräche: wie wäre es
auszuhalten, wenn es nicht einen Freund gäbe?

Immer ist für den Einsiedler der Freund der Dritte: der Dritte ist der
Kork, der verhindert, dass das Gespräch der Zweie in die Tiefe sinkt.

Ach, es giebt zu viele Tiefen für alle Einsiedler. Darum sehnen sie
sich so nach einem Freunde und nach seiner Höhe.

Unser Glaube an Andre verräth, worin wir gerne an uns selber glauben
möchten. Unsre Sehnsucht nach einem Freunde ist unser Verräther.

Und oft will man mit der Liebe nur den Neid überspringen. Und oft
greift man an und macht sich einen Feind, um zu verbergen, dass man
angreifbar ist.

„Sei wenigstens mein Feind!“—so spricht die wahre Ehrfurcht, die nicht
um Freundschaft zu bitten wagt.

Will man einen Freund haben, so muss man auch für ihn Krieg führen
wollen: und um Krieg zu führen, muss man Feind sein _können_.

Man soll in seinem Freunde noch den Feind ehren. Kannst du an deinen
Freund dicht herantreten, ohne zu ihm überzutreten?

In seinem Freunde soll man seinen besten Feind haben. Du sollst ihm am
nächsten mit dem Herzen sein, wenn du ihm widerstrebst.

Du willst vor deinem Freunde kein Kleid tragen? Es soll deines Freundes
Ehre sein, dass du dich ihm giebst, wie du bist? Aber er wünscht dich
darum zum Teufel!

Wer aus sich kein Hehl macht, empört: so sehr habt ihr Grund, die
Nacktheit zu fürchten! Ja, wenn ihr Götter wäret, da dürftet ihr euch
eurer Kleider schämen!

Du kannst dich für deinen Freund nicht schön genug putzen: denn du
sollst ihm ein Pfeil und eine Sehnsucht nach dem Übermenschen sein.

Sahst du deinen Freund schon schlafen,—damit du erfahrest, wie er
aussieht? Was ist doch sonst das Gesicht deines Freundes? Es ist dein
eignes Gesicht, auf einem rauhen und unvollkommnen Spiegel.

Sahst du deinen Freund schon schlafen? Erschrakst du nicht, dass dein
Freund so aussieht? Oh, mein Freund, der Mensch ist Etwas, das
überwunden werden muss.

Im Errathen und Stillschweigen soll der Freund Meister sein: nicht
Alles musst du sehn wollen. Dein Traum soll dir verrathen, was dein
Freund im Wachen thut.

Ein Errathen sei dein Mitleiden: dass du erst wissest, ob dein Freund
Mitleiden wolle. Vielleicht liebt er an dir das ungebrochne Auge und
den Blick der Ewigkeit.

Das Mitleiden mit dem Freunde berge sich unter einer harten Schale, an
ihm sollst du dir einen Zahn ausbeissen. So wird es seine Feinheit und
Süsse haben.

Bist du reine Luft und Einsamkeit und Brod und Arznei deinem Freunde?
Mancher kann seine eignen Ketten nicht lösen und doch ist er dem
Freunde ein Erlöser.

Bist du ein Sclave? So kannst du nicht Freund sein. Bist du ein Tyrann?
So kannst du nicht Freunde haben.

Allzulange war im Weibe ein Sclave und ein Tyrann versteckt. Desshalb
ist das Weib noch nicht der Freundschaft fähig: es kennt nur die Liebe.

In der Liebe des Weibes ist Ungerechtigkeit und Blindheit gegen Alles,
was es nicht liebt. Und auch in der wissenden Liebe des Weibes ist
immer noch Überfall und Blitz und Nacht neben dem Lichte.

Noch ist das Weib nicht der Freundschaft fähig: Katzen sind immer noch
die Weiber, und Vögel. Oder, besten Falles, Kühe.

Noch ist das Weib nicht der Freundschaft fähig. Aber sagt mir, ihr
Männer, wer von euch ist denn fähig der Freundschaft?

Oh über eure Armuth, ihr Männer, und euren Geiz der Seele! Wie viel ihr
dem Freunde gebt, das will ich noch meinem Feinde geben, und will auch
nicht ärmer damit geworden sein.

Es giebt Kameradschaft: möge es Freundschaft geben!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von tausend und Einem Ziele

VieIe Länder sah Zarathustra und viele Völker: so entdeckte er vieler
Völker Gutes und Böses. Keine grössere Macht fand Zarathustra auf
Erden, als Gut und Böse.

Leben könnte kein Volk, das nicht erst schätzte; will es sich aber
erhalten, so darf es nicht schätzen, wie der Nachbar schätzt.

Vieles, das diesem Volke gut hiess, hiess einem andern Hohn und
Schmach: also fand ich’s. Vieles fand ich hier böse genannt und dort
mit purpurnen Ehren geputzt.

Nie verstand ein Nachbar den andern: stets verwunderte sich seine Seele
ob des Nachbarn Wahn und Bosheit.

Eine Tafel der Güter hängt über jedem Volke. Siehe, es ist seiner
Überwindungen Tafel; siehe, es ist die Stimme seines Willens zur Macht.

Löblich ist, was ihm schwer gilt; was unerlässlich und schwer, heisst
gut, und was aus der höchsten Noth noch befreit, das Seltene,
Schwerste,—das preist es heilig.

Was da macht, dass es herrscht und siegt und glänzt, seinem Nachbarn zu
Grauen und Neide: das gilt ihm das Hohe, das Erste, das Messende, der
Sinn aller Dinge.

Wahrlich, mein Bruder, erkanntest du erst eines Volkes Noth und Land
und Himmel und Nachbar: so erräthst du wohl das Gesetz seiner
Überwindungen und warum es auf dieser Leiter zu seiner Hoffnung steigt.

„Immer sollst du der Erste sein und den Andern vorragen: Niemanden soll
deine eifersüchtige Seele lieben, es sei denn den Freund“—diess machte
einem Griechen die Seele zittern: dabei gieng er seinen Pfad der
Grösse.

„Wahrheit reden und gut mit Bogen und Pfeil verkehren“ —so dünkte es
jenem Volke zugleich lieb und schwer, aus dem mein Name kommt—der Name,
welcher mir zugleich lieb und schwer ist.

„Vater und Mutter ehren und bis in die Wurzel der Seele hinein ihnen zu
Willen sein“ : diese Tafel der Überwindung hängte ein andres Volk über
sich auf und wurde mächtig und ewig damit.

„Treue üben und um der Treue Willen Ehre und Blut auch an böse und
fährliche Sachen setzen“ : also sich lehrend bezwang sich ein anderes
Volk, und also sich bezwingend wurde es schwanger und schwer von
grossen Hoffnungen.

Wahrlich, die Menschen gaben sich alles ihr Gutes und Böses. Wahrlich,
sie nahmen es nicht, sie fanden es nicht, nicht fiel es ihnen als
Stimme vom Himmel.

Werthe legte erst der Mensch in die Dinge, sich zu erhalten,—er schuf
erst den Dingen Sinn, einen Menschen-Sinn! Darum nennt er sich
„Mensch“, das ist: der Schätzende.

Schätzen ist Schaffen: hört es, ihr Schaffenden! Schätzen selber ist
aller geschätzten Dinge Schatz und Kleinod.

Durch das Schätzen erst giebt es Werth: und ohne das Schätzen wäre die
Nuss des Daseins hohl. Hört es, ihr Schaffenden!

Wandel der Werthe,—das ist Wandel der Schaffenden. Immer vernichtet,
wer ein Schöpfer sein muss.

Schaffende waren erst Völker und spät erst Einzelne; wahrlich, der
Einzelne selber ist noch die jüngste Schöpfung.

Völker hängten sich einst eine Tafel des Guten über sich. Liebe, die
herrschen will, und Liebe, die gehorchen will, erschufen sich zusammen
solche Tafeln.

Älter ist an der Heerde die Lust, als die Lust am Ich: und so lange das
gute Gewissen Heerde heisst, sagt nur das schlechte Gewissen: Ich.

Wahrlich, das schlaue Ich, das lieblose, das seinen Nutzen im Nutzen
Vieler will: das ist nicht der Heerde Ursprung, sondern ihr Untergang.

Liebende waren es stets und Schaffende, die schufen Gut und Böse. Feuer
der Liebe glüht in aller Tugenden Namen und Feuer des Zorns.

Viele Länder sah Zarathustra und viele Völker: keine grössere Macht
fand Zarathustra auf Erden, als die Werke der Liebenden: „gut“ und
„böse“  ist ihr Name.

Wahrlich, ein Ungethüm ist die Macht dieses Lobens und Tadelns. Sagt,
wer bezwingt es mir, ihr Brüder? Sagt, wer wirft diesem Thier die
Fessel über die tausend Nacken?

Tausend Ziele gab es bisher, denn tausend Völker gab es. Nur die Fessel
der tausend Nacken fehlt noch, es fehlt das Eine Ziel. Noch hat die
Menschheit kein Ziel.

Aber sagt mir doch, meine Brüder: wenn der Menschheit das Ziel noch
fehlt, fehlt da nicht auch—sie selber noch?—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von der Nächstenliebe

Ihr drängt euch um den Nächsten und habt schöne Worte dafür. Aber ich
sage euch: eure Nächstenliebe ist eure schlechte Liebe zu euch selber.

Ihr flüchtet zum Nächsten vor euch selber und möchtet euch daraus eine
Tugend machen: aber ich durchschaue euer „Selbstloses“.

Das Du ist älter als das Ich; das Du ist heilig gesprochen, aber noch
nicht das Ich: so drängt sich der Mensch hin zum Nächsten.

Rathe ich euch zur Nächstenliebe? Lieber noch rathe ich euch zur
Nächsten-Flucht und zur Fernsten-Liebe!

Höher als die Liebe zum Nächsten ist die Liebe zum Fernsten und
Künftigen; höher noch als die Liebe zu Menschen ist die Liebe zu Sachen
und Gespenstern.

Diess Gespenst, das vor dir herläuft, mein Bruder, ist schöner als du;
warum giebst du ihm nicht dein Fleisch und deine Knochen? Aber du
fürchtest dich und läufst zu deinem Nächsten.

Ihr haltet es mit euch selber nicht aus und liebt euch nicht genug: nun
wollt ihr den Nächsten zur Liebe verführen und euch mit seinem Irrthum
vergolden.

Ich wollte, ihr hieltet es nicht aus mit allerlei Nächsten und deren
Nachbarn; so müsstet ihr aus euch selber euren Freund und sein
überwallendes Herz schaffen.

Ihr ladet euch einen Zeugen ein, wenn ihr von euch gut reden wollt; und
wenn ihr ihn verführt habt, gut von euch zu denken, denkt ihr selber
gut von euch.

Nicht nur Der lügt, welcher wider sein Wissen redet, sondern erst recht
Der, welcher wider sein Nichtwissen redet. Und so redet ihr von euch im
Verkehre und belügt mit euch den Nachbar.

Also spricht der Narr: „der Umgang mit Menschen verdirbt den Charakter,
sonderlich wenn man keinen hat.“

Der Eine geht zum Nächsten, weil er sich sucht, und der Andre, weil er
sich verlieren möchte. Eure schlechte Liebe zu euch selber macht euch
aus der Einsamkeit ein Gefängniss.

Die Ferneren sind es, welche eure Liebe zum Nächsten bezahlen; und
schon wenn ihr zu fünfen mit einander seid, muss immer ein sechster
sterben.

Ich liebe auch eure Feste nicht: zu viel Schauspieler fand ich dabei,
und auch die Zuschauer gebärdeten sich oft gleich Schauspielern.

Nicht den Nächsten lehre ich euch, sondern den Freund. Der Freund sei
euch das Fest der Erde und ein Vorgefühl des Übermenschen.

Ich lehre euch den Freund und sein übervolles Herz. Aber man muss
verstehn, ein Schwamm zu sein, wenn man von übervollen Herzen geliebt
sein will.

Ich lehre euch den Freund, in dem die Welt fertig dasteht, eine Schale
des Guten,—den schaffenden Freund, der immer eine fertige Welt zu
verschenken hat.

Und wie ihm die Welt auseinander rollte, so rollt sie ihm wieder in
Ringen zusammen, als das Werden des Guten durch das Böse, als das
Werden der Zwecke aus dem Zufalle.

Die Zukunft und das Fernste sei dir die Ursache deines Heute: in deinem
Freunde sollst du den Übermenschen als deine Ursache lieben.

Meine Brüder, zur Nächstenliebe rathe ich euch nicht: ich rathe euch
zur Fernsten-Liebe.

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom Wege des Schaffenden

Willst du, mein Bruder, in die Vereinsamung gehen? Willst du den Weg zu
dir selber suchen? Zaudere noch ein Wenig und höre mich.

„Wer sucht, der geht leicht selber verloren. Alle Vereinsamung ist
Schuld“: also spricht die Heerde. Und du gehörtest lange zur Heerde.

Die Stimme der Heerde wird auch in dir noch tönen. Und wenn du sagen
wirst „ich habe nicht mehr Ein Gewissen mit euch“, so wird es eine
Klage und ein Schmerz sein.

Siehe, diesen Schmerz selber gebar noch das Eine Gewissen: und dieses
Gewissens letzter Schimmer glüht noch auf deiner Trübsal.

Aber du willst den Weg deiner Trübsal gehen, welches ist der Weg zu dir
selber? So zeige mir dein Recht und deine Kraft dazu!

Bist du eine neue Kraft und ein neues Recht? Eine erste Bewegung? Ein
aus sich rollendes Rad? Kannst du auch Sterne zwingen, dass sie um dich
sich drehen?

Ach, es giebt so viel Lüsternheit nach Höhe! Es giebt so viel Krämpfe
der Ehrgeizigen! Zeige mir, dass du keiner der Lüsternen und
Ehrgeizigen bist!

Ach, es giebt so viel grosse Gedanken, die thun nicht mehr als ein
Blasebalg: sie blasen auf und machen leerer.

Frei nennst du dich? Deinen herrschenden Gedanken will ich hören und
nicht, dass du einem Joche entronnen bist.

Bist du ein Solcher, der einem Joche entrinnen _durfte_? Es giebt
Manchen, der seinen letzten Werth wegwarf, als er seine Dienstbarkeit
wegwarf.

Frei wovon? Was schiert das Zarathustra! Hell aber soll mir dein Auge
künden: frei _wozu_?

Kannst du dir selber dein Böses und dein Gutes geben und deinen Willen
über dich aufhängen wie ein Gesetz? Kannst du dir selber Richter sein
und Rächer deines Gesetzes?

Furchtbar ist das Alleinsein mit dem Richter und Rächer des eignen
Gesetzes. Also wird ein Stern hinausgeworfen in den öden Raum und in
den eisigen Athem des Alleinseins.

Heute noch leidest du an den Vielen, du Einer: heute noch hast du
deinen Muth ganz und deine Hoffnungen.

Aber einst wird dich die Einsamkeit müde machen, einst wird dein Stolz
sich krümmen und dein Muth knirschen. Schreien wirst du einst „ich bin
allein!“

Einst wirst du dein Hohes nicht mehr sehn und dein Niedriges allzunahe;
dein Erhabnes selbst wird dich fürchten machen wie ein Gespenst.
Schreien wirst du einst: „Alles ist falsch!“

Es giebt Gefühle, die den Einsamen tödten wollen; gelingt es ihnen
nicht, nun, so müssen sie selber sterben! Aber vermagst du das, Mörder
zu sein?

Kennst du, mein Bruder, schon das Wort „Verachtung“? Und die Qual
deiner Gerechtigkeit, Solchen gerecht zu sein, die dich verachten?

Du zwingst Viele, über dich umzulernen; das rechnen sie dir hart an. Du
kamst ihnen nahe und giengst doch vorüber: das verzeihen sie dir
niemals.

Du gehst über sie hinaus: aber je höher du steigst, um so kleiner sieht
dich das Auge des Neides. Am meisten aber wird der Fliegende gehasst.

„Wie wolltet ihr gegen mich gerecht sein!—musst du sprechen—ich erwähle
mir eure Ungerechtigkeit als den mir zugemessnen Theil.“

Ungerechtigkeit und Schmutz werfen sie nach dem Einsamen: aber, mein
Bruder, wenn du ein Stern sein willst, so musst du ihnen desshalb nicht
weniger leuchten!

Und hüte dich vor den Guten und Gerechten! Sie kreuzigen gerne Die,
welche sich ihre eigne Tugend erfinden,—sie hassen den Einsamen.

Hüte dich auch vor der heiligen Einfalt! Alles ist ihr unheilig, was
nicht einfältig ist; sie spielt auch gerne mit dem Feuer—der
Scheiterhaufen.

Und hüte dich auch vor den Anfällen deiner Liebe! Zu schnell streckt
der Einsame Dem die Hand entgegen, der ihm begegnet.

Manchem Menschen darfst du nicht die Hand geben, sondern nur die Tatze:
und ich will, dass deine Tatze auch Krallen habe.

Aber der schlimmste Feind, dem du begegnen kannst, wirst du immer dir
selber sein; du selber lauerst dir auf in Höhlen und Wäldern.

Einsamer, du gehst den Weg zu dir selber! Und an dir selber fuhrt dein
Weg vorbei und an deinen sieben Teufeln!

Ketzer wirst du dir selber sein und Hexe und Wahrsager und Narr und
Zweifler und Unheiliger und Bösewicht.

Verbrennen musst du dich wollen in deiner eignen Flamme: wie wolltest
du neu werden, wenn du nicht erst Asche geworden bist!

Einsamer, du gehst den Weg des Schaffenden: einen Gott willst du dir
schaffen aus deinen sieben Teufeln!

Einsamer, du gehst den Weg des Liebenden: dich selbst liebst du und
desshalb verachtest du dich, wie nur Liebende verachten.

Schaffen will der Liebende, weil er verachtet! Was weiss Der von Liebe,
der nicht gerade verachten musste, was er liebte!

Mit deiner Liebe gehe in deine Vereinsamung und mit deinem Schaffen,
mein Bruder; und spät erst wird die Gerechtigkeit dir nachhinken.

Mit meinen Thränen gehe in deine Vereinsamung, mein Bruder. Ich liebe
Den, der über sich selber hinaus schaffen will und so zu Grunde geht.—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von alten und jungen Weiblein

„Was schleichst du so scheu durch die Dämmerung, Zarathustra? Und was
birgst du behutsam unter deinem Mantel?

Ist es ein Schatz, der dir geschenkt? Oder ein Kind, das dir geboren
wurde? Oder gehst du jetzt selber auf den Wegen der Diebe, du Freund
der Bösen?“—

Wahrlich, mein Bruder! sprach Zarathustra, es ist ein Schatz, der mir
geschenkt wurde: eine kleine Wahrheit ist’s, die ich trage.

Aber sie ist ungebärdig wie ein junges Kind; und wenn ich ihr nicht den
Mund halte, so schreit sie überlaut.

Als ich heute allein meines Weges gieng, zur Stunde, wo die Sonne
sinkt, begegnete mir ein altes Weiblein und redete also zu meiner
Seele:

„Vieles sprach Zarathustra auch zu uns Weibern, doch nie sprach er uns
über das Weib.“

Und ich entgegnete ihr: „über das Weib soll man nur zu Männern reden.“

„Rede auch zu mir vom Weibe, sprach sie; ich bin alt genug, um es
gleich wieder zu vergessen.“

Und ich willfahrte dem alten Weiblein und sprach also zu ihm:

Alles am Weibe ist ein Räthsel, und Alles am Weibe hat Eine Lösung: sie
heisst Schwangerschaft.

Der Mann ist für das Weib ein Mittel: der Zweck ist immer das Kind.
Aber was ist das Weib für den Mann?

Zweierlei will der ächte Mann: Gefahr und Spiel. Desshalb will er das
Weib, als das gefährlichste Spielzeug.

Der Mann soll zum Kriege erzogen werden und das Weib zur Erholung des
Kriegers: alles Andre ist Thorheit.

Allzusüsse Früchte—die mag der Krieger nicht. Darum mag er das Weib;
bitter ist auch noch das süsseste Weib.

Besser als ein Mann versteht das Weib die Kinder, aber der Mann ist
kindlicher als das Weib.

Im ächten Manne ist ein Kind versteckt: das will spielen. Auf, ihr
Frauen, so entdeckt mir doch das Kind im Manne!

Ein Spielzeug sei das Weib, rein und fein, dem Edelsteine gleich,
bestrahlt von den Tugenden einer Welt, welche noch nicht da ist.

Der Strahl eines Sternes glänze in eurer Liebe! Eure Hoffnung heisse:
„möge ich den Übermenschen gebären!“

In eurer Liebe sei Tapferkeit! Mit eurer Liebe sollt ihr auf Den
losgehn, der euch Furcht einflösst!

In eurer Liebe sei eure Ehre! Wenig versteht sich sonst das Weib auf
Ehre. Aber diess sei eure Ehre, immer mehr zu lieben, als ihr geliebt
werdet, und nie die Zweiten zu sein.

Der Mann fürchte sich vor dem Weibe, wenn es liebt: da bringt es jedes
Opfer, und jedes andre Ding gilt ihm ohne Werth.

Der Mann fürchte sich vor dem Weibe, wenn es hasst: denn der Mann ist
im Grunde der Seele nur böse, das Weib aber ist dort schlecht.

Wen hasst das Weib am meisten?—Also sprach das Eisen zum Magneten: „ich
hasse dich am meisten, weil du anziehst, aber nicht stark genug bist,
an dich zu ziehen.“

Das Glück des Mannes heisst: ich will. Das Glück des Weibes heisst: er
will.

„Siehe, jetzt eben ward die Welt vollkommen!“—also denkt ein jedes
Weib, wenn es aus ganzer Liebe gehorcht.

Und gehorchen muss das Weib und eine Tiefe finden zu seiner Oberfläche.
Oberfläche ist des Weibes Gemüth, eine bewegliche stürmische Haut auf
einem seichten Gewässer.

Des Mannes Gemüth aber ist tief, sein Strom rauscht in unterirdischen
Höhlen: das Weib ahnt seine Kraft, aber begreift sie nicht.—

Da entgegnete mir das alte Weiblein: „Vieles Artige sagte Zarathustra
und sonderlich für Die, welche jung genug dazu sind.

Seltsam ist’s, Zarathustra kennt wenig die Weiber, und doch hat er über
sie Recht! Geschieht diess desshalb, weil beim Weibe kein Ding
unmöglich ist?

Und nun nimm zum Danke eine kleine Wahrheit! Bin ich doch alt genug für
sie!

Wickle sie ein und halte ihr den Mund: sonst schreit sie überlaut,
diese kleine Wahrheit.“

„Gieb mir, Weib, deine kleine Wahrheit!“ sagte ich. Und also sprach das
alte Weiblein:

„Du gehst zu Frauen? Vergiss die Peitsche nicht!“—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom Biss der Natter

Eines Tages war Zarathustra unter einem Feigenbaume eingeschlafen, da
es heiss war, und hatte seine Arme über das Gesicht gelegt. Da kam eine
Natter und biss ihn in den Hals, so dass Zarathustra vor Schmerz
aufschrie. Als er den Arm vom Gesicht genommen hatte, sah er die
Schlange an: da erkannte sie die Augen Zarathustra’s, wand sich
ungeschickt und wollte davon. „Nicht doch, sprach Zarathustra; noch
nahmst du meinen Dank nicht an! Du wecktest mich zur Zeit, mein Weg ist
noch lang.“ „Dein Weg ist noch kurz, sagte die Natter traurig; mein
Gift tödtet.“ Zarathustra lächelte. „Wann starb wohl je ein Drache am
Gift einer Schlange?—sagte er. Aber nimm dein Gift zurück! Du bist
nicht reich genug, es mir zu schenken.“ Da fiel ihm die Natter von
Neuem um den Hals und leckte ihm seine Wunde.

Als Zarathustra diess einmal seinen Jüngern erzählte, fragten sie: „Und
was, oh Zarathustra, ist die Moral deiner Geschichte?“ Zarathustra
antwortete darauf also:

Den Vernichter der Moral heissen mich die Guten und Gerechten: meine
Geschichte ist unmoralisch.—

So ihr aber einen Feind habt, so vergeltet ihm nicht Böses mit Gutem:
denn das würde beschämen. Sondern beweist, dass er euch etwas Gutes
angethan hat.

Und lieber zürnt noch, als dass ihr beschämt! Und wenn euch geflucht
wird, so gefällt es mir nicht, dass ihr dann segnen wollt. Lieber ein
Wenig mitfluchen!

Und geschah euch ein grosses Unrecht, so thut mir geschwind fünf kleine
dazu! Grässlich ist Der anzusehn, den allein das Unrecht drückt.

Wusstet ihr diess schon? Getheiltes Unrecht ist halbes Recht. Und Der
soll das Unrecht auf sich nehmen, der es tragen kann!

Eine kleine Rache ist menschlicher, als gar keine Rache. Und wenn die
Strafe nicht auch ein Recht und eine Ehre ist für den Übertretenden, so
mag ich auch euer Strafen nicht.

Vornehmer ist’s, sich Unrecht zu geben als Recht zu behalten,
sonderlich wenn man Recht hat. Nur muss man reich genug dazu sein.

Ich mag eure kalte Gerechtigkeit nicht; und aus dem Auge eurer Richter
blickt mir immer der Henker und sein kaltes Eisen.

Sagt, wo findet sich die Gerechtigkeit, welche Liebe mit sehenden Augen
ist?

So erfindet mir doch die Liebe, welche nicht nur alle Strafe, sondern
auch alle Schuld trägt!

So erfindet mir doch die Gerechtigkeit, die Jeden freispricht,
ausgenommen den Richtenden!

Wollt ihr auch diess noch hören? An Dem, der von Grund aus gerecht sein
will, wird auch noch die Lüge zur Menschen-Freundlichkeit.

Aber wie wollte ich gerecht sein von Grund aus! Wie kann ich Jedem das
Seine geben! Diess sei mir genug: ich gebe Jedem das Meine.

Endlich, meine Brüder, hütet euch Unrecht zu thun allen Einsiedlern!
Wie könnte ein Einsiedler vergessen! Wie könnte er vergelten!

Wie ein tiefer Brunnen ist ein Einsiedler. Leicht ist es, einen Stein
hineinzuwerfen; sank er aber bis zum Grunde, sagt, wer will ihn wieder
hinausbringen?

Hütet euch, den Einsiedler zu beleidigen! Thatet ihr’s aber, nun, so
tödtet ihn auch noch!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von Kind und Ehe

Ich habe eine Frage für dich allein, mein Bruder: wie ein Senkblei
werfe ich diese Frage in deine Seele, dass ich wisse, wie tief sie sei.

Du bist jung und wünschest dir Kind und Ehe. Aber ich frage dich: bist
du ein Mensch, der ein Kind sich wünschen _darf_?

Bist du der Siegreiche, der Selbstbezwinger, der Gebieter der Sinne,
der Herr deiner Tugenden? Also frage ich dich.

Oder redet aus deinem Wunsche das Thier und die Nothdurft? Oder
Vereinsamung? Oder Unfriede mit dir?

Ich will, dass dein Sieg und deine Freiheit sich nach einem Kinde
sehne. Lebendige Denkmale sollst du bauen deinem Siege und deiner
Befreiung.

Über dich sollst du hinausbauen. Aber erst musst du mir selber gebaut
sein, rechtwinklig an Leib und Seele.

Nicht nur fort sollst du dich pflanzen, sondern hinauf! Dazu helfe dir
der Garten der Ehe!

Einen höheren Leib sollst du schaffen, eine erste Bewegung, ein aus
sich rollendes Rad,—einen Schaffenden sollst du schaffen.

Ehe: so heisse ich den Willen zu Zweien, das Eine zu schaffen, das mehr
ist, als die es schufen. Ehrfurcht vor einander nenne ich Ehe als vor
den Wollenden eines solchen Willens.

Diess sei der Sinn und die Wahrheit deiner Ehe. Aber Das, was die
Viel-zu-Vielen Ehe nennen, diese Überflüssigen,—ach, wie nenne ich das?

Ach, diese Armuth der Seele zu Zweien! Ach, dieser Schmutz der Seele zu
Zweien! Ach diess erbärmliche Behagen zu Zweien!

Ehe nennen sie diess Alles; und sie sagen, ihre Ehen seien im Himmel
geschlossen.

Nun, ich mag ihn nicht, diesen Himmel der Überflüssigen! Nein, ich mag
sie nicht, diese im himmlischen Netz verschlungenen Thiere!

Ferne bleibe mir auch der Gott, der heranhinkt, zu segnen, was er nicht
zusammenfügte!

Lacht mir nicht über solche Ehen! Welches Kind hätte nicht Grund, über
seine Eltern zu weinen?

Würdig schien mir dieser Mann und reif für den Sinn der Erde: aber als
ich sein Weib sah, schien mir die Erde ein Haus für Unsinnige.

Ja, ich wollte, dass die Erde in Krämpfen bebte, wenn sich ein Heiliger
und eine Gans mit einander paaren.

Dieser gieng wie ein Held auf Wahrheiten aus und endlich erbeutete er
sich eine kleine geputzte Lüge. Seine Ehe nennt er’s.

Jener war spröde im Verkehre und wählte wählerisch. Aber mit Einem Male
verdarb er für alle Male seine Gesellschaft: seine Ehe nennt er’s.

Jener suchte eine Magd mit den Tugenden eines Engels. Aber mit Einem
Male wurde er die Magd eines Weibes, und nun thäte es Noth, dass er
darüber noch zum Engel werde.

Sorgsam fand ich jetzt alle Käufer, und Alle haben listige Augen. Aber
seine Frau kauft auch der Listigste noch im Sack.

Viele kurze Thorheiten—das heisst bei euch Liebe. Und eure Ehe macht
vielen kurzer Thorheiten ein Ende, als Eine lange Dummheit.

Eure Liebe zum Weibe und des Weibes Liebe zum Manne: ach, möchte sie
doch Mitleiden sein mit leidenden und verhüllten Göttern! Aber zumeist
errathen zwei Thiere einander.

Aber auch noch eure beste Liebe ist nur ein verzücktes Gleichniss und
eine schmerzhafte Gluth. Eine Fackel ist sie, die euch zu höheren Wegen
leuchten soll.

Über euch hinaus sollt ihr einst lieben! So _lernt_ erst lieben! Und
darum musstet ihr den bittern Kelch eurer Liebe trinken.

Bitterniss ist im Kelch auch der besten Liebe: so macht sie Sehnsucht
zum Übermenschen, so macht sie Durst dir, dem Schaffenden!

Durst dem Schaffenden, Pfeil und Sehnsucht zum Übermenschen: sprich,
mein Bruder, ist diess dein Wille zur Ehe?

Heilig heisst mir solch ein Wille und solche Ehe.—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom freien Tode

Viele sterben zu spät, und Einige sterben zu früh. Noch klingt fremd
die Lehre: „stirb zur rechten Zeit!“

Stirb zur rechten Zeit: also lehrt es Zarathustra.

Freilich, wer nie zur rechten Zeit lebt, wie sollte der je zur rechten
Zeit sterben? Möchte er doch nie geboren sein!—Also rathe ich den
Überflüssigen.

Aber auch die Überflüssigen thun noch wichtig mit ihrem Sterben, und
auch die hohlste Nuss will noch geknackt sein.

Wichtig nehmen Alle das Sterben: aber noch ist der Tod kein Fest. Noch
erlernten die Menschen nicht, wie man die schönsten Feste weiht.

Den vollbringenden Tod zeige ich euch, der den Lebenden ein Stachel und
ein Gelöbniss wird.

Seinen Tod stirbt der Vollbringende, siegreich, umringt von Hoffenden
und Gelobenden.

Also sollte man sterben lernen; und es sollte kein Fest geben, wo ein
solcher Sterbender nicht der Lebenden Schwüre weihte!

Also zu sterben ist das Beste; das Zweite aber ist: im Kampfe zu
sterben und eine grosse Seele zu verschwenden.

Aber dem Kämpfenden gleich verhasst wie dem Sieger ist euer grinsender
Tod, der heranschleicht wie ein Dieb—und doch als Herr kommt.

Meinen Tod lobe ich euch, den freien Tod, der mir kommt, weil _ich_
will.

Und wann werde ich wollen?—Wer ein Ziel hat und einen Erben, der will
den Tod zur rechten Zeit für Ziel und Erben.

Und aus Ehrfurcht vor Ziel und Erben wird er keine dürren Kränze mehr
im Heiligthum des Lebens aufhängen.

Wahrlich, nicht will ich den Seildrehern gleichen: sie ziehen ihren
Faden in die Länge und gehen dabei selber immer rückwärts.

Mancher wird auch für seine Wahrheiten und Siege zu alt; ein zahnloser
Mund hat nicht mehr das Recht zu jeder Wahrheit.

Und Jeder, der Ruhm haben will, muss sich bei Zeiten von der Ehre
verabschieden und die schwere Kunst üben, zur rechten Zeit zu—gehn.

Man muss aufhören, sich essen zu lassen, wenn man am besten schmeckt:
das wissen Die, welche lange geliebt werden wollen.

Saure Äpfel giebt es freilich, deren Loos will, dass sie bis auf den
letzten Tag des Herbstes warten: und zugleich werden sie reif, gelb und
runzelig.

Andern altert das Herz zuerst und Andern der Geist. Und Einige sind
greis in der Jugend: aber spät jung erhält lang jung.

Manchem missräth das Leben: ein Giftwurm frisst sich ihm an’s Herz. So
möge er zusehn, dass ihm das Sterben um so mehr gerathe.

Mancher wird nie süss, er fault im Sommer schon. Feigheit ist es, die
ihn an seinem Aste festhält.

Viel zu Viele leben und viel zu lange hängen sie an ihren Ästen. Möchte
ein Sturm kommen, der all diess Faule und Wurmfressne vom Baume
schüttelt!

Möchten Prediger kommen des _schnellen_ Todes! Das wären mir die
rechten Stürme und Schüttler an Lebensbäumen Aber ich höre nur den
langsamen Tod predigen und Geduld mit allem „Irdischen“ .

Ach, ihr predigt Geduld mit dem Irdischen? Dieses Irdische ist es, das
zu viel Geduld mit euch hat, ihr Lästermäuler!

Wahrlich, zu früh starb jener Hebräer, den die Prediger des langsamen
Todes ehren: und Vielen ward es seitdem zum Verhängniss, dass er zu
früh starb.

Noch kannte er nur Thränen und die Schwermuth des Hebräers, sammt dem
Hasse der Guten und Gerechten,—der Hebräer Jesus: da überfiel ihn die
Sehnsucht zum Tode.

Wäre er doch in der Wüste geblieben und ferne von den Guten und
Gerechten! Vielleicht hätte er leben gelernt und die Erde lieben
gelernt—und das Lachen dazu!

Glaubt es mir, meine Brüder! Er starb zu früh; er selber hätte seine
Lehre widerrufen, wäre er bis zu meinem Alter gekommen! Edel genug war
er zum Widerrufen!

Aber ungereift war er noch. Unreif liebt der Jüngling und unreif hasst
er auch Mensch und Erde. Angebunden und schwer ist ihm noch Gemüth und
Geistesflügel.

Aber im Manne ist mehr Kind als im Jünglinge, und weniger Schwermuth:
besser versteht er sich auf Tod und Leben.

Frei zum Tode und frei im Tode, ein heiliger Nein-sager, wenn es nicht
Zeit mehr ist zum Ja: also versteht er sich auf Tod und Leben.

Dass euer Sterben keine Lästerung sei auf Mensch und Erde, meine
Freunde: das erbitte ich mir von dem Honig eurer Seele.

In eurem Sterben soll noch euer Geist und eure Tugend glühn, gleich
einem Abendroth um die Erde: oder aber das Sterben ist euch schlecht
gerathen.

Also will ich selber sterben, dass ihr Freunde um meinetwillen die Erde
mehr liebt; und zur Erde will ich wieder werden, dass ich in Der Ruhe
habe, die mich gebar.

Wahrlich, ein Ziel hatte Zarathustra, er warf seinen Ball: nun seid ihr
Freunde meines Zieles Erbe, euch werfe ich den goldenen Ball zu.

Lieber als Alles sehe ich euch, meine Freunde, den goldenen Ball
werfen! Und so verziehe ich noch ein Wenig auf Erden: verzeiht es mir!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von der schenkenden Tugend

1.

Als Zarathustra von der Stadt Abschied genommen hatte, welcher sein
Herz zugethan war und deren Name lautet: „die bunte Kuh“—folgten ihm
Viele, die sich seine Jünger nannten und gaben ihm das Geleit. Also
kamen sie an einen Kreuzweg: da sagte ihnen Zarathustra, dass er
nunmehr allein gehen wolle; denn er war ein Freund des Alleingehens.
Seine Jünger aber reichten ihm zum Abschiede einen Stab, an dessen
goldnem Griffe sich eine Schlange um die Sonne ringelte. Zarathustra
freute sich des Stabes und stützte sich darauf; dann sprach er also zu
seinen Jüngern.

Sagt mir doch: wie kam Gold zum höchsten Werthe? Darum, dass es
ungemein ist und unnützlich und leuchtend und mild im Glanze; es
schenkt sich immer.

Nur als Abbild der höchsten Tugend kam Gold zum höchsten Werthe.
Goldgleich leuchtet der Blick dem Schenkenden. Goldes-Glanz schliesst
Friede zwischen Mond und Sonne.

Ungemein ist die höchste Tugend und unnützlich, leuchtend ist sie und
mild im Glanze: eine schenkende Tugend ist die höchste Tugend.

Wahrlich, ich errathe euch wohl, meine Jünger: ihr trachtet, gleich
mir, nach der schenkenden Tugend. Was hättet ihr mit Katzen und Wölfen
gemeinsam?

Das ist euer Durst, selber zu Opfern und Geschenken zu werden: und
darum habt ihr den Durst, alle Reichthümer in euren Seele zu häufen.

Unersättlich trachtet eure Seele nach Schätzen und Kleinodien, weil
eure Tugend unersättlich ist im Verschenken-Wollen.

Ihr zwingt alle Dinge zu euch und in euch, dass sie aus eurem Borne
zurückströmen sollen als die Gaben eurer Liebe.

Wahrlich, zum Räuber an allen Werthen muss solche schenkende Liebe
werden; aber heil und heilig heisse ich diese Selbstsucht.

Eine andre Selbstsucht giebt es, eine allzuarme, eine hungernde, die
immer stehlen will, jene Selbstsucht der Kranken, die kranke
Selbstsucht.

Mit dem Auge des Diebes blickt sie auf alles Glänzende; mit der Gier
des Hungers misst sie Den, der reich zu essen hat; und immer schleicht
sie um den Tisch der Schenkenden.

Krankheit redet aus solcher Begierde und unsichtbare Entartung; von
siechem Leibe redet die diebische Gier dieser Selbstsucht.

Sagt mir, meine Brüder: was gilt uns als Schlechtes und Schlechtestes?
Ist es nicht _Entartung_?—Und auf Entartung rathen wir immer, wo die
schenkende Seele fehlt.

Aufwärts geht unser Weg, von der Art hinüber zur Über-Art. Aber ein
Grauen ist uns der entartende Sinn, welcher spricht: „Alles für mich.“

Aufwärts fliegt unser Sinn: so ist er ein Gleichniss unsres Leibes,
einer Erhöhung Gleichniss. Solcher Erhöhungen Gleichnisse sind die
Namen der Tugenden.

Also geht der Leib durch die Geschichte, ein Werdender und ein
Kämpfender. Und der Geist—was ist er ihm? Seiner Kämpfe und Siege
Herold, Genoss und Wiederhall.

Gleichnisse sind alle Namen von Gut und Böse: sie sprechen nicht aus,
sie winken nur. Ein Thor, welcher von ihnen Wissen will!

Achtet mir, meine Brüder, auf jede Stunde, wo euer Geist in
Gleichnissen reden will: da ist der Ursprung eurer Tugend.

Erhöht ist da euer Leib und auferstanden; mit seiner Wonne entzückt er
den Geist, dass er Schöpfer wird und Schätzer und Liebender und aller
Dinge Wohlthäter.

Wenn euer Herz breit und voll wallt, dem Strome gleich, ein Segen und
eine Gefahr den Anwohnenden: da ist der Ursprung eurer Tugend.

Wenn ihr erhaben seid über Lob und Tadel, und euer Wille allen Dingen
befehlen will, als eines Liebenden Wille: da ist der Ursprung eurer
Tugend.

Wenn ihr das Angenehme verachtet und das weiche Bett, und von den
Weichlichen euch nicht weit genug betten könnt: da ist der Ursprung
eurer Tugend.

Wenn ihr Eines Willens Wollende seid, und diese Wende aller Noth euch
Nothwendigkeit heisst: da ist der Ursprung eurer Tugend.

Wahrlich, ein neues Gutes und Böses ist sie! Wahrlich, ein neues tiefes
Rauschen und eines neuen Quelles Stimme!

Macht ist sie, diese neue Tugend; ein herrschender Gedanke ist sie und
um ihn eine kluge Seele: eine goldene Sonne und um sie die Schlange der
Erkenntniss.

2.

Hier schwieg Zarathustra eine Weile und sah mit Liebe auf seine Jünger.
Dann fuhr er also fort zu reden:—und seine Stimme hatte sich
verwandelt.

Bleibt mir der Erde treu, meine Brüder, mit der Macht eurer Tugend!
Eure schenkende Liebe und eure Erkenntniss diene dem Sinn der Erde!
Also bitte und beschwöre ich euch.

Lasst sie nicht davon fliegen vom Irdischen und mit den Flügeln gegen
ewige Wände schlagen! Ach, es gab immer so viel verflogene Tugend!

Führt, gleich mir, die verflogene Tugend zur Erde zurück—ja, zurück zu
Leib und Leben: dass sie der Erde ihren Sinn gebe, einen Menschen-Sinn!

Hundertfältig verflog und vergriff sich bisher so Geist wie Tugend.
Ach, in unserm Leibe wohnt jetzt noch all dieser Wahn und Fehlgriff:
Leib und Wille ist er da geworden.

Hundertfältig versuchte und verirrte sich bisher so Geist wie Tugend.
Ja, ein Versuch war der Mensch. Ach, viel Unwissen und Irrthum ist an
uns Leib geworden!

Nicht nur die Vernunft von Jahrtausenden—auch ihr Wahnsinn bricht an
uns aus. Gefährlich ist es, Erbe zu sein.

Noch kämpfen wir Schritt um Schritt mit dem Riesen Zufall, und über der
ganzen Menschheit waltete bisher noch der Unsinn, der Ohne-Sinn.

Euer Geist und eure Tugend diene dem Sinn der Erde, meine Brüder: und
aller Dinge Werth werde neu von euch gesetzt! Darum sollt ihr Kämpfende
sein! Darum sollt ihr Schaffende sein!

Wissend reinigt sich der Leib; mit Wissen versuchend erhöht er sich;
dem Erkennenden heiligen sich alle Triebe; dem Erhöhten wird die Seele
fröhlich.

Arzt, hilf dir selber: so hilfst du auch deinem Kranken noch. Das sei
seine beste Hülfe, dass er Den mit Augen sehe, der sich selber heil
macht.

Tausend Pfade giebt es, die nie noch gegangen sind; tausend
Gesundheiten und verborgene Eilande des Lebens. Unerschöpft und
unentdeckt ist immer noch Mensch und Menschen-Erde.

Wachet und horcht, ihr Einsamen! Von der Zukunft her kommen Winde mit
heimlichem Flügelschlagen; und an feine Ohren ergeht gute Botschaft.

Ihr Einsamen von heute, ihr Ausscheidenden, ihr sollt einst ein Volk
sein: aus euch, die ihr euch selber auswähltet, soll ein auserwähltes
Volk erwachsen:—und aus ihm der Übermensch.

Wahrlich, eine Stätte der Genesung soll noch die Erde werden! Und schon
liegt ein neuer Geruch um sie, ein Heil bringender,—und eine neue
Hoffnung!

3.

Als Zarathustra diese Worte gesagt hatte, schwieg er, wie Einer, der
nicht sein letztes Wort gesagt hat; lange wog er den Stab zweifelnd in
seiner Hand. Endlich sprach er also:—und seine Stimme hatte sich
verwandelt.

Allein gehe ich nun, meine Jünger! Auch ihr geht nun davon und allein!
So will ich es.

Wahrlich, ich rathe euch: geht fort von mir und wehrt euch gegen
Zarathustra! Und besser noch: schämt euch seiner! Vielleicht betrog er
euch.

Der Mensch der Erkenntniss muss nicht nur seine Feinde lieben, sondern
auch seine Freunde hassen können.

Man vergilt einem Lehrer schlecht, wenn man immer nur der Schüler
bleibt. Und warum wollt ihr nicht an meinem Kranze rupfen?

Ihr verehrt mich; aber wie, wenn eure Verehrung eines Tages umfällt?
Hütet euch, dass euch nicht eine Bildsäule erschlage!

Ihr sagt, ihr glaubt an Zarathustra? Aber was liegt an Zarathustra! Ihr
seid meine Gläubigen: aber was liegt an allen Gläubigen!

Ihr hattet euch noch nicht gesucht: da fandet ihr mich. So thun alle
Gläubigen; darum ist es so wenig mit allem Glauben.

Nun heisse ich euch, mich verlieren und euch finden; und erst, wenn ihr
mich Alle verleugnet habt, will ich euch wiederkehren.

Wahrlich, mit andern Augen, meine Brüder, werde ich mir dann meine
Verlorenen suchen; mit einer anderen Liebe werde ich euch dann lieben.

Und einst noch sollt ihr mir Freunde geworden sein und Kinder Einer
Hoffnung: dann will ich zum dritten Male bei euch sein, dass ich den
grossen Mittag mit euch feiere.

Und das ist der grosse Mittag, da der Mensch auf der Mitte seiner Bahn
steht zwischen Thier und Übermensch und seinen Weg zum Abende als seine
höchste Hoffnung feiert: denn es ist der Weg zu einem neuen Morgen.

Alsda wird sich der Untergehende selber segnen, dass er ein
Hinübergehender sei; und die Sonne seiner Erkenntniss wird ihm im
Mittage stehn.

„Todt sind alle Götter: nun wollen wir, dass der Übermensch
lebe.“—diess sei einst am grossen Mittage unser letzter Wille!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Zweiter Theil

„—und erst, wenn ihr mich Alle verleugnet habt, will ich euch
wiederkehren.
    Wahrlich, mit andern _Augen_, meine Brüder, werde ich mir dann
    meine Verlorenen suchen; mit einer andern Liebe werde ich euch dann
    lieben.“

Zarathustra, von der schenkenden Tugend


Das Kind mit dem Spiegel

Hierauf gieng Zarathustra wieder zurück in das Gebirge und in die
Einsamkeit seiner Höhle und entzog sich den Menschen: wartend gleich
einem Säemann, der seinen Samen ausgeworfen hat. Seine Seele aber wurde
voll von Ungeduld und Begierde nach Denen, welche er liebte: denn er
hatte ihnen noch Viel zu geben. Diess nämlich ist das Schwerste, aus
Liebe die offne Hand schliessen und als Schenkender die Scham bewahren.

Also vergiengen dem Einsamen Monde und Jahre; seine Weisheit aber wuchs
und machte ihm Schmerzen durch ihre Fülle.

Eines Morgens aber wachte er schon vor der Morgenröthe auf, besann sich
lange auf seinem Lager und sprach endlich zu seinem Herzen:

Was erschrak ich doch so in meinem Traume, dass ich aufwachte? Trat
nicht ein Kind zu mir, das einen Spiegel trug?

„Oh Zarathustra—sprach das Kind zu mir—schaue Dich an im Spiegel!“

Aber als ich in den Spiegel schaute, da schrie ich auf, und mein Herz
war erschüttert: denn nicht mich sahe ich darin, sondern eines Teufels
Fratze und Hohnlachen.

Wahrlich, allzugut verstehe ich des Traumes Zeichen und Mahnung: meine
_Lehre_ ist in Gefahr, Unkraut will Weizen heissen!

Meine Feinde sind mächtig worden und haben meiner Lehre Bildniss
entstellt, also, dass meine Liebsten sich der Gaben schämen müssen, die
ich ihnen gab.

Verloren giengen mir meine Freunde; die Stunde kam mir, meine Verlornen
zu suchen!—

Mit diesen Worten sprang Zarathustra auf, aber nicht wie ein
Geängstigter, der nach Luft sucht, sondern eher wie ein Seher und
Sänger, welchen der Geist anfällt. Verwundert sahen sein Adler und
seine Schlange auf ihn hin: denn gleich dem Morgenrothe lag ein
kommendes Glück auf seinem Antlitze.

Was geschah mir doch, meine Thiere?—sagte Zarathustra. Bin ich nicht
verwandelt! Kam mir nicht die Seligkeit wie ein Sturmwind?

Thöricht ist mein Glück und Thörichtes wird es reden: zu jung noch ist
es—so habt Geduld mit ihm!

Verwundet bin ich von meinem Glücke: alle Leidenden sollen mir Arzte
sein!

Zu meinen Freunden darf ich wieder hinab und auch zu meinen Feinden!
Zarathustra darf wieder reden und schenken und Lieben das Liebste thun!

Meine ungeduldige Liebe fliesst über in Strömen, abwärts, nach Aufgang
und Niedergang. Aus schweigsamem Gebirge und Gewittern des Schmerzes
rauscht meine Seele in die Thäler.

Zu lange sehnte ich mich und schaute in die Ferne. Zu lange gehörte ich
der Einsamkeit: so verlernte ich das Schweigen.

Mund bin ich worden ganz und gar, und Brausen eines Bachs aus hohen
Felsen: hinab will ich meine Rede stürzen in die Thäler.

Und mag mein Strom der Liebe in Unwegsames stürzen! Wie sollte ein
Strom nicht endlich den Weg zum Meere finden!

Wohl ist ein See in mir, ein einsiedlerischer, selbstgenugsamer; aber
mein Strom der Liebe reisst ihn mit sich hinab—zum Meere!

Neue Wege gehe ich, eine neue Rede kommt mir; müde wurde ich, gleich
allen Schaffenden, der alten Zungen. Nicht will mein Geist mehr auf
abgelaufnen Sohlen wandeln.

Zu langsam läuft mir alles Reden:—in deinen Wagen springe ich, Sturm!
Und auch dich will ich noch peitschen mit meiner Bosheit!

Wie ein Schrei und ein jauchzen will ich über weite Meere hinfahren,
bis ich die glückseligen Inseln finde, wo meine Freunde weilen:—

Und meine Feinde unter ihnen! Wie liebe ich nun jeden, zu dem ich nur
reden darf! Auch meine Feinde gehören zu meiner Seligkeit.

Und wenn ich auf mein wildestes Pferd steigen will, so hilft mir mein
Speer immer am besten hinauf: der ist meines Fusses allzeit bereiter
Diener:—

Der Speer, den ich gegen meine Feinde schleudere! Wie danke ich es
meinen Feinden, dass ich endlich ihn schleudern darf!

Zu gross war die Spannung meiner Wolke: zwischen Gelächtern der Blitze
will ich Hagelschauer in die Tiefe werfen.

Gewaltig wird sich da meine Brust heben, gewaltig wird sie ihren Sturm
über die Berge hinblasen: so kommt ihr Erleichterung.

Wahrlich, einem Sturme gleich kommt mein Glück und meine Freiheit! Aber
meine Feinde sollen glauben, _der Böse_ rase über ihren Häuptern.

Ja, auch ihr werdet erschreckt sein, meine Freunde, ob meiner wilden
Weisheit; und vielleicht flieht ihr davon sammt meinen Feinden.

Ach, dass ich’s verstünde, euch mit Hirtenflöten zurück zu locken! Ach,
dass meine Löwin Weisheit zärtlich brüllen lernte! Und Vieles lernten
wir schon mit einander!

Meine wilde Weisheit wurde trächtig auf einsamen Bergen; auf rauhen
Steinen gebar sie ihr Junges, Jüngstes.

Nun läuft sie närrisch durch die harte Wüste und sucht und sucht nach
sanftem Rasen—meine alte wilde Weisheit!

Auf eurer Herzen sanften Rasen, meine Freunde!—auf eure Liebe möchte
sie ihr Liebstes betten!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Auf den glückseligen Inseln

Die Feigen fallen von den Bäumen, sie sind gut und süss; und indem sie
fallen, reisst ihnen die rothe Haut. Ein Nordwind bin ich reifen
Feigen.

Also, gleich Feigen, fallen euch diese Lehren zu, meine Freunde: nun
trinkt ihren Saft und ihr süsses Fleisch! Herbst ist es umher und
reiner Himmel und Nachmittag.

Seht, welche Fülle ist um uns! Und aus dem Überflusse heraus ist es
schön hinaus zu blicken auf ferne Meere.

Einst sagte man Gott, wenn man auf ferne Meere blickte; nun aber lehrte
ich euch sagen: Übermensch.

Gott ist eine Muthmaassung; aber ich will, dass euer Muthmaassen nicht
weiter reiche, als euer schaffender Wille.

Könntet ihr einen Gott _schaffen_?—So schweigt mir doch von allen
Göttern! Wohl aber könntet ihr den Übermenschen schaffen.

Nicht ihr vielleicht selber, meine Brüder! Aber zu Vätern und Vorfahren
könntet ihr euch umschaffen des Übermenschen: und Diess sei euer bestes
Schaffen!—

Gott ist eine Muthmaassung: aber ich will, dass euer Muthmaassen
begrenzt sei in der Denkbarkeit.

Könntet ihr einen Gott _denken_?—Aber diess bedeute euch Wille zur
Wahrheit, dass Alles verwandelt werde in Menschen—Denkbares,
Menschen—Sichtbares, Menschen—Fühlbares! Eure eignen Sinne sollt ihr zu
Ende denken!

Und was ihr Welt nanntet, das soll erst von euch geschaffen werden:
eure Vernunft, euer Bild, euer Wille, eure Liebe soll es selber werden!
Und wahrlich, zu eurer Seligkeit, ihr Erkennenden!

Und wie wolltet ihr das Leben ertragen ohne diese Hoffnung, ihr
Erkennenden? Weder in’s Unbegreifliche dürftet ihr eingeboren sein,
noch in’s Unvernünftige.

Aber dass ich euch ganz mein Herz offenbare, ihr Freunde: _wenn_ es
Götter gäbe, wie hielte ich’s aus, kein Gott zu sein! _Also_ giebt es
keine Götter.

Wohl zog ich den Schluss; nun aber zieht er mich.—

Gott ist eine Muthmaassung: aber wer tränke alle Qual dieser
Muthmaassung, ohne zu sterben? Soll dem Schaffenden sein Glaube
genommen sein und dem Adler sein Schweben in Adler-Fernen?

Gott ist ein Gedanke, der macht alles Gerade krumm und Alles, was
steht, drehend. Wie? Die Zeit wäre hinweg, und alles Vergängliche nur
Lüge?

Diess zu denken ist Wirbel und Schwindel menschlichen Gebeinen und noch
dem Magen ein Erbrechen: wahrlich, die drehende Krankheit heisse ich’s,
Solches zu muthmaassen.

Böse heisse ich’s und menschenfeindlich: all diess Lehren vom Einen und
Vollen und Unbewegten und Satten und Unvergänglichen!

Alles Unvergängliche—das ist nur ein Gleichniss! Und die Dichter lügen
zuviel.—

Aber von Zeit und Werden sollen die besten Gleichnisse reden: ein Lob
sollen sie sein und eine Rechtfertigung aller Vergänglichkeit!

Schaffen—das ist die grosse Erlösung vom Leiden, und des Lebens
Leichtwerden. Aber dass der Schaffende sei, dazu selber thut Leid noth
und viel Verwandelung.

Ja, viel bitteres Sterben muss in eurem Leben sein, ihr Schaffenden!
Also seid ihr Fürsprecher und Rechtfertiger aller Vergänglichkeit.

Dass der Schaffende selber das Kind sei, das neu geboren werde, dazu
muss er auch die Gebärerin sein wollen und der Schmerz der Gebärerin.

Wahrlich, durch hundert Seelen gieng ich meinen Weg und durch hundert
Wiegen und Geburtswehen. Manchen Abschied nahm ich schon, ich kenne die
herzbrechenden letzten Stunden.

Aber so will’s mein schaffender Wille, mein Schicksal. Oder, dass ich’s
euch redlicher sage: solches Schicksal gerade—will mein Wille.

Alles Fühlende leidet an mir und ist in Gefängnissen: aber mein Wollen
kommt mir stets als mein Befreier und Freudebringer.

Wollen befreit: das ist die wahre Lehre von Wille und Freiheit—so lehrt
sie euch Zarathustra.

Nicht-mehr-wollen und Nicht-mehr-schätzen und Nicht-mehr-schaffen! ach,
dass diese grosse Müdigkeit mir stets ferne bleibe!

Auch im Erkennen fühle ich nur meines Willens Zeuge- und Werde-Lust;
und wenn Unschuld in meiner Erkenntniss ist, so geschieht diess, weil
Wille zur Zeugung in ihr ist.

Hinweg von Gott und Göttem lockte mich dieser Wille; was wäre denn zu
schaffen, wenn Götter—da wären!

Aber zum Menschen treibt er mich stets von Neuem, mein inbrünstiger
Schaffens-Wille; so treibt’s den Hammer hin zum Steine.

Ach, ihr Menschen, im Steine schläft mir ein Bild, das Bild meiner
Bilder! Ach, dass es im härtesten, hässlichsten Steine schlafen muss!

Nun wüthet mein Hammer grausam gegen sein Gefängniss. Vom Steine
stäuben Stücke: was schiert mich das?

Vollenden will ich’s: denn ein Schatten kam zu mir—aller Dinge
Stillstes und Leichtestes kam einst zu mir!

Des Übermenschen Schönheit kam zu mir als Schatten. Ach, meine Brüder!
Was gehen mich noch—die Götter an!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Mitleidigen

Meine Freunde, es kam eine Spottrede zu eurem Freunde: „seht nur
Zarathustra! Wandelt er nicht unter uns wie unter Thieren?“

Aber so ist es besser geredet: „der Erkennende wandelt unter Menschen
_als_ unter Thieren.“

Der Mensch selber aber heisst dem Erkennenden: das Thier, das rothe
Backen hat.

Wie geschah ihm das? Ist es nicht, weil er sich zu oft hat schämen
müssen?

Oh meine Freunde! So spricht der Erkennende: Scham, Scham, Scham—das
ist die Geschichte des Menschen!

Und darum gebeut sich der Edle, nicht zu beschämen: Scham gebeut er
sich vor allem Leidenden.

Wahrlich, ich mag sie nicht, die Barmherzigen, die selig sind in ihrem
Mitleiden: zu sehr gebricht es ihnen an Scham.

Muss ich mitleidig sein, so will ich’s doch nicht heissen; und wenn
ich’s bin, dann gern aus der Ferne.

Gerne verhülle ich auch das Haupt und fliehe davon, bevor ich noch
erkannt bin: und also heisse ich euch thun, meine Freunde!

Möge mein Schicksal mir immer Leidlose, gleich euch, über den Weg
führen, und Solche, mit denen mir Hoffnung und Mahl und Honig gemein
sein _darf_!

Wahrlich, ich that wohl Das und jenes an Leidenden: aber Besseres
schien ich mir stets zu thun, wenn ich lernte, mich besser freuen.

Seit es Menschen giebt, hat der Mensch sich zu wenig gefreut: Das
allein, meine Brüder, ist unsre Erbsünde!

Und lernen wir besser uns freuen, so verlernen wir am besten, Andern
wehe zu thun und Wehes auszudenken.

Darum wasche ich mir die Hand, die dem Leidenden half, darum wische ich
mir auch noch die Seele ab.

Denn dass ich den Leidenden leidend sah, dessen schämte ich mich um
seiner Scham willen; und als ich ihm half, da vergieng ich mich hart an
seinem Stolze.

Grosse Verbindlichkeiten machen nicht dankbar, sondern rachsüchtig; und
wenn die kleine Wohlthat nicht vergessen wird, so wird noch ein
Nage-Wurm daraus.

„Seid spröde im Annehmen! Zeichnet aus damit, dass ihr annehmt!“—also
rathe ich Denen, die Nichts zu verschenken haben.

Ich aber bin ein Schenkender: gerne schenke ich, als Freund den
Freunden. Fremde aber und Arme mögen sich die Frucht selber von meinem
Baume pflücken: so beschämt es weniger.

Bettler aber sollte man ganz abschaffen! Wahrlich, man ärgert sich
ihnen zu geben und, ärgert sich ihnen nicht zu geben.

Und insgleichen die Sünder und bösen Gewissen! Glaubt mir, meine
Freunde: Gewissensbisse erziehn zum Beissen.

Das Schlimmste aber sind die kleinen Gedanken. Wahrlich, besser noch
bös gethan, als klein gedacht!

Zwar ihr sagt: „die Lust an kleinen Bosheiten erspart uns manche grosse
böse That.“ Aber hier sollte man nicht sparen wollen.

Wie ein Geschwür ist die böse That: sie juckt und kratzt und bricht
heraus,—sie redet ehrlich.

„Siehe, ich bin Krankheit“—so redet die böse That; das ist ihre
Ehrlichkeit.

Aber dem Pilze gleich ist der kleine Gedanke: er kriecht und duckt sich
und will nirgendswo sein—bis der ganze Leib morsch und welk ist vor
kleinen Pilzen.

Dem aber, der vom Teufel besessen ist, sage ich diess Wort in’s Ohr:
„besser noch, du ziehest deinen Teufel gross! Auch für dich giebt es
noch einen Weg der Grösse!“—

Ach, meine Brüder! Man weiss von Jedermann Etwas zu viel! Und Mancher
wird uns durchsichtig, aber desshalb können wir noch lange nicht durch
ihn hindurch.

Es ist schwer, mit Menschen zu leben, weil Schweigen so schwer ist.

Und nicht gegen Den, der uns zuwider ist, sind wir am unbilligsten,
sondern gegen Den, welcher uns gar Nichts angeht.

Hast du aber einen leidenden Freund, so sei seinem Leiden eine
Ruhestätte, doch gleichsam ein hartes Bett, ein Feldbett: so wirst du
ihm am besten nützen.

Und thut dir ein Freund Übles, so sprich: „ich vergebe dir, was du mir
thatest; dass du es aber _dir_ thatest,—wie könnte ich das vergeben!“

Also redet alle grosse Liebe: die überwindet auch noch Vergebung und
Mitleiden.

Man soll sein Herz festhalten; denn lässt man es gehn, wie bald geht
Einem da der Kopf durch!

Ach, wo in der Welt geschahen grössere Thorheiten, als bei den
Mitleidigen? Und was in der Welt stiftete mehr Leid, als die Thorheiten
der Mitleidigen?

Wehe allen Liebenden, die nicht noch eine Höhe haben, welche über ihrem
Mitleiden ist!

Also sprach der Teufel einst zu mir: „auch Gott hat seine Hölle: das
ist seine Liebe zu den Menschen.“

Und jüngst hörte ich ihn diess Wort sagen: „Gott ist todt; an seinem
Mitleiden mit den Menschen ist Gott gestorben.“—

So seid mir gewarnt vordem Mitleiden: _daher_ kommt noch den Menschen
eine schwere Wolke! Wahrlich, ich verstehe mich auf Wetterzeichen!

Merket aber auch diess Wort: alle grosse Liebe ist noch über all ihrem
Mitleiden: denn sie will das Geliebte noch—schaffen!

„Mich selber bringe ich meiner Liebe dar, und meinen Nächsten gleich
mir“—so geht die Rede allen Schaffenden.

Alle Schaffenden aber sind hart.—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Priestern

Und einstmals gab Zarathustra seinen Jüngern ein Zeichen und sprach
diese Worte zu ihnen:

„Hier sind Priester: und wenn es auch meine Feinde sind, geht mir still
an ihnen vorüber und mit schlafendem Schwerte!

Auch unter ihnen sind Helden; Viele von ihnen litten zuviel—: so wollen
sie Andre leiden machen.

Böse Feinde sind sie: Nichts ist rachsüchtiger als ihre Demuth. Und
leicht besudelt sich Der, welcher sie angreift.

Aber mein Blut ist mit dem ihren verwandt; und ich will mein Blut auch
noch in dem ihren geehrt wissen.“—

Und als sie vorüber gegangen waren, fiel Zarathustra der Schmerz an;
und nicht lange hatte er mit seinem Schmerze gerungen, da hub er also
an zu reden:

Es jammert mich dieser Priester. Sie gehen mir auch wider den
Geschmack; aber das ist mir das Geringste, seit ich unter Menschen bin.

Aber ich leide und litt mit ihnen: Gefangene sind es mir und
Abgezeichnete. Der, welchen sie Erlöser nennen, schlug sie in Banden:—

In Banden falscher Werthe und Wahn-Worte! Ach dass Einer sie noch von
ihrem Erlöser erlöste!

Auf einem Eilande glaubten sie einst zu landen, als das Meer sie
herumriss; aber siehe, es war ein schlafendes Ungeheuer!

Falsche Werthe und Wahn-Worte: das sind die schlimmsten Ungeheuer für
Sterbliche,—lange schläft und wartet in ihnen das Verhängniss.

Aber endlich kommt es und wacht und frisst und schlingt, was auf ihm
sich Hütten baute.

Oh seht mir doch diese Hütten an, die sich diese Priester bauten!
Kirchen heissen sie ihre süssduftenden Höhlen.

Oh über diess verfälschte Licht, diese versumpfte Luft! Hier, wo die
Seele zu ihrer Höhe hinauf—nicht fliegen darf!

Sondern also gebietet ihr Glaube: „auf den Knien die Treppe hinan, ihr
Sünder!“

Wahrlich, lieber sehe ich noch den Schamlosen, als die verrenkten Augen
ihrer Scham und Andacht!

Wer schuf sich solche Höhlen und Buss-Treppen? Waren es nicht Solche,
die sich verbergen wollten und sich vor dem reinen Himmel schämten?

Und erst wenn der reine Himmel wieder durch zerbrochne Decken blickt,
und hinab auf Gras und rothen Mohn an zerbrochnen Mauern,—will ich den
Stätten dieses Gottes wieder mein Herz zuwenden.

Sie nannten Gott, was ihnen widersprach und wehe that: und wahrlich, es
war viel Helden-Art in ihrer Anbetung!

Und nicht anders wussten sie ihren Gott zu lieben, als indem sie den
Menschen an’s Kreuz schlugen!

Als Leichname gedachten sie zu leben, schwarz schlugen sie ihren
Leichnam aus; auch aus ihren Reden rieche ich noch die üble Würze von
Todtenkammern.

Und wer ihnen nahe lebt, der lebt schwarzen Teichen nahe, aus denen
heraus die Unke ihr Lied mit süssem Tiefsinne singt.

Bessere Lieder müssten sie mir singen, dass ich an ihren Erlöser
glauben lerne: erlöster müssten mir seine jünger aussehen!

Nackt möchte ich sie sehn: denn allein die Schönheit sollte Busse
predigen. Aber wen überredet wohl diese vermummte Trübsal!

Wahrlich, ihre Erlöser selber kamen nicht aus der Freiheit und der
Freiheit siebentem Himmel! Wahrlich, sie selber wandelten niemals auf
den Teppichen der Erkenntniss!

Aus Lücken bestand der Geist dieser Erlöser; aber in jede Lücke hatten
sie ihren Wahn gestellt, ihren Lückenbüsser, den sie Gott nannten.

In ihrem Mitleiden war ihr Geist ertrunken, und wenn sie schwollen und
überschwollen von Mitleiden, schwamm immer obenauf eine grosse
Thorheit.

Eifrig trieben sie und mit Geschrei ihre Heerde über ihren Steg: wie
als ob es zur Zukunft nur Einen Steg gäbe! Wahrlich, auch diese Hirten
gehörten noch zu den Schafen!

Kleine Geister und umfängliche Seelen hatten diese Hirten: aber, meine
Brüder, was für kleine Länder waren bisher auch die umfänglichsten
Seelen!

Blutzeichen schrieben sie auf den Weg, den sie giengen, und ihre
Thorheit lehrte, dass man mit Blut die Wahrheit beweise.

Aber Blut ist der schlechteste Zeuge der Wahrheit; Blut vergiftet die
reinste Lehre noch zu Wahn und Hass der Herzen.

Und wenn Einer durch’s Feuer geht für seine Lehre,—was beweist diess!
Mehr ist’s wahrlich, dass aus eignem Brande die eigne Lehre kommt!

Schwüles Herz und kalter Kopf: wo diess zusammentrifft, da entsteht der
Brausewind, der „Erlöser“.

Grössere gab es wahrlich und Höher-Geborene, als Die, welche das Volk
Erlöser nennt, diese hinreissenden Brausewinde!

Und noch von Grösseren, als alle Erlöser waren, müsst ihr, meine
Brüder, erlöst werden, wollt ihr zur Freiheit den Weg finden!

Niemals noch gab es einen Übermenschen. Nackt sah ich Beide, den
grössten und den kleinsten Menschen:—

Allzuähnlich sind sie noch einander. Wahrlich, auch den Grössten fand
ich—allzumenschlich!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Tugendhaften

Mit Donnern und himmlischen Feuerwerken muss man zu schlaffen und
schlafenden Sinnen reden.

Aber der Schönheit Stimme redet leise: sie schleicht sich nur in die
aufgewecktesten Seelen.

Leise erbebte und lachte mir heut mein Schild; das ist der Schönheit
heiliges Lachen und Beben.

Über euch, ihr Tugendhaften, lachte heut meine Schönheit. Und also kam
ihre Stimme zu mir: „sie wollen noch—bezahlt sein!“

Ihr wollt noch bezahlt sein, ihr Tugendhaften! Wollt Lohn für Tugend
und Himmel für Erden und Ewiges für euer Heute haben?

Und nun zürnt ihr mir, dass ich lehre, es giebt keinen Lohn- und
Zahlmeister? Und wahrlich, ich lehre nicht einmal, dass Tugend ihr
eigener Lohn ist.

Ach, das ist meine Trauer: in den Grund der Dinge hat man Lohn und
Strafe hineingelogen—und nun auch noch in den Grund eurer Seelen, ihr
Tugendhaften!

Aber dem Rüssel des Ebers gleich soll mein Wort den Grund eurer Seelen
aufreissen; Pflugschar will ich euch heissen.

Alle Heimlichkeiten eures Grundes sollen an’s Licht; und wenn ihr
aufgewühlt und zerbrochen in der Sonne liegt, wird auch eure Lüge von
eurer Wahrheit ausgeschieden sein.

Denn diess ist eure Wahrheit: ihr seid _zu reinlich_ für den Schmutz
der Worte: Rache, Strafe, Lohn, Vergeltung.

Ihr liebt eure Tugend, wie die Mutter ihr Kind; aber wann hörte man,
dass eine Mutter bezahlt sein wollte für ihre Liebe?

Es ist euer liebstes Selbst, eure Tugend. Des Ringes Durst ist in euch:
sich selber wieder zu erreichen, dazu ringt und dreht sich jeder Ring.

Und dem Sterne gleich, der erlischt, ist jedes Werk eurer Tugend: immer
ist sein Licht noch unterwegs und wandert—und wann wird es nicht mehr
unterwegs sein?

Also ist das Licht eurer Tugend noch unterwegs, auch wenn das Werk
gethan ist. Mag es nun vergessen und todt sein: sein Strahl von Licht
lebt noch und wandert.

Dass eure Tugend euer Selbst sei und nicht ein Fremdes, eine Haut, eine
Bemäntelung: das ist die Wahrheit aus dem Grunde eurer Seele, ihr
Tugendhaften! -

Aber wohl giebt es Solche, denen Tugend der Krampf unter einer Peitsche
heisst: und ihr habt mir zuviel auf deren Geschrei gehört!

Und Andre giebt es, die heissen Tugend das Faulwerden ihrer Laster; und
wenn ihr Hass und ihre Eifersucht einmal die Glieder strecken, wird
ihre „Gerechtigkeit“ munter und reibt sich die verschlafenen Augen.

Und Andre giebt es, die werden abwärts gezogen: ihre Teufel ziehn sie.
Aber je mehr sie sinken, um so glühender leuchtet ihr Auge und die
Begierde nach ihrem Gotte.

Ach, auch deren Geschrei drang zu euren Ohren, ihr Tugendhaften: was
ich _nicht_ bin, das, das ist mir Gott und Tugend!

Und Andre giebt es, die kommen schwer und knarrend daher, gleich Wägen,
die Steine abwärts fahren: die reden viel von Würde und Tugend,—ihren
Hemmschuh heissen sie Tugend!

Und Andre giebt es, die sind gleich Alltags-Uhren, die aufgezogen
wurden; sie machen ihr Tiktak und wollen, dass man Tiktak—Tugend
heisse.

Wahrlich, an Diesen habe ich meine Lust: wo ich solche Uhren finde,
werde ich sie mit meinem Spotte aufziehn; und sie sollen mir dabei noch
schnurren!

Und Andre sind stolz über ihre Handvoll Gerechtigkeit und begehen um
ihrerwillen Frevel an allen Dingen: also dass die Welt in ihrer
Ungerechtigkeit ertränkt wird.

Ach, wie übel ihnen das Wort „Tugend“ aus dem Munde läuft! Und wenn sie
sagen: „ich bin gerecht,“ so klingt es immer gleich wie: „ich bin
gerächt!“

Mit ihrer Tugend wollen sie ihren Feinden die Augen auskratzen; und sie
erheben sich nur, um Andre zu erniedrigen.

Und wiederum giebt es Solche, die sitzen in ihrem Sumpfe und reden also
heraus aus dem Schilfrohr: „Tugend—das ist still im Sumpfe sitzen.

Wir beissen Niemanden und gehen Dem aus dem Wege, der beissen will; und
in Allem haben wir die Meinung, die man uns giebt.“

Und wiederum giebt es Solche, die lieben Gebärden und denken: Tugend
ist eine Art Gebärde.

Ihre Kniee beten immer an, und ihre Hände sind Lobpreisungen der
Tugend, aber ihr Herz weiss Nichts davon.

Und wiederum giebt es Solche, die halten es für Tugend, zu sagen:
„Tugend ist nothwendig“; aber sie glauben im Grunde nur daran, dass
Polizei nothwendig ist.

Und Mancher, der das Hohe an den Menschen nicht sehen kann, nennt es
Tugend, dass er ihr Niedriges allzunahe sieht: also heisst er seinen
bösen Blick Tugend.

Und Einige wollen erbaut und aufgerichtet sein und heissen es Tugend;
und Andre wollen umgeworfen sein—und heissen es auch Tugend.

Und derart glauben fast Alle daran, Antheil zu haben an der Tugend; und
zum Mindesten will ein jeder Kenner sein über „gut“ und „böse“ .

Aber nicht dazu kam Zarathustra, allen diesen Lügnern und Narren zu
sagen: „was wisst _ihr_ von Tugend! Was _könntet_ ihr von Tugend
wissen!“—

Sondern, dass ihr, meine Freunde, der alten Worte müde würdet, welche
ihr von den Narren und Lügnern gelernt habt:

Müde würdet der Worte „Lohn,“ „Vergeltung,“ „Strafe,“ „Rache in der
Gerechtigkeit“—

Müde würdet zu sagen: „dass eine Handlung gut ist, das macht, sie ist
selbstlos.“

Ach, meine Freunde! Dass _euer_ Selbst in der Handlung sei, wie die
Mutter im Kinde ist: das sei mir _euer_ Wort von Tugend!

Wahrlich, ich nahm euch wohl hundert Worte und eurer Tugend liebste
Spielwerke; und nun zürnt ihr mir, wie Kinder zürnen.

Sie spielten am Meere,—da kam die Welle und riss ihnen ihr Spielwerk in
die Tiefe: nun weinen sie.

Aber die selbe Welle soll ihnen neue Spielwerke bringen und neue bunte
Muscheln vor sie hin ausschütten!

So werden sie getröstet sein; und gleich ihnen sollt auch ihr, meine
Freunde, eure Tröstungen haben—und neue bunte Muscheln!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom Gesindel

Das Leben ist ein Born der Lust; aber wo das Gesindel mit trinkt, da
sind alle Brunnen vergiftet.

Allem Reinlichen bin ich hold; aber ich mag die grinsenden Mäuler nicht
sehn und den Durst der Unreinen.

Sie warfen ihr Auge hinab in den Brunnen: nun glänzt mir ihr widriges
Lächeln herauf aus dem Brunnen.

Das heilige Wasser haben sie vergiftet mit ihrer Lüsternheit; und als
sie ihre schmutzigen Träume Lust nannten, vergifteten sie auch noch die
Worte.

Unwillig wird die Flamme, wenn sie ihre feuchten Herzen an’s Feuer
legen; der Geist selber brodelt und raucht, wo das Gesindel an’s Feuer
tritt.

Süsslich und übermürbe wird in ihrer Hand die Frucht: windfällig und
wipfeldürr macht ihr Blick den Fruchtbaum.

Und Mancher, der sich vom Leben abkehrte, kehrte sich nur vom Gesindel
ab: er wollte nicht Brunnen und Flamme und Frucht mit dem Gesindel
theilen.

Und Mancher, der in die Wüste gieng und mit Raubthieren Durst litt,
wollte nur nicht mit schmutzigen Kameeltreibern um die Cisterne sitzen.

Und Mancher, der wie ein Vernichter daher kam und wie ein Hagelschlag
allen Fruchtfeldern, wollte nur seinen Fuss dem Gesindel in den Rachen
setzen und also seinen Schlund stopfen.

Und nicht das ist der Bissen, an dem ich am meisten würgte, zu wissen,
dass das Leben selber Feindschaft nöthig hat und Sterben und
Marterkreuze:—

Sondern ich fragte einst und erstickte fast an meiner Frage: wie? hat
das Leben auch das Gesindel _nöthig_?

Sind vergiftete Brunnen nöthig und stinkende Feuer und beschmutzte
Träume und Maden im Lebensbrode?

Nicht mein Hass, sondern mein Ekel frass mir hungrig am Leben! Ach, des
Geistes wurde ich oft müde, als ich auch das Gesindel geistreich fand!

Und den Herrschenden wandt’ich den Rücken, als ich sah, was sie jetzt
Herrschen nennen: schachern und markten um Macht—mit dem Gesindel!

Unter Völkern wohnte ich fremder Zunge, mit verschlossenen Ohren: dass
mir ihres Schacherns Zunge fremd bliebe und ihr Markten um Macht.

Und die Nase mir haltend, gieng ich unmuthig durch alles Gestern und
Heute: wahrlich, übel riecht alles Gestern und Heute nach dem
schreibenden Gesindel!

Einem Krüppel gleich, der taub und blind und stumm wurde: also lebte
ich lange, dass ich nicht mit Macht- und Schreib- und Lust-Gesindel
lebte.

Mühsam stieg mein Geist Treppen, und vorsichtig; Almosen der Lust waren
sein Labsal; am Stabe schlich dem Blinden das Leben.

Was geschah mir doch? Wie erlöste ich mich vom Ekel? Wer verjüngte mein
Auge? Wie erflog ich die Höhe, wo kein Gesindel mehr am Brunnen sitzt?

Schuf mein Ekel selber mir Flügel und quellenahnende Kräfte? Wahrlich,
in’s Höchste musste ich fliegen, dass ich den Born der Lust
wiederfände!

Oh, ich fand ihn, meine Brüder! Hier im Höchsten quillt mir der Born
der Lust! Und es giebt ein Leben, an dem kein Gesindel mit trinkt!

Fast zu heftig strömst du mir, Quell der Lust! Und oft leerst du den
Becher wieder, dadurch dass du ihn füllen willst!

Und noch muss ich lernen, bescheidener dir zu nahen: allzuheftig strömt
dir noch mein Herz entgegen:—

Mein Herz, auf dem mein Sommer brennt, der kurze, heisse,
schwermüthige, überselige: wie verlangt mein Sommer-Herz nach deiner
Kühle!

Vorbei die zögernde Trübsal meines Frühlings! Vorüber die Bosheit
meiner Schneeflocken im Juni! Sommer wurde ich ganz und Sommer-Mittag!

Ein Sommer im Höchsten mit kalten Quellen und seliger Stille: oh kommt,
meine Freunde, dass die Stille noch seliger werde! Denn diess ist
_unsre_ Höhe und unsre Heimat: zu hoch und steil wohnen wir hier allen
Unreinen und ihrem Durste. Werft nur eure reinen Augen in den Born
meiner Lust, ihr Freunde! Wie sollte er darob trübe werden!
Entgegenlachen soll er euch mit _seiner_ Reinheit.

Auf dem Baume Zukunft bauen wir unser Nest; Adler sollen uns Einsamen
Speise bringen in ihren Schnäbeln!

Wahrlich, keine Speise, an der Unsaubere mitessen dürften! Feuer würden
sie zu fressen wähnen und sich die Mäuler verbrennen!

Wahrlich, keine Heimstätten halten wir hier bereit für Unsaubere!
Eishöhle würde ihren Leibern unser Glück heissen und ihren Geistern!

Und wie starke Winde wollen wir über ihnen leben, Nachbarn den Adlern,
Nachbarn dem Schnee, Nachbarn der Sonne: also leben starke Winde.

Und einem Winde gleich will ich einst noch zwischen sie blasen und mit
meinem Geiste ihrem Geiste den Athem nehmen: so will es meine Zukunft.

Wahrlich, ein starker Wind ist Zarathustra allen Niederungen; und
solchen Rath räth er seinen Feinden und Allem, was spuckt und speit:
hütet euch _gegen_ den Wind zu speien!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Taranteln

Siehe, das ist der Tarantel Höhle! Willst du sie selber sehn? Hier
hängt ihr Netz: rühre daran, dass es erzittert.

Da kommt sie willig: willkommen, Tarantel! Schwarz sitzt auf deinem
Rücken dein Dreieck und Wahrzeichen; und ich weiss auch, was in deiner
Seele sitzt.

Rache sitzt in deiner Seele: wohin du beissest, da wächst schwarzer
Schorf; mit Rache macht dein Gift die Seele drehend!

Also rede ich zu euch im Gleichniss, die ihr die Seelen drehend macht,
ihr Prediger der _Gleichheit_! Taranteln seid ihr mir und versteckte
Rachsüchtige!

Aber ich will eure Verstecke schon an’s Licht bringen: darum lache ich
euch in’s Antlitz mein Gelächter der Höhe.

Darum reisse ich an eurem Netze, dass eure Wuth euch aus eurer
Lügen-Höhle locke, und eure Rache hervorspringe hinter eurem Wort
„Gerechtigkeit.“

Denn dass der Mensch erlöst werde von der Rache: das ist mir die Brücke
zur höchsten Hoffnung und ein Regenbogen nach langen Unwettern.

Aber anders wollen es freilich die Taranteln. „Das gerade heisse uns
Gerechtigkeit, dass die Welt voll werde von den Unwettern unsrer Rache“
—also reden sie mit einander.

„Rache wollen wir üben und Beschimpfung an Allen, die uns nicht gleich
sind“—so geloben sich die Tarantel-Herzen.

„Und „Wille zur Gleichheit“—das selber soll fürderhin der Name für
Tugend werden; und gegen Alles, was Macht hat, wollen wir unser
Geschrei erheben!“

Ihr Prediger der Gleichheit, der Tyrannen-Wahnsinn der Ohnmacht schreit
also aus euch nach „Gleichheit“: eure heimlichsten Tyrannen-Gelüste
vermummen sich also in Tugend-Worte!

Vergrämter Dünkel, verhaltener Neid, vielleicht eurer Väter Dünkel und
Neid: aus euch bricht’s als Flamme heraus und Wahnsinn der Rache.

Was der Vater schwieg, das kommt im Sohne zum Reden; und oft fand ich
den Sohn als des Vaters entblösstes Geheimniss.

Den Begeisterten gleichen sie: aber nicht das Herz ist es, was sie
begeistert, —sondern die Rache. Und wenn sie fein und kalt werden,
ist’s nicht der Geist, sondern der Neid, der sie fein und kalt macht.

Ihre Eifersucht führt sie auch auf der Denker Pfade; und diess ist das
Merkmal ihrer Eifersucht—immer gehn sie zu weit: dass ihre Müdigkeit
sich zuletzt noch auf Schnee schlafen legen muss.

Aus jeder ihrer Klagen tönt Rache, in jedem ihrer Lobsprüche ist ein
Wehethun; und Richter-sein scheint ihnen Seligkeit.

Also aber rathe ich euch, meine Freunde: misstraut Allen, in welchen
der Trieb, zu strafen, mächtig ist!

Das ist Volk schlechter Art und Abkunft; aus ihren Gesichtern blickt
der Henker und der Spürhund.

Misstraut allen Denen, die viel von ihrer Gerechtigkeit reden!
Wahrlich, ihren Seelen fehlt es nicht nur an Honig.

Und wenn sie sich selber „die Guten und Gerechten“  nennen, so vergesst
nicht, dass ihnen zum Pharisäer Nichts fehlt als—Macht!

Meine Freunde, ich will nicht vermischt und verwechselt werden.

Es giebt Solche, die predigen meine Lehre vom Leben: und zugleich sind
sie Prediger der Gleichheit und Taranteln.

Dass sie dem Leben zu Willen reden, ob sie gleich in ihrer Höhle
sitzen, diese Gift-Spinnen, und abgekehrt vom Leben: das macht, sie
wollen damit wehethun.

Solchen wollen sie damit wehethun, die jetzt die Macht haben: denn bei
diesen ist noch die Predigt vom Tode am besten zu Hause.

Wäre es anders, so würden die Taranteln anders lehren: und gerade sie
waren ehemals die besten Welt-Verleumder und Ketzer-Brenner.

Mit diesen Predigern der Gleichheit will ich nicht vermischt und
verwechselt sein. Denn so redet _mir_ die Gerechtigkeit: „die Menschen
sind nicht gleich.“

Und sie sollen es auch nicht werden! Was wäre denn meine Liebe zum
Übermenschen, wenn ich anders spräche?

Auf tausend Brücken und Stegen sollen sie sich drängen zur Zukunft, und
immer mehr Krieg und Ungleichheit soll zwischen sie gesetzt sein: so
lässt mich meine grosse Liebe reden!

Erfinder von Bildern und Gespenstern sollen sie werden in ihren
Feindschaften, und mit ihren Bildern und Gespenstern sollen sie noch
gegeneinander den höchsten Kampf kämpfen!

Gut und Böse, und Reich und Arm, und Hoch und Gering, und alle Namen
der Werthe: Waffen sollen es sein und klirrende Merkmale davon, dass
das Leben sich immer wieder selber überwinden muss!

In die Höhe will es sich bauen mit Pfeilern und Stufen, das Leben
selber: in weite Fernen will es blicken und hinaus nach seligen
Schönheiten,—_darum_ braucht es Höhe!

Und weil es Höhe braucht, braucht es Stufen und Widerspruch der Stufen
und Steigenden! Steigen will das Leben und steigend sich überwinden.

Und seht mir doch, meine Freunde! Hier, wo der Tarantel Höhle ist,
heben sich eines alten Tempels Trümmer aufwärts,—seht mir doch mit
erleuchteten Augen hin!

Wahrlich, wer hier einst seine Gedanken in Stein nach Oben thürmte, um
das Geheimniss alles Lebens wusste er gleich dem Weisesten!

Dass Kampf und Ungleiches auch noch in der Schönheit sei und Krieg um
Macht und Übermacht: das lehrt er uns hier im deutlichsten Gleichniss.

Wie sich göttlich hier Gewölbe und Bogen brechen, im Ringkampfe: wie
mit Licht und Schatten sie wider einander streben, die
göttlich-Strebenden—

Also sicher und schön lasst uns auch Feinde sein, meine Freunde!
Göttlich wollen wir _wider_ einander streben!—

Wehe! Da biss mich selber die Tarantel, meine alte Feindin! Göttlich
sicher und schön biss sie mich in den Finger!

„Strafe muss sein und Gerechtigkeit—so denkt sie: nicht umsonst soll er
hier der Feindschaft zu Ehren Lieder singen!“

Ja, sie hat sich gerächt! Und wehe! nun wird sie mit Rache auch noch
meine Seele drehend machen!

Dass ich mich aber _nicht_ drehe, meine Freunde, bindet mich fest hier
an diese Säule! Lieber noch Säulen-Heiliger will ich sein, als Wirbel
der Rachsucht!

Wahrlich, kein Dreh- und Wirbelwind ist Zarathustra; und wenn er ein
Tänzer ist, nimmermehr doch ein Tarantel-Tänzer!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den berühmten Weisen

Dem Volke habt ihr gedient und des Volkes Aberglauben, ihr berühmten
Weisen alle!—und _nicht_ der Wahrheit! Und gerade darum zollte man euch
Ehrfurcht.

Und darum auch ertrug man euren Unglauben, weil er ein Witz und Umweg
war zum Volke. So lässt der Herr seine Sclaven gewähren und ergötzt
sich noch an ihrem Übermuthe.

Aber wer dem Volke verhasst ist wie ein Wolf den Hunden: das ist der
freie Geist, der Fessel-Feind, der Nicht-Anbeter, der in Wäldern
Hausende.

Ihn zu jagen aus seinem Schlupfe—das hiess immer dem Volke „Sinn für
das Rechte“ : gegen ihn hetzt es noch immer seine scharfzahnigsten
Hunde.

„Denn die Wahrheit ist da: ist das Volk doch da! Wehe, wehe den
Suchenden!“—also scholl es von jeher.

Eurem Volke wolltet ihr Recht schaffen in seiner Verehrung: das hiesset
ihr „Wille zur Wahrheit,“ ihr berühmten Weisen!

Und euer Herz sprach immer zu sich: „vom Volke kam ich: von dort her
kam mir auch Gottes Stimme.“

Hart-nackig und klug, dem Esel gleich, wart ihr immer als des Volkes
Fürsprecher.

Und mancher Mächtige, der gut fahren wollte mit dem Volke, spannte vor
seine Rosse noch—ein Eselein, einen berühmten Weisen.

Und nun wollte ich, ihr berühmten Weisen, ihr würfet endlich das Fell
des Löwen ganz von euch!

Das Fell des Raubthiers, das buntgefleckte, und die Zotten des
Forschenden, Suchenden, Erobernden!

Ach, dass ich an eure „Wahrhaftigkeit“ glauben lerne, dazu müsstet ihr
mir erst euren verehrenden Willen zerbrechen.

Wahrhaftig—so heisse ich Den, der in götterlose Wüsten geht und sein
verehrendes Herz zerbrochen hat.

Im gelben Sande und verbrannt von der Sonne schielt er wohl durstig
nach den quellenreichen Eilanden, wo Lebendiges unter dunkeln Bäumen
ruht.

Aber sein Durst überredet ihn nicht, diesen Behaglichen gleich zu
werden: denn wo Oasen sind, da sind auch Götzenbilder.

Hungernd, gewaltthätig, einsam, gottlos: so will sich selber der
Löwen-Wille.

Frei von dem Glück der Knechte, erlöst von Göttern und Anbetungen,
furchtlos und fürchterlich, gross und einsam: so ist der Wille des
Wahrhaftigen.

In der Wüste wohnten von je die Wahrhaftigen, die freien Geister, als
der Wüste Herren; aber in den Städten wohnen die gutgefütterten,
berühmten Weisen,—die Zugthiere.

Immer nämlich ziehen sie, als Esel—des _Volkes_ Karren!

Nicht dass ich ihnen darob zürne: aber Dienende bleiben sie mir und
Angeschirrte, auch wenn sie von goldnem Geschirre glänzen.

Und oft waren sie gute Diener und preiswürdige. Denn so spricht die
Tugend: musst du Diener sein, so suche Den, welchem dein Dienst am
besten nützt!

„Der Geist und die Tugend deines Herrn sollen wachsen, dadurch dass du
sein Diener bist: so wächsest du selber mit seinem Geiste und seiner
Tugend!“

Und wahrlich, ihr berühmten Weisen, ihr Diener des Volkes! Ihr selber
wuchset mit des Volkes Geist und Tugend—und das Volk durch euch! Zu
euren Ehren sage ich das!

Aber Volk bleibt ihr mir auch noch in euren Tugenden, Volk mit blöden
Augen,—Volk, das nicht weiss, was _Geist_ ist!

Geist ist das Leben, das selber in’s Leben schneidet: an der eignen
Qual mehrt es sich das eigne Wissen,—wusstet ihr das schon?

Und des Geistes Glück ist diess: gesalbt zu sein und durch Thränen
geweiht zum Opferthier,—wusstet ihr das schon?

Und die Blindheit des Blinden und sein Suchen und Tappen soll noch von
der Macht der Sonne zeugen, in die er schaute,—wusstet ihr das schon?

Und mit Bergen soll der Erkennende _bauen_ lernen! Wenig ist es, dass
der Geist Berge versetzt,—wusstet ihr das schon?

Ihr kennt nur des Geistes Funken: aber ihr seht den Ambos nicht, der er
ist, und nicht die Grausamkeit seines Hammers!

Wahrlich, ihr kennt des Geistes Stolz nicht! Aber noch weniger würdet
ihr des Geistes Bescheidenheit ertragen, wenn sie einmal reden wollte!

Und niemals noch durftet ihr euren Geist in eine Grube von Schnee
werfen: ihr seid nicht heiss genug dazu! So kennt ihr auch die
Entzückungen seiner Kälte nicht.

In Allem aber thut ihr mir zu vertraulich mit dem Geiste; und aus der
Weisheit machtet ihr oft ein Armen- und Krankenhaus für schlechte
Dichter.

Ihr seid keine Adler: so erfuhrt ihr auch das Glück im Schrecken des
Geistes nicht. Und wer kein Vogel ist, soll sich nicht über Abgründen
lagern.

Ihr seid mir Laue: aber kalt strömt jede tiefe Erkenntniss. Eiskalt
sind die innersten Brunnen des Geistes: ein Labsal heissen Händen und
Handelnden.

Ehrbar steht ihr mir da und steif und mit geradem Rücken, ihr berühmten
Weisen! —euch treibt kein starker Wind und Wille.

Saht ihr nie ein Segel über das Meer gehn, geründet und gebläht und
zitternd vor dem Ungestüm des Windes?

Dem Segel gleich, zitternd vor dem Ungestüm des Geistes, geht meine
Weisheit über das Meer—meine wilde Weisheit!

Aber ihr Diener des Volkes, ihr berühmten Weisen,—wie _könntet_ ihr mit
mir gehn!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Das Nachtlied

Nacht ist es: nun reden lauter alle springenden Brunnen. Und auch meine
Seele ist ein springender Brunnen.

Nacht ist es: nun erst erwachen alle Lieder der Liebenden. Und auch
meine Seele ist das Lied eines Liebenden.

Ein Ungestilltes, Unstillbares ist in mir; das will laut werden. Eine
Begierde nach Liebe ist in mir, die redet selber die Sprache der Liebe.

Licht bin ich: ach, dass ich Nacht wäre! Aber diess ist meine
Einsamkeit, dass ich von Licht umgürtet bin.

Ach, dass ich dunkel wäre und nächtig! Wie wollte ich an den Brüsten
des Lichts saugen!

Und euch selber wollte ich noch segnen, ihr kleinen Funkelsterne und
Leuchtwürmer droben!—und selig sein ob eurer Licht-Geschenke.

Aber ich lebe in meinem eignen Lichte, ich trinke die Flammen in mich
zurück, die aus mir brechen.

Ich kenne das Glück des Nehmenden nicht; und oft träumte mir davon,
dass Stehlen noch seliger sein müsse, als Nehmen.

Das ist meine Armuth, dass meine Hand niemals ausruht vom Schenken; das
ist mein Neid, dass ich wartende Augen sehe und die erhellten Nächte
der Sehnsucht.

Oh Unseligkeit aller Schenkenden! Oh Verfinsterung meiner Sonne! Oh
Begierde nach Begehren! Oh Heisshunger in der Sättigung!

Sie nehmen von mir: aber rühre ich noch an ihre Seele? Eine Kluft ist
zwischen Geben und Nehmen; und die kleinste Kluft ist am letzten zu
überbrücken.

Ein Hunger wächst aus meiner Schönheit: wehethun möchte ich Denen,
welchen ich leuchte, berauben möchte ich meine Beschenkten:—also
hungere ich nach Bosheit.

Die Hand zurückziehend, wenn sich schon ihr die Hand entgegenstreckt;
dem Wasserfälle gleich zögernd, der noch im Sturze zögert:—also hungere
ich nach Bosheit.

Solche Rache sinnt meine Fülle aus; solche Tücke quillt aus meiner
Einsamkeit.

Mein Glück im Schenken erstarb im Schenken, meine Tugend wurde ihrer
selber müde an ihrem Überflusse!

Wer immer schenkt, dessen Gefahr ist, dass er die Scham verliere; wer
immer austheilt, dessen Hand und Herz hat Schwielen vor lauter
Austheilen.

Mein Auge quillt nicht mehr über vor der Scham der Bittenden; meine
Hand wurde zu hart für das Zittern gefüllter Hände.

Wohin kam die Thräne meinem Auge und der Flaum meinem Herzen? Oh
Einsamkeit aller Schenkenden! Oh Schweigsamkeit aller Leuchtenden!

Viel Sonnen kreisen im öden Räume: zu Allem, was dunkel ist, reden sie
mit ihrem Lichte,—mir schweigen sie.

Oh diess ist die Feindschaft des Lichts gegen Leuchtendes,
erbarmungslos wandelt es seine Bahnen.

Unbillig gegen Leuchtendes im tiefsten Herzen: kalt gegen Sonnen,—also
wandelt jede Sonne.

Einem Sturme gleich fliegen die Sonnen ihre Bahnen, das ist ihr
Wandeln. Ihrem unerbittlichen Willen folgen sie, das ist ihre Kälte.

Oh, ihr erst seid es, ihr Dunklen, ihr Nächtigen, die ihr Wärme schafft
aus Leuchtendem! Oh, ihr erst trinkt euch Milch und Labsal aus des
Lichtes Eutern!

Ach, Eis ist um mich, meine Hand verbrennt sich an Eisigem! Ach, Durst
ist in mir, der schmachtet nach eurem Durste!

Nacht ist es: ach dass ich Licht sein muss! Und Durst nach Nächtigem!
Und Einsamkeit!

Nacht ist es: nun bricht wie ein Born aus mir mein Verlangen,—nach Rede
verlangt mich.

Nacht ist es: nun reden lauter alle springenden Brunnen. Und auch meine
Seele ist ein springender Brunnen.

Nacht ist es: nun erst erwachen alle Lieder der Liebenden. Und auch
meine Seele ist das Lied eines Liebenden.—

Also sang Zarathustra.


Das Tanzlied

Eines Abends gieng Zarathustra mit seinen Jüngern durch den Wald; und
als er nach einem Brunnen suchte, siehe, da kam er auf eine grüne
Wiese, die von Bäumen und Gebüsch still umstanden war: auf der tanzten
Mädchen mit einander. Sobald die Mädchen Zarathustra erkannten, liessen
sie vom Tanze ab; Zarathustra aber trat mit freundlicher Gebärde zu
ihnen und sprach diese Worte:

„Lasst vom Tanze nicht ab, ihr lieblichen Mädchen! Kein Spielverderber
kam zu euch mit bösem Blick, kein Mädchen-Feind.

Gottes Fürsprecher bin ich vor dem Teufel: der aber ist der Geist der
Schwere. Wie sollte ich, ihr Leichten, göttlichen Tänzen feind sein?
Oder Mädchen-Füssen mit schönen Knöcheln?

Wohl bin ich ein Wald und eine Nacht dunkler Bäume: doch wer sich vor
meinem Dunkel nicht scheut, der findet auch Rosenhänge unter meinen
Cypressen.

Und auch den kleinen Gott findet er wohl, der den Mädchen der liebste
ist: neben dem Brunnen liegt er, still, mit geschlossenen Augen.

Wahrlich, am hellen Tage schlief er mir ein, der Tagedieb! Haschte er
wohl zu viel nach Schmetterlingen?

Zürnt mir nicht, ihr schönen Tanzenden, wenn ich den kleinen Gott ein
Wenig züchtige! Schreien wird er wohl und weinen,—aber zum Lachen ist
er noch im Weinen!

Und mit Thränen im Auge soll er euch um einen Tanz bitten; und ich
selber will ein Lied zu seinem Tanze singen:

Ein Tanz- und Spottlied auf den Geist der Schwere, meinen allerhöchsten
grossmächtigsten Teufel, von dem sie sagen, dass er „der Herr der Welt“
sei.“—

Und diess ist das Lied, welches Zarathustra sang, als Cupido und die
Mädchen zusammen tanzten.

In dein Auge schaute ich jüngst, oh Leben! Und in’s Unergründliche
schien ich mir da zu sinken.

Aber du zogst mich mit goldner Angel heraus; spöttisch lachtest du, als
ich dich unergründlich nannte.

„So geht die Rede aller Fische, sprachst du; was _sie_ nicht ergründen,
ist unergründlich.

Aber veränderlich bin ich nur und wild und in Allem ein Weib, und kein
tugendhaftes:

Ob ich schon euch Männern „die Tiefe“ heisse oder „die Treue“, „die
Ewige“, „die Geheimnissvolle.“—

Doch ihr Männer beschenkt uns stets mit den eignen Tugenden—ach, ihr
Tugendhaften!“

Also lachte sie, die Unglaubliche; aber ich glaube ihr niemals und
ihrem Lachen, wenn sie bös von sich selber spricht.

Und als ich unter vier Augen mit meiner wilden Weisheit redete, sagte
sie mir zornig: „Du willst, du begehrst, du liebst, darum allein
_lobst_ du das Leben!“

Fast hätte ich da bös geantwortet und der Zornigen die Wahrheit gesagt;
und man kann nicht böser antworten, als wenn man seiner Weisheit „die
Wahrheit sagt.“

So nämlich steht es zwischen uns Dreien. Von Grund aus liebe ich nur
das Leben —und, wahrlich, am meisten dann, wenn ich es hasse!

Dass ich aber der Weisheit gut bin und oft zu gut: das macht, sie
erinnert mich gar sehr an das Leben!

Sie hat ihr Auge, ihr Lachen und sogar ihr goldnes Angelrüthchen: was
kann ich dafür, dass die Beiden sich so ähnlich sehen?

Und als mich einmal das Leben fragte: Wer ist denn das, die
Weisheit?—da sagte ich eifrig: „Ach ja! die Weisheit!

Man dürstet um sie und wird nicht satt, man blickt durch Schleier, man
hascht durch Netze.

Ist sie schön? Was weiss ich! Aber die ältesten Karpfen werden noch mit
ihr geködert.

Veränderlich ist sie und trotzig; oft sah ich sie sich die Lippe
beissen und den Kamm wider ihres Haares Strich führen.

Vielleicht ist sie böse und falsch, und in Allem ein Frauenzimmer; aber
wenn sie von sich selber schlecht spricht, da gerade verführt sie am
meisten.“

Als ich diess zu dem Leben sagte, da lachte es boshaft und machte die
Augen zu. „Von wem redest du doch? sagte sie, wohl von mir?

Und wenn du Recht hättest,—sagt man _das_ mir so in’s Gesicht! Aber nun
sprich doch auch von deiner Weisheit!“

Ach, und nun machtest du wieder dein Auge auf, oh geliebtes Leben! Und
in’s Unergründliche schien ich mir wieder zu sinken.—

Also sang Zarathustra. Als aber der Tanz zu Ende und die Mädchen
fortgegangen waren, wurde er traurig.

„Die Sonne ist lange schon hinunter, sagte er endlich; die Wiese ist
feucht, von den Wäldern her kommt Kühle.

Ein Unbekanntes ist um mich und blickt nachdenklich. Was! Du lebst
noch, Zarathustra?

Warum? Wofür? Wodurch? Wohin? Wo? Wie? Ist es nicht Thorheit, noch zu
leben?—

Ach, meine Freunde, der Abend ist es, der so aus mir fragt. Vergebt mir
meine Traurigkeit!

Abend ward es: vergebt mir, dass es Abend ward!“

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Das Grablied

„Dort ist die Gräberinsel, die schweigsame; dort sind auch die Gräber
meiner Jugend. Dahin will ich einen immergrünen Kranz des Lebens
tragen.“

Also im Herzen beschliessend fuhr ich über das Meer.—

Oh ihr, meiner Jugend Gesichte und Erscheinungen! Oh, ihr Blicke der
Liebe alle, ihr göttlichen Augenblicke! Wie starbt ihr mir so schnell!
Ich gedenke eurer heute wie meiner Todten.

Von euch her, meinen liebsten Todten, kommt mir ein süsser Geruch, ein
herz- und thränenlösender. Wahrlich, er erschüttert und löst das Herz
dem einsam Schiffenden.

Immer noch bin ich der Reichste und Bestzubeneidende—ich der Einsamste!
Denn ich _hatte_ euch doch, und ihr habt mich noch: sagt, wem fielen,
wie mir, solche Rosenäpfel vom Baume?

Immer noch bin ich eurer Liebe Erbe und Erdreich, blühend zu eurem
Gedächtnisse von bunten wildwachsenen Tugenden, oh ihr Geliebtesten!

Ach, wir waren gemacht, einander nahe zu bleiben, ihr holden fremden
Wunder; und nicht schüchternen Vögeln gleich kamt ihr zu mir und meiner
Begierde—nein, als Trauende zu dem Trauenden!

Ja, zur Treue gemacht, gleich mir, und zu zärtlichen Ewigkeiten: muss
ich nun euch nach eurer Untreue heissen, ihr göttlichen Blicke und
Augenblicke: keinen andern Namen lernte ich noch.

Wahrlich, zu schnell starbt ihr mir, ihr Flüchtlinge. Doch floht ihr
mich nicht, noch floh ich euch: unschuldig sind wir einander in unsrer
Untreue.

_Mich_ zu tödten, erwürgte man euch, ihr Singvögel meiner Hoffnungen!
Ja, nach euch, ihr Liebsten, schoss immer die Bosheit Pfeile—mein Herz
zu treffen!

Und sie traf! Wart ihr doch stets mein Herzlichstes, mein Besitz und
mein Besessen-sein: _darum_ musstet ihr jung sterben und allzu frühe!

Nach dem Verwundbarsten, das ich besass, schoss man den Pfeil: das
waret ihr, denen die Haut einem Flaume gleich ist und mehr noch dem
Lächeln, das an einem Blick erstirbt!

Aber diess Wort will ich zu meinen Feinden reden: was ist alles
Menschen-Morden gegen Das, was ihr mir thatet!

Böseres thatet ihr mir, als aller Menschen-Mord ist;
Unwiederbringliches nahmt ihr mir:—also rede ich zu euch, meine Feinde!

Mordetet ihr doch meiner Jugend Gesichte und liebste Wunder! Meine
Gespielen nahmt ihr mir, die seligen Geister! Ihrem Gedächtnisse lege
ich diesen Kranz und diesen Fluch nieder.

Diesen Fluch gegen euch, meine Feinde! Machtet ihr doch mein Ewiges
kurz, wie ein Ton zerbricht in kalter Nacht! Kaum als Aufblinken
göttlicher Augen kam es mir nur,—als Augenblick!

Also sprach zur guten Stunde einst meine Reinheit: „göttlich sollen mir
alle Wesen sein.“

Da überfielt ihr mich mit schmutzigen Gespenstern; ach, wohin floh nun
jene gute Stunde!

„Alle Tage sollen mir heilig sein“ —so redete einst die Weisheit meiner
Jugend: wahrlich, einer fröhlichen Weisheit Rede!

Aber da stahlt ihr Feinde mir meine Nächte und verkauftet sie zu
schlafloser Qual: ach, wohin floh nun jene fröhliche Weisheit?

Einst begehrte ich nach glücklichen Vogelzeichen: da führtet ihr mir
ein Eulen-Unthier über den Weg, ein widriges. Ach, wohin floh da meine
zärtliche Begierde?

Allem Ekel gelobte ich einst zu entsagen: da verwandeltet ihr meine
Nahen und Nächsten in Eiterbeulen. Ach, wohin floh da mein edelstes
Gelöbniss?

Als Blinder gieng ich einst selige Wege: da warft ihr Unflath auf den
Weg des Blinden: und nun ekelte ihn des alten Blinden-Fusssteigs.

Und als ich mein Schwerstes that und meiner Überwindungen Sieg feierte:
da machtet ihr Die, welche mich liebten, schrein, ich thue ihnen am
wehesten.

Wahrlich, das war immer euer Thun: ihr vergälltet mir meinen besten
Honig und den Fleiss meiner besten Bienen.

Meiner Mildthätigkeit sandtet ihr immer die frechsten Bettler zu; um
mein Mitleiden drängtet ihr immer die unheilbar Schamlosen. So
verwundetet ihr meine Tugend in ihrem Glauben.

Und legte ich noch mein Heiligstes zum Opfer hin: flugs stellte eure
„Frömmigkeit“ ihre fetteren Gaben dazu: also dass im Dampfe eures
Fettes noch mein Heiligstes erstickte.

Und einst wollte ich tanzen, wie nie ich noch tanzte: über alle Himmel
weg wollte ich tanzen. Da überredetet ihr meinen liebsten Sänger.

Und nun stimmte er eine schaurige dumpfe Weise an; ach, er tutete mir,
wie ein düsteres Horn, zu Ohren!

Mörderischer Sänger, Werkzeug der Bosheit, Unschuldigster! Schon stand
ich bereit zum besten Tanze: da mordetest du mit deinen Tönen meine
Verzückung!

Nur im Tanze weiss ich der höchsten Dinge Gleichniss zu reden:—und nun
blieb mir mein höchstes Gleichniss ungeredet in einen Gliedern!

Ungeredet und unerlöst blieb mir die höchste Hoffnung! Und es starben
mir alle Gesichte und Tröstungen meiner Jugend!

Wie ertrug ich’s nur? Wie verwand und überwand ich solche Wunden? Wie
erstand meine Seele wieder aus diesen Gräbern?

Ja, ein Unverwundbares, Unbegrabbares ist an mir, ein
Felsensprengendes: das heisst _mein Wille_. Schweigsam schreitet es und
unverändert durch die Jahre.

Seinen Gang will er gehn auf meinen Füssen, mein alter Wille;
herzenshart ist ihm der Sinn und unverwundbar.

Unverwundbar bin ich allein an meiner Ferse. Immer noch lebst du da und
bist dir gleich, Geduldigster! Immer noch brachst du dich durch alle
Gräber!

In dir lebt auch noch das Unerlöste meiner Jugend; und als Leben und
Jugend sitzest du hoffend hier auf gelben Grab-Trümmern.

Ja, noch bist du mir aller Gräber Zertrümmerer: Heil dir, mein Wille!
Und nur wo Gräber sind, giebt es Auferstehungen.—

Also sang Zarathustra.—


Von der Selbst-Überwindung

„Wille zur Wahrheit“ heisst ihr’s, ihr Weisesten, was euch treibt und
brünstig macht?

Wille zur Denkbarkeit alles Seienden: also heisse _ich_ euren Willen!

Alles Seiende wollt ihr erst denkbar _machen_: denn ihr zweifelt mit
gutem Misstrauen, ob es schon denkbar ist.

Aber es soll sich euch fügen und biegen! So will’s euer Wille. Glatt
soll es werden und dem Geiste unterthan, als sein Spiegel und
Widerbild.

Das ist euer ganzer Wille, ihr Weisesten, als ein Wille zur Macht; und
auch wenn ihr vom Guten und Bösen redet und von den Werthschätzungen.
Schaffen wollt ihr noch die Welt, vor der ihr knien könnt: so ist es
eure letzte Hoffnung und Trunkenheit.

Die Unweisen freilich, das Volk,—die sind gleich dem Flusse, auf dem
ein Nachen weiter schwimmt: und im Nachen sitzen feierlich und vermummt
die Werthschätzungen.

Euren Willen und eure Werthe setztet ihr auf den Fluss des Werdens;
einen alten Willen zur Macht verräth mir, was vom Volke als gut und
böse geglaubt wird.

Ihr wart es, ihr Weisesten, die solche Gäste in diesen Nachen setzten
und ihnen Prunk und stolze Namen gaben,—ihr und euer herrschender
Wille!

Weiter trägt nun der Fluss euren Nachen: er _muss_ ihn tragen. Wenig
thut’s, ob die gebrochene Welle schäumt und zornig dem Kiele
widerspricht!

Nicht der Fluss ist eure Gefahr und das Ende eures Guten und Bösen, ihr
Weisesten: sondern jener Wille selber, der Wille zur Macht,—der
unerschöpfte zeugende Lebens-Wille.

Aber damit ihr mein Wort versteht vom Guten und Bösen: dazu will ich
euch noch mein Wort vom Leben sagen und von der Art alles Lebendigen.

Dem Lebendigen gieng ich nach, ich gieng die grössten und die kleinsten
Wege, dass ich seine Art erkenne.

Mit hundertfachem Spiegel fieng ich noch seinen Blick auf, wenn ihm der
Mund geschlossen war: dass sein Auge mir rede. Und sein Auge redete
mir.

Aber, wo ich nur Lebendiges fand, da hörte ich auch die Rede vom
Gehorsame. Alles Lebendige ist ein Gehorchendes.

Und diess ist das Zweite: Dem wird befohlen, der sich nicht selber
gehorchen kann. So ist es des Lebendigen Art.

Diess aber ist das Dritte, was ich hörte: dass Befehlen schwerer ist,
als Gehorchen. Und nicht nur, dass der Befehlende die Last aller
Gehorchenden trägt, und dass leicht ihn diese Last zerdrückt:—

Ein Versuch und Wagniss erschien mir in allem Befehlen; und stets, wenn
es befiehlt, wagt das Lebendige sich selber dran.

Ja noch, wenn es sich selber befiehlt: auch da noch muss es sein
Befehlen büssen. Seinem eignen Gesetze muss es Richter und Rächer und
Opfer werden.

Wie geschieht diess doch! so fragte ich mich. Was überredet das
Lebendige, dass es gehorcht und befiehlt und befehlend noch Gehorsam
übt?

Hört mir nun mein Wort, ihr Weisesten! Prüft es ernstlich, ob ich dem
Leben selber in’s Herz kroch und bis in die Wurzeln seines Herzens!

Wo ich Lebendiges fand, da fand ich Willen zur Macht; und noch im
Willen des Dienenden fand ich den Willen, Herr zu sein.

Dass dem Stärkeren diene das Schwächere, dazu überredet es sein Wille,
der über noch Schwächeres Herr sein will: dieser Lust allein mag es
nicht entrathen.

Und wie das Kleinere sich dem Grösseren hingiebt, dass es Lust und
Macht am Kleinsten habe: also giebt sich auch das Grösste noch hin und
setzt um der Macht willen—das Leben dran.

Das ist die Hingebung des Grössten, dass es Wagniss ist und Gefahr und
um den Tod ein Würfelspielen.

Und wo Opferung und Dienste und Liebesblicke sind: auch da ist Wille,
Herr zu sein. Auf Schleichwegen schleicht sich da der Schwächere in die
Burg und bis in’s Herz dem Mächtigeren—und stiehlt da Macht.

Und diess Geheimniss redete das Leben selber zu mir. Siehe, sprach es,
ich bin das, was sich immer selber überwinden muss.

„Freilich, ihr heisst es Wille zur Zeugung oder Trieb zum Zwecke, zum
Höheren, Ferneren, Vielfacheren: aber all diess ist Eins und Ein
Geheimniss.

Lieber noch gehe ich unter, als dass ich diesem Einen absagte; und
wahrlich, wo es Untergang giebt und Blätterfallen, siehe, da opfert
sich Leben—um Macht!

Dass ich Kampf sein muss und Werden und Zweck und der Zwecke
Widerspruch: ach, wer meinen Willen erräth, erräth wohl auch, auf
welchen _krummen_ Wegen er gehen muss!

Was ich auch schaffe und wie ich’s auch liebe,—bald muss ich Gegner ihm
sein und meiner Liebe: so will es mein Wille.

Und auch du, Erkennender, bist nur ein Pfad und Fusstapfen meines
Willens: wahrlich, mein Wille zur Macht wandelt auch auf den Füssen
deines Willens zur Wahrheit!

Der traf freilich die Wahrheit nicht, der das Wort nach ihr schoss vom
„Willen zum Dasein“: diesen Willen—giebt es nicht!

Denn: was nicht ist, das kann nicht wollen; was aber im Dasein ist, wie
könnte das noch zum Dasein wollen!

Nur, wo Leben ist, da ist auch Wille: aber nicht Wille zum Leben,
sondern—so lehre ich’s dich—Wille zur Macht!

Vieles ist dem Lebenden höher geschätzt, als Leben selber; doch aus dem
Schätzen selber heraus redet—der Wille zur Macht!“—

Also lehrte mich einst das Leben: und daraus löse ich euch, ihr
Weisesten, noch das Räthsel eures Herzens.

Wahrlich, ich sage euch: Gutes und Böses, das unvergänglich wäre—das
giebt es nicht! Aus sich selber muss es sich immer wieder überwinden.

Mit euren Werthen und Worten von Gut und Böse übt ihr Gewalt, ihr
Werthschätzenden: und diess ist eure verborgene Liebe und eurer Seele
Glänzen, Zittern und Überwallen.

Aber eine stärkere Gewalt wächst aus euren Werthen und eine neue
Überwindung: an der zerbricht Ei und Eierschale.

Und wer ein Schöpfer sein muss im Guten und Bösen: wahrlich, der muss
ein Vernichter erst sein und Werthe zerbrechen.

Also gehört das höchste Böse zur höchsten Güte: diese aber ist die
schöpferische.—

Reden wir nur davon, ihr Weisesten, ob es gleich schlimm ist. Schweigen
ist schlimmer; alle verschwiegenere Wahrheiten werden giftig.

Und mag doch Alles zerbrechen, was an unseren Wahrheiten
zerbrechen—kann! Manches Haus giebt es noch zu bauen!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Erhabenen

Still ist der Grund meines Meeres: wer erriethe wohl, dass er
scherzhafte Ungeheuer birgt!

Unerschütterlich ist meine Tiefe: aber sie glänzt von schwimmenden
Räthseln und Gelächtern.

Einen Erhabenen sah ich heute, einen Feierlichen, einen Büsser des
Geistes: oh wie lachte meine Seele ob seiner Hässlichkeit!

Mit erhobener Brust und Denen gleich, welche den Athem an sich ziehn:
also stand er da, der Erhabene, und schweigsam:

Behängt mit hässlichen Wahrheiten, seiner Jagdbeute, und reich an
zerrissenen Kleidern; auch viele Dornen hiengen an ihm—aber noch sah
ich keine Rose.

Noch lernte er das Lachen nicht und die Schönheit. Finster kam dieser
Jäger zurück aus dem Walde der Erkenntniss.

Vom Kampfe kehrte er heim mit wilden Thieren: aber aus seinem Ernste
blickt auch noch ein wildes Thier—ein unüberwundenes!

Wie ein Tiger steht er immer noch da, der springen will; aber ich mag
diese gespannten Seelen nicht, unhold ist mein Geschmack allen diesen
Zurückgezognen.

Und ihr sagt mir, Freunde, dass nicht zu streiten sei über Geschmack
und Schmecken? Aber alles Leben ist Streit um Geschmack und Schmecken!

Geschmack: das ist Gewicht zugleich und Wagschale und Wägender; und
wehe allem Lebendigen, das ohne Streit um Gewicht und Wagschale und
Wägende leben wollte!

Wenn er seiner Erhabenheit müde würde, dieser Erhabene: dann erst würde
seine Schönheit anheben,—und dann erst will ich ihn schmecken und
schmackhaft finden.

Und erst, wenn er sich von sich selber abwendet, wird er über seinen
eignen Schatten springen—und, wahrlich! hinein in _seine_ Sonne.

Allzulange sass er im Schatten, die Wangen bleichten dem Büsser des
Geistes; fast verhungerte er an seinen Erwartungen.

Verachtung ist noch in seinem Auge; und Ekel birgt sich an seinem
Munde. Zwar ruht er jetzt, aber seine Ruhe hat sich noch nicht in die
Sonne gelegt.

Dem Stiere gleich sollte er thun; und sein Glück sollte nach Erde
riechen und nicht nach Verachtung der Erde.

Als weissen Stier möchte ich ihn sehn, wie er schnaubend und brüllend
der Pflugschar vorangeht: und sein Gebrüll sollte noch alles Irdische
preisen!

Dunkel noch ist sein Antlitz; der Hand Schatten spielt auf ihm.
Verschattet ist noch der Sinn seines Auges.

Seine That selber ist noch der Schatten auf ihm: die Hand verdunkelt
den Handelnden. Noch hat er seine That nicht überwunden.

Wohl liebe ich an ihm den Nacken des Stiers: aber nun will ich auch
noch das Auge des Engels sehn.

Auch seinen Helden-Willen muss er noch verlernen: ein Gehobener soll er
mir sein und nicht nur ein Erhabener:—der Äther selber sollte ihn
heben, den Willenlosen!

Er bezwang Unthiere, er löste Räthsel: aber erlösen sollte er auch noch
seine Unthiere und Räthsel, zu himmlischen Kindern sollte er sie noch
verwandeln.

Noch hat seine Erkenntniss nicht lächeln gelernt und ohne Eifersucht
sein; noch ist seine strömende Leidenschaft nicht stille geworden in
der Schönheit.

Wahrlich, nicht in der Sattheit soll sein Verlangen schweigen und
untertauchen, sondern in der Schönheit! Die Anmuth gehört zur Grossmuth
des Grossgesinnten.

Den Arm über das Haupt gelegt: so sollte der Held ausruhn, so sollte er
auch noch sein Ausruhen überwinden.

Aber gerade dem Helden ist das _Schöne_ aller Dinge Schwerstes.
Unerringbar ist das Schöne allem heftigen Willen.

Ein Wenig mehr, ein Wenig weniger: das gerade ist hier Viel, das ist
hier das Meiste.

Mit lässigen Muskeln stehn und mit abgeschirrtem Willen: das ist das
Schwerste euch Allen, ihr Erhabenen!

Wenn die Macht gnädig wird und herabkommt in’s Sichtbare: Schönheit
heisse ich solches Herabkommen.

Und von Niemandem will ich so als von dir gerade Schönheit, du
Gewaltiger: deine Güte sei deine letzte Selbst- Überwältigung.

Alles Böse traue ich dir zu: darum will ich von dir das Gute.

Wahrlich, ich lachte oft der Schwächlinge, welche sich gut glauben,
weil sie lahme Tatzen haben!

Der Säule Tugend sollst du nachstreben: schöner wird sie immer und
zarter, aber inwendig härter und tragsamer, je mehr sie aufsteigt.

Ja, du Erhabener, einst sollst du noch schön sein und deiner eignen
Schönheit den Spiegel vorhalten.

Dann wird deine Seele vor göttlichen Begierden schaudern; und Anbetung
wird noch in deiner Eitelkeit sein!

Diess nämlich ist das Geheimniss der Seele: erst, wenn sie der Held
verlassen hat, naht ihr, im Traume,—der Über-Held.

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom Lande der Bildung

Zu weit hinein flog ich in die Zukunft: ein Grauen überfiel mich.

Und als ich um mich sah, siehe! da war die Zeit mein einziger
Zeitgenosse.

Da floh ich rückwärts, heimwärts—und immer eilender: so kam ich zu
euch, ihr Gegenwärtigen, und in’s Land der Bildung.

Zum ersten Male brachte ich ein Auge mit für euch, und gute Begierde:
wahrlich, mit Sehnsucht im Herzen kam ich.

Aber wie geschah mir? So angst mir auch war,—ich musste lachen! Nie sah
mein Auge etwas so Buntgesprenkeltes!

Ich lachte und lachte, während der Fuss mir noch zitterte und das Herz
dazu: „hier ist ja die Heimat aller Farbentöpfe!“—sagte ich.

Mit fünfzig Klexen bemalt an Gesicht und Gliedern: so sasset ihr da zu
meinem Staunen, ihr Gegenwärtigen!

Und mit fünfzig Spiegeln um euch, die eurem Farbenspiele schmeichelten
und nachredeten!

Wahrlich, ihr könntet gar keine bessere Maske tragen, ihr
Gegenwärtigen, als euer eignes Gesicht ist! Wer könnte euch—_erkennen_!

Vollgeschrieben mit den Zeichen der Vergangenheit, und auch diese
Zeichen überpinselt mit neuen Zeichen: also habt ihr euch gut versteckt
vor allen Zeichendeutern!

Und wenn man auch Nierenprüfer ist: wer glaubt wohl noch, dass ihr
Nieren habt! Aus Farben scheint ihr gebacken und aus geleimten Zetteln.

Alle Zeiten und Völker blicken bunt aus euren Schleiern; alle Sitten
und Glauben reden bunt aus euren Gebärden.

Wer von euch Schleier und Überwürfe und Farben und Gebärden abzöge:
gerade genug würde er übrig behalten, um die Vögel damit zu
erschrecken.

Wahrlich, ich selber bin der erschreckte Vogel, der euch einmal nackt
sah und ohne Farbe; und ich flog davon, als das Gerippe mir Liebe
zuwinkte.

Lieber wollte ich doch noch Tagelöhner sein in der Unterwelt und bei
den Schatten des Ehemals!—feister und voller als ihr sind ja noch die
Unterweltlichen!

Diess, ja diess ist Bitterniss meinen Gedärmen, dass ich euch weder
nackt, noch bekleidet aushalte, ihr Gegenwärtigen!

Alles Unheimliche der Zukunft, und was je verflogenen Vögeln Schauder
machte, ist wahrlich heimlicher noch und traulicher als eure
„Wirklichkeit“.

Denn so sprecht ihr: „Wirkliche sind wir ganz, und ohne Glauben und
Aberglauben“ : also brüstet ihr euch—ach, auch noch ohne Brüste!

Ja, wie solltet ihr glauben _können_, ihr Buntgesprenkelten!—die ihr
Gemälde seid von Allem, was je geglaubt wurde!

Wandelnde Widerlegungen seid ihr des Glaubens selber, und aller
Gedanken Gliederbrechen. _Unglaubwürdige_: also heisse _ich_ euch, ihr
Wirklichen!

Alle Zeiten schwätzen wider einander in euren Geistern; und aller
Zeiten Träume und Geschwätz waren wirklicher noch als euer Wachsein
ist!

Unfruchtbare seid ihr: _darum_ fehlt es euch an Glauben. Aber wer
schaffen musste, der hatte auch immer seine Wahr-Träume und
Stern-Zeichen—und glaubte an Glauben!—

Halboffne Thore seid ihr, an denen Todtengräber warten. Und das ist
_eure_ Wirklichkeit: „Alles ist werth, dass es zu Grunde geht.“

Ach, wie ihr mir dasteht, ihr Unfruchtbaren, wie mager in den Rippen!
Und Mancher von euch hatte wohl dessen selber ein Einsehen.

Und er sprach: „es hat wohl da ein Gott, als ich schlief, mir heimlich
Etwas entwendet? Wahrlich, genug, sich ein Weibchen daraus zu bilden!

Wundersam ist die Armuth meiner Rippen!“ also sprach schon mancher
Gegenwärtige.

Ja, zum Lachen seid ihr mir, ihr Gegenwärtigen! Und sonderlich, wenn
ihr euch über euch selber wundert!

Und wehe mir, wenn ich nicht lachen könnte über eure Verwunderung, und
alles Widrige aus euren Näpfen hinunter trinken müsste!

So aber will ich’s mit euch leichter nehmen, da ich _Schweres_ zu
tragen habe; und was thut’s mir, wenn sich Käfer und Flügelwürmer noch
auf mein Bündel setzen!

Wahrlich, es soll mir darob nicht schwerer werden! Und nicht aus euch,
ihr Gegenwärtigen, soll mir die grosse Müdigkeit kommen.—Ach, wohin
soll ich nun noch steigen mit meiner Sehnsucht! Von allen Bergen schaue
ich aus nach Vater- und Mutterländern.

Aber Heimat fand ich nirgends: unstät bin ich in allen Städten und ein
Aufbruch an allen Thoren.

Fremd sind mir und ein Spott die Gegenwärtigen, zu denen mich jüngst
das Herz trieb; und vertrieben bin ich aus Vater- und Mutterländern.

So liebe ich allein noch meiner _Kinder Land_, das unentdeckte, im
fernsten Meere: nach ihm heisse ich meine Segel suchen und suchen.

An meinen Kindern will ich es gut machen, dass ich meiner Väter Kind
bin: und an aller Zukunft—_diese_ Gegenwart!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von der unbefleckten Erkenntniss

Als gestern der Mond aufgieng, wähnte ich, dass er eine Sonne gebären
wolle: so breit und trächtig lag er am Horizonte.

Aber ein Lügner war er mir mit seiner Schwangerschaft; und eher noch
will ich an den Mann im Monde glauben als an das Weib.

Freilich, wenig Mann ist er auch, dieser schüchterne Nachtschwärmer.
Wahrlich, mit schlechtem Gewissen wandelt er über die Dächer.

Denn er ist lüstern und eifersüchtig, der Mönch im Monde, lüstern nach
der Erde und nach allen Freuden der Liebenden.

Nein, ich mag ihn nicht, diesen Kater auf den Dächern! Widerlich sind
mir Alle, die um halbverschlossne Fenster schleichen!

Fromm und schweigsam wandelt er hin auf Sternen-Teppichen:—aber ich mag
alle leisetretenden Mannsfüsse nicht, an denen auch nicht ein Sporen
klirrt.

Jedes Redlichen Schritt redet; die Katze aber stiehlt sich über den
Boden weg. Siehe, katzenhaft kommt der Mond daher und unredlich.—

Dieses Gleichniss gebe ich euch empfindsamen Heuchlern, euch, den
„Rein-Erkennenden!“ Euch heisse _ich_—Lüsterne!

Auch ihr liebt die Erde und das Irdische: ich errieth euch wohl!—aber
Scham ist in eurer Liebe und schlechtes Gewissen,—dem Monde gleicht
ihr!

Zur Verachtung des Irdischen hat man euren Geist überredet, aber nicht
eure Eingeweide: _die_ aber sind das Stärkste an euch!

Und nun schämt sich euer Geist, dass er euren Eingeweiden zu willen ist
und geht vor seiner eignen Scham Schleich- und Lügenwege.

„Das wäre mir das Höchste—also redet euer verlogner Geist zu sich—auf
das Leben ohne Begierde zu schaun und nicht gleich dem Hunde mit
hängender Zunge:

Glücklich zu sein im Schauen, mit erstorbenem Willen, ohne Griff und
Gier der Selbstsucht—kalt und aschgrau am ganzen Leibe, aber mit
trunkenen Mondesaugen!“

„Das wäre mir das Liebste,—also verführt sich selber der Verführte—die
Erde zu lieben, wie der Mond sie liebt, und nur mit dem Auge allein
ihre Schönheit zu betasten.

Und das heisse mir aller Dinge _unbefleckte_ Erkenntniss, dass ich von
den Dingen Nichts will: ausser dass ich vor ihnen da liegen darf wie
ein Spiegel mit hundert Augen.“—

Oh, ihr empfindsamen Heuchler, ihr Lüsternen! Euch fehlt die Unschuld
in der Begierde: und nun verleumdet ihr drum das Begehren!

Wahrlich, nicht als Schaffende, Zeugende, Werdelustige liebt ihr die
Erde!

Wo ist Unschuld? Wo der Wille zur Zeugung ist. Und wer über sich hinaus
schaffen will, der hat mir den reinsten Willen.

Wo ist Schönheit? Wo ich mit allem Willen _wollen muss_; wo ich lieben
und untergehn will, dass ein Bild nicht nur Bild bleibe.

Lieben und Untergehn: das reimt sich seit Ewigkeiten. Wille zur Liebe:
das ist, willig auch sein zum Tode. Also rede ich zu euch Feiglingen!

Aber nun will euer entmanntes Schielen „Beschaulichkeit“ heissen! Und
was mit feigen Augen sich tasten lässt, soll „schön“  getauft werden!
oh, ihr Beschmutzer edler Namen!

Aber das soll euer Fluch sein, ihr Unbefleckten, ihr Rein-Erkennenden,
dass ihr nie gebären werdet: und wenn ihr auch breit und trächtig am
Horizonte liegt!

Wahrlich, ihr nehmt den Mund voll mit edlen Worten: und wir sollen
glauben, dass euch das Herz übergehe, ihr Lügenbolde?

Aber in _eine_ Worte sind geringe, verachtete, krumme Worte: gerne
nehme ich auf, was bei eurer Mahlzeit unter den Tisch fällt.

Immer noch kann ich mit ihnen—Heuchlern die Wahrheit sagen! ja, meine
Gräten, Muscheln und Stachelblätter sollen—Heuchlern die Nasen kitzeln!

Schlechte Luft ist immer um euch und eure Mahlzeiten: eure lüsternen
Gedanken, eure Lügen und Heimlichkeiten sind ja in der Luft!

Wagt es doch erst, euch selber zu glauben—euch und euren Eingeweiden!
Wer sich selber nicht glaubt, lügt immer.

Eines Gottes Larve hängtet ihr um vor euch selber, ihr „Reinen“ : in
eines Gottes Larve verkroch sich euer greulicher Ringelwurm.

Wahrlich, ihr täuscht, ihr „Beschaulichen“ ! Auch Zarathustra war einst
der Narr eurer göttlichen Häute; nicht errieth er das
Schlangengeringel, mit denen sie gestopft waren.

Eines Gottes Seele wähnte ich einst spielen zu sehn in euren Spielen,
ihr Rein-Erkennenden! Keine bessere Kunst wähnte ich einst als eure
Künste!

Schlangen-Unflath und schlimmen Geruch verhehlte mir die Ferne: und
dass einer Eidechse List lüstern hier herumschlich.

Aber ich kam euch _nah_: da kam mir der Tag—und nun kommt er euch,—zu
Ende gieng des Mondes Liebschaft!

Seht doch hin! Ertappt und bleich steht er da—vor der Morgenröthe!

Denn schon kommt sie, die Glühende,—_ihre_ Liebe zur Erde kommt!
Unschuld und Schöpfer-Begier ist alle Sonnen-Liebe!

Seht doch hin, wie sie ungeduldig über das Meer kommt! Fühlt ihr den
Durst und den heissen Athem ihrer Liebe nicht?

Am Meere will sie saugen und seine Tiefe zu sich in die Höhe trinken:
da hebt sich die Begierde des Meeres mit tausend Brüsten.

Geküsst und gesaugt _will_ es sein vom Durste der Sonne; Luft _will_ es
werden und Höhe und Fusspfad des Lichts und selber Licht!

Wahrlich, der Sonne gleich liebe ich das Leben und alle tiefen Meere.

Und diess heisst _mir_ Erkenntniss: alles Tiefe soll hinauf—zu meiner
Höhe!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Gelehrten

Als ich im Schlafe lag, da frass ein Schaf am Epheukranze meines
Hauptes,—frass und sprach dazu: „Zarathustra ist kein Gelehrter mehr.“

Sprach’s und gieng stotzig davon und stolz. Ein Kind erzählte mir’s.

Gerne liege ich hier, wo die Kinder spielen, an der zerbrochnen Mauer,
unter Disteln und rothen Mohnblumen.

Ein Gelehrter bin ich den Kindern noch und auch den Disteln und rothen
Mohnblumen. Unschuldig sind sie, selbst noch in ihrer Bosheit.

Aber den Schafen bin ich’s nicht mehr: so will es mein Loos—gesegnet
sei es!

Denn diess ist die Wahrheit: ausgezogen bin ich aus dem Hause der
Gelehrten: und die Thür habe ich noch hinter mir zugeworfen.

Zu lange sass meine Seele hungrig an ihrem Tische; nicht, gleich ihnen,
bin ich auf das Erkennen abgerichtet wie auf das Nüsseknacken.

Freiheit liebe ich und die Luft über frischer Erde; lieber noch will
ich auf Ochsenhäuten schlafen, als auf ihren Würden und Achtbarkeiten.

Ich bin zu heiss und verbrannt von eigenen Gedanken: oft will es mir
den Athem nehmen. Da muss ich in’s Freie und weg aus allen verstaubten
Stuben.

Aber sie sitzen kühl in kühlem Schatten: sie wollen in Allem nur
Zuschauer sein und hüten sich dort zu sitzen, wo die Sonne auf die
Stufen brennt.

Gleich Solchen, die auf der Strasse stehn und die Leute angaffen,
welche vorübergehn: also warten sie auch und gaffen Gedanken an, die
Andre gedacht haben.

Greift man sie mit Händen, so stäuben sie um sich gleich Mehlsäcken,
und unfreiwillig. aber wer erriethe wohl, dass ihr Staub vom Korne
stammt und von der gelben Wonne der Sommerfelder?

Geben sie sich weise, so fröstelt mich ihrer kleinen Sprüche und
Wahrheiten: ein Geruch ist oft an ihrer Weisheit, als ob sie aus dem
Sumpfe stamme: und wahrlich, ich hörte auch schon den Frosch aus ihr
quaken!

Geschickt sind sie, sie haben kluge Finger: was will _meine_ Einfalt
bei ihrer Vielfalt! Alles Fädeln und Knüpfen und Weben verstehn ihre
Finger: also wirken sie die Strümpfe des Geistes!

Gute Uhrwerke sind sie: nur sorge man, sie richtig aufzuziehn! Dann
zeigen sie ohne Falsch die Stunde an und machen einen bescheidnen Lärm
dabei.

Gleich Mühlwerken arbeiten sie und Stampfen: man werfe ihnen nur seine
Fruchtkörner zu!—sie wissen schon, Korn klein zu mahlen und weissen
Staub daraus zu machen.

Sie sehen einander gut auf die Finger und trauen sich nicht zum Besten.
Erfinderisch in kleinen Schlauheiten warten sie auf Solche, deren
Wissen auf lahmen Füssen geht,—gleich Spinnen warten sie.

Ich sah sie immer mit Vorsicht Gift bereiten; und immer zogen sie
gläserne Handschuhe dabei an ihre Finger.

Auch mit falschen Würfeln wissen sie zu spielen; und so eifrig fand ich
sie spielen, dass sie dabei schwitzten.

Wir sind einander fremd, und ihre Tugenden gehn mir noch mehr wider den
Geschmack, als ihre Falschheiten und falschen Würfel.

Und als ich bei ihnen wohnte, da wohnte ich über ihnen. Darüber wurden
sie mir gram.

Sie wollen Nichts davon hören, dass Einer über ihren Köpfen wandelt;
und so legten sie Holz und Erde und Unrath zwischen mich und ihre
Köpfe.

Also dämpften sie den Schall meiner Schritte: und am schlechtesten
wurde ich bisher von den Gelehrtesten gehört.

Aller Menschen Fehl und Schwäche legten sie zwischen sich und
mich:—„Fehlboden“  heissen sie das in ihren Häusern.

Aber trotzdem wandele ich mit meinen Gedanken _über_ ihren Köpfen; und
selbst, wenn ich auf meinen eignen Fehlern wandeln wollte, würde ich
noch über ihnen sein und ihren Köpfen.

Denn die Menschen sind _nicht_ gleich: so spricht die Gerechtigkeit.
Und was ich will, dürften _sie_ nicht wollen!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den Dichtern

„Seit ich den Leib besser kenne,—sagte Zarathustra zu einem seiner
Jünger—ist mir der Geist nur noch gleichsam Geist; und alles das
„Unvergängliche“—das ist auch nur ein Gleichniss.“

„So hörte ich dich schon einmal sagen, antwortete der Jünger; und
damals fügtest du hinzu: „aber die Dichter lügen zuviel.“ Warum sagtest
du doch, dass die Dichter zuviel lügen?“

„Warum? sagte Zarathustra. Du fragst warum? Ich gehöre nicht zu Denen,
welche man nach ihrem Warum fragen darf.

Ist denn mein Erleben von Gestern? Das ist lange her, dass ich die
Gründe meiner Meinungen erlebte.

Müsste ich nicht ein Fass sein von Gedächtniss, wenn ich auch meine
Gründe bei mir haben wollte?

Schon zuviel ist mir’s, meine Meinungen selber zu behalten; und mancher
Vogel fliegt davon.

Und mitunter finde ich auch ein zugezogenes Thier in meinem
Taubenschlage, das mir fremd ist, und das zittert, wenn ich meine Hand
darauf lege.

Doch was sagte dir einst Zarathustra? Dass die Dichter zuviel
lügen?—Aber auch Zarathustra ist ein Dichter.

Glaubst du nun, dass er hier die Wahrheit redete? Warum glaubst du
das?“

Der Jünger antwortete: „ich glaube an Zarathustra.“ Aber Zarathustra
schüttelte den Kopf und lächelte.

Der Glaube macht mich nicht selig, sagte er, zumal nicht der Glaube an
mich.

Aber gesetzt, dass jemand allen Ernstes sagte, die Dichter lügen
zuviel: so hat er Recht,—_wir_ lügen zuviel.

Wir wissen auch zu wenig und sind schlechte Lerner: so müssen wir schon
lügen.

Und wer von uns Dichtern hätte nicht seinen Wein verfälscht? Manch
giftiger Mischmasch geschah in unsern Kellern, manches Unbeschreibliche
ward da gethan.

Und weil wir wenig wissen, so gefallen uns von Herzen die geistig
Armen, sonderlich wenn es junge Weibchen sind!

Und selbst nach den Dingen sind wir noch begehrlich, die sich die alten
Weibchen Abends erzählen. Das heissen wir selber an uns das
Ewig-Weibliche.

Und als ob es einen besondren geheimen Zugang zum Wissen gäbe, der sich
Denen _verschütte_, welche Etwas lernen: so glauben wir an das Volk und
seine „Weisheit“.

Das aber glauben alle Dichter: dass wer im Grase oder an einsamen
Gehängen liegend die Ohren spitze, Etwas von den Dingen erfahre, die
zwischen Himmel und Erde sind.

Und kommen ihnen zärtliche Regungen, so meinen die Dichter immer, die
Natur selber sei in sie verliebt:

Und sie schleiche zu ihrem Ohre, Heimliches hinein zu sagen und
verliebte Schmeichelreden: dessen brüsten und blähen sie sich vor allen
Sterblichen!

Ach, es giebt so viel Dinge zwischen Himmel und Erden, von denen sich
nur die Dichter Etwas haben träumen lassen!

Und zumal _über_ dem Himmel: denn alle Götter sind Dichter-Gleichniss,
Dichter-Erschleichniss!

Wahrlich, immer zieht es uns hinan—nämlich zum Reich der Wolken: auf
diese setzen wir unsre bunten Bälge und heissen sie dann Götter und
Übermenschen:—

Sind sie doch gerade leicht genug für diese Stühle!—alle diese Götter
und Übermenschen.

Ach, wie bin ich all des Unzulänglichen müde, das durchaus Ereigniss
sein soll! Ach, wie bin ich der Dichter müde!

Als Zarathustra so sprach, zürnte ihm sein Jünger, aber er schwieg. Und
auch Zarathustra schwieg; und sein Auge hatte sich nach innen gekehrt,
gleich als ob es in weite Fernen sähe. Endlich seufzte er und holte
Athem.

Ich bin von Heute und Ehedem, sagte er dann; aber Etwas ist in mir, das
ist von Morgen und übermorgen und Einstmals.

Ich wurde der Dichter müde, der alten und der neuen: Oberflächliche
sind sie mir Alle und seichte Meere.

Sie dachten nicht genug in die Tiefe: darum sank ihr Gefühl nicht bis
zu den Gründen.

Etwas Wollust und etwas Langeweile: das ist noch ihr bestes Nachdenken
gewesen.

Gespenster-Hauch und -Huschen gilt mir all ihr Harfen-Klingklang; was
wussten sie bisher von der Inbrunst der Töne!—

Sie sind mir auch nicht reinlich genug: sie trüben Alle ihr Gewässer,
dass es tief scheine.

Und gerne geben sie sich damit als Versöhner: aber Mittler und Mischer
bleiben sie mir und Halb-und-Halbe und Unreinliche!—

Ach, ich warf wohl mein Netz in ihre Meere und wollte gute Fische
fangen; aber immer zog ich eines alten Gottes Kopf herauf.

So gab dem Hungrigen das Meer einen Stein. Und sie selber mögen wohl
aus dem Meere stammen.

Gewiss, man findet Perlen in ihnen: um so ähnlicher sind sie selber
harten Schalthieren. Und statt der Seele fand ich oft bei ihnen
gesalzenen Schleim.

Sie lernten vom Meere auch noch seine Eitelkeit: ist nicht das Meer der
Pfau der Pfauen?

Noch vor dem hässlichsten aller Büffel rollt es seinen Schweif hin,
nimmer wird es seines Spitzenfächers von Silber und Seide müde.

Trutzig blickt der Büffel dazu, dem Sande nahe in seiner Seele, näher
noch dem Dickicht, am nächsten aber dem Sumpfe.

Was ist ihm Schönheit und Meer und Pfauen-Zierath! Dieses Gleichniss
sage ich den Dichtern.

Wahrlich, ihr Geist selber ist der Pfau der Pfauen und ein Meer von
Eitelkeit!

Zuschauer will der Geist des Dichters: sollten’s auch Büffel sein!—

Aber dieses Geistes wurde ich müde: und ich sehe kommen, dass er seiner
selber müde wird.

Verwandelt sah ich schon die Dichter und gegen sich selber den Blick
gerichtet.

Büsser des Geistes sah ich kommen: die wuchsen aus ihnen.

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von grossen Ereignissen

Es giebt eine Insel im Meere—unweit den glückseligen Inseln
Zarathustra’s—auf welcher beständig ein Feuerberg raucht; von der sagt
das Volk, und sonderlich sagen es die alten Weibchen aus dem Volke,
dass sie wie ein Felsblock vor das Thor der Unterwelt gestellt sei:
durch den Feuerberg selber aber führe der schmale Weg abwärts, der zu
diesem Thore der Unterwelt geleite.

Um jene Zeit nun, als Zarathustra auf den glückseligen Inseln weilte,
geschah es, dass ein Schiff an der Insel Anker warf, auf welcher der
rauchende Berg steht; und seine Mannschaft gieng an’s Land, um
Kaninchen zu schiessen. Gegen die Stunde des Mittags aber, da der
Capitän und seine Leute wieder beisammen waren, sahen sie plötzlich
durch die Luft einen Mann auf sich zukommen, und eine Stimme sagte
deutlich: „es ist Zeit! Es ist die höchste Zeit!“ Wie die Gestalt ihnen
aber am nächsten war—sie flog aber schnell gleich einem Schatten
vorbei, in der Richtung, wo der Feuerberg lag—da erkannten sie mit
grösster Bestürzung, dass es Zarathustra sei; denn sie hatten ihn Alle
schon gesehn, ausgenommen der Capitän selber, und sie liebten ihn, wie
das Volk liebt: also dass zu gleichen Theilen Liebe und Scheu beisammen
sind.

„Seht mir an! sagte der alte Steuermann, da fährt Zarathustra zur
Hölle!“—

Um die gleiche Zeit, als diese Schiffer an der Feuerinsel landeten,
lief das Gerücht umher, dass Zarathustra verschwunden sei; und als man
seine Freunde fragte, erzählten sie, er sei bei Nacht zu Schiff
gegangen, ohne zu sagen, wohin er reisen wolle.

Also entstand eine Unruhe; nach drei Tagen aber kam zu dieser Unruhe
die Geschichte der Schiffsleute hinzu—und nun sagte alles Volk, dass
der Teufel Zarathustra geholt habe. Seine jünger lachten zwar ob dieses
Geredes; und einer von ihnen sagte sogar: „eher glaube ich noch, dass
Zarathustra sich den Teufel geholt hat.“ Aber im Grunde der Seele waren
sie Alle voll Besorgniss und Sehnsucht: so war ihre Freude gross, als
am fünften Tage Zarathustra unter ihnen erschien.

Und diess ist die Erzählung von Zarathustra’s Gespräch mit dem
Feuerhunde.

Die Erde, sagte er, hat eine Haut; und diese Haut hat Krankheiten. Eine
dieser Krankheiten heisst zum Beispiel: „Mensch.“

Und eine andere dieser Krankheiten heisst „Feuerhund“: über _den_ haben
sich die Menschen Viel vorgelogen und vorlügen lassen.

Diess Geheimniss zu ergründen gieng ich über das Meer: und ich habe die
Wahrheit nackt gesehn, wahrlich! barfuss bis zum Halse.

Was es mit dem Feuerhund auf sich hat, weiss ich nun; und insgleichen
mit all den Auswurf- und Umsturz-Teufeln, vor denen sich nicht nur alte
Weibchen fürchten.

Heraus mit dir, Feuerhund, aus deiner Tiefe! rief ich, und bekenne, wie
tief diese Tiefe ist! Woher ist das, was du da heraufschnaubst?

Du trinkst reichlich am Meere: das verräth deine versalzte
Beredsamkeit! Fürwahr, für einen Hund der Tiefe nimmst du deine Nahrung
zu sehr von der Oberfläche!

Höchstens für den Bauchredner der Erde halt’ ich dich: und immer, wenn
ich Umsturz- und Auswurf-Teufel reden hörte, fand ich sie gleich dir:
gesalzen, lügnerisch und flach.

Ihr versteht zu brüllen und mit Asche zu verdunkeln! Ihr seid die
besten Grossmäuler und lerntet sattsam die Kunst, Schlamm heiss zu
sieden.

Wo ihr seid, da muss stets Schlamm in der Nähe sein, und viel
Schwammichtes, Höhlichtes, Eingezwängtes: das will in die Freiheit.

„Freiheit“ brüllt ihr Alle am liebsten: aber ich verlernte den Glauben
an „grosse Ereignisse,“ sobald viel Gebrüll und Rauch um sie herum ist.

Und glaube mir nur, Freund Höllenlärm! Die grössten Ereignisse—das sind
nicht unsre lautesten, sondern unsre stillsten Stunden.

Nicht um die Erfinder von neuem Lärme: um die Erfinder von neuen
Werthen dreht sich die Welt; _unhörbar_ dreht sie sich.

Und gesteh es nur! Wenig war immer nur geschehn, wenn dein Lärm und
Rauch sich verzog. Was liegt daran, dass eine Stadt zur Mumie wurde,
und eine Bildsäule im Schlamme liegt!

Und diess Wort sage ich noch den Umstürzern von Bildsäulen. Das ist
wohl die grösste Thorheit, Salz in’s Meer und Bildsäulen in den Schlamm
zu werfen.

Im Schlamme eurer Verachtung lag die Bildsäule: aber das ist gerade ihr
Gesetz, dass ihr aus der Verachtung wieder Leben und lebende Schönheit
wächst!

Mit göttlicheren Zügen steht sie nun auf und leidendverführerisch; und
wahrlich! sie wird euch noch Dank sagen, dass ihr sie umstürztet, ihr
Umstürzer!

Diesen Rath aber rathe ich Königen und Kirchen und Allem, was alters-
und tugendschwach ist—lasst euch nur umstürzen! Dass ihr wieder zum
Leben kommt, und zu euch—die Tugend!—

Also redete ich vor dem Feuerhunde: da unterbrach er mich mürrisch und
fragte: „Kirche? Was ist denn das?“

Kirche? antwortete ich, das ist eine Art von Staat, und zwar die
verlogenste. Doch schweig still, du Heuchelhund! Du kennst deine Art
wohl am besten schon!

Gleich dir selber ist der Staat ein Heuchelhund; gleich dir redet er
gern mit Rauch und Gebrülle,—dass er glauben mache, gleich dir, er rede
aus dem Bauch der Dinge.

Denn er will durchaus das wichtigste Thier auf Erden sein, der Staat;
und man glaubt’s ihm auch.—

Als ich das gesagt hatte, gebärdete sich der Feuerhund wie unsinnig vor
Neid. „Wie? schrie er, das wichtigste Thier auf Erden? Und man glaubt’s
ihm auch?“ Und so viel Dampf und grässliche Stimmen kamen ihm aus dem
Schlunde, dass ich meinte, er werde vor Arger und Neid ersticken.

Endlich wurde er stiller, und sein Keuchen liess nach; sobald er aber
stille war, sagte ich lachend:

„Du ärgerst dich, Feuerhund: also habe ich über dich Recht!

Und dass ich auch noch Recht behalte, so höre von einem andern
Feuerhunde: der spricht wirklich aus dem Herzen der Erde.

Gold haucht sein Athem und goldigen Regen: so will’s das Herz ihm. Was
ist ihm Asche und Rauch und heisser Schleim noch!

Lachen flattert aus ihm wie ein buntes Gewölke; abgünstig ist er deinem
Gurgeln und Speien und Grimmen der Ein- geweide!

Das Gold aber und das Lachen—das nimmt er aus dem Herzen der Erde: denn
dass du’s nur weisst,—das Herz der Erde ist von Gold.“

Als diess der Feuerhund vernahm, hielt er’s nicht mehr aus, mir
zuzuhören. Beschämt zog er seinen Schwanz ein, sagte auf eine
kleinlaute Weise Wau! Wau! und kroch hinab in seine Höhle.—

Also erzählte Zarathustra. Seine Jünger aber hörten ihm kaum zu: so
gross war ihre Begierde, ihm von den Schiffsleuten, den Kaninchen und
dem fliegenden Manne zu erzählen.

„Was soll ich davon denken! sagte Zarathustra. Bin ich denn ein
Gespenst?

Aber es wird mein Schatten gewesen sein. Ihr hörtet wohl schon Einiges
vom Wanderer und seinem Schatten?

Sicher aber ist das: ich muss ihn kürzer halten,—er verdirbt mir sonst
noch den Ruf.“

Und nochmals schüttelte Zarathustra den Kopf und wunderte sich. „Was
soll ich davon denken!“ sagte er nochmals.

„Warum schrie denn das Gespenst: es ist Zeit! Es ist die höchste Zeit!

_Wozu_ ist es denn—höchste Zeit?“—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Der Wahrsager

„- und ich sahe eine grosse Traurigkeit über die Menschen kommen. Die
Besten wurden ihrer Werke müde.

Eine Lehre ergieng, ein Glauben lief neben ihr: „Alles ist leer, Alles
ist gleich, Alles war!“

Und von allen Hügeln klang es wieder: „Alles ist leer, Alles ist
gleich, Alles war!“

Wohl haben wir geerntet: aber warum wurden alle Früchte uns faul und
braun? Was fiel vom bösen Monde bei der letzten Nacht hernieder?

Umsonst war alle Arbeit, Gift ist unser Wein geworden, böser Blick
sengte unsre Felder und Herzen gelb.

Trocken wurden wir Alle; und fällt Feuer auf uns, so stäuben wir der
Asche gleich:—ja das Feuer selber machten wir müde.

Alle Brunnen versiegten uns, auch das Meer wich zurück. Aller Grund
will reissen, aber die Tiefe will nicht schlingen!

„Ach, wo ist noch ein Meer, in dem man ertrinken könnte“: so klingt
unsre Klage - hinweg über flache Sümpfe.

Wahrlich, zum Sterben wurden wir schon zu müde; nun wachen wir noch und
leben fort—in Grabkammern!“—

Also hörte Zarathustra einen Wahrsager reden; und seine Weissagung
gieng ihm zu Herzen und verwandelte ihn. Traurig gieng er umher und
müde; und er wurde Denen gleich, von welchen der Wahrsager geredet
hatte.

Wahrlich, so sagte er zu seinen Jüngern, es ist um ein Kleines, so
kommt diese lange Dämmerung. Ach, wie soll ich mein Licht hinüber
retten!

Dass es mir nicht ersticke in dieser Traurigkeit! Ferneren Welten soll
es ja Licht sein und noch fernsten Nächten!

Dergestalt im Herzen bekümmert gieng Zarathustra umher; und drei Tage
lang nahm er nicht Trank und Speise zu sich, hatte keine Ruhe und
verlor die Rede. Endlich geschah es, dass er in einen tiefen Schlaf
verfiel. Seine jünger aber sassen um ihn in langen Nachtwachen und
warteten mit Sorge, ob er wach werde und wieder rede und genesen sei
von seiner Trübsal.

Diess aber ist die Rede, welche Zarathustra sprach, als er aufwachte;
seine Stimme aber kam zu seinen Jüngern wie aus weiter Ferne.

Hört mir doch den Traum, den ich träumte, ihr Freunde, und helft mir
seinen Sinn rathen!

Ein Räthsel ist er mir noch, dieser Traum; sein Sinn ist verborgen in
ihm und eingefangen und fliegt noch nicht über ihn hin mit freien
Flügeln.

Allem Leben hatte ich abgesagt, so träumte mir. Zum Nacht- und
Grabwächter war ich worden, dort auf der einsamen Berg-Burg des Todes.

Droben hütete ich seine Särge: voll standen die dumpfen Gewölbe von
solchen Siegeszeichen. Aus gläsernen Särgen blickte mich überwundenes
Leben an.

Den Geruch verstaubter Ewigkeiten athmete ich: schwül und verstaubt lag
meine Seele. Und wer hätte dort auch seine Seele lüften können!

Helle der Mitternacht war immer um mich, Einsamkeit kauerte neben ihr;
und, zudritt, röchelnde Todesstille, die schlimmste meiner Freundinnen.

Schlüssel führte ich, die rostigsten aller Schlüssel; und ich verstand
es, damit das knarrendste aller Thore zu öffnen.

Einem bitterbösen Gekrächze gleich lief der Ton durch die langen Gänge,
wenn sich des Thores Flügel hoben: unhold schrie dieser Vogel, ungern
wollte er geweckt sein.

Aber furchtbarer noch und herzzuschnürender war es, wenn es wieder
schwieg und rings stille ward, und ich allein sass in diesem tückischen
Schweigen.

So gieng mir und schlich die Zeit, wenn Zeit es noch gab: was weiss ich
davon! Aber endlich geschah das, was mich weckte.

Dreimal schlugen Schläge an’s Thor, gleich Donnern, es hallten und
heulten die Gewölbe dreimal wieder: da gieng ich zum Thore.

Alpa! rief ich, wer trägt seine Asche zu Berge? Alpa! Alpa! Wer trägt
seine Asche zu Berge?

Und ich drückte den Schlüssel und hob am Thore und mühte mich. Aber
noch keinen Fingerbreit stand es offen:

Da riss ein brausender Wind seine Flügel auseinander: pfeifend,
schrillend und schneidend warf er mir einen schwarzen Sarg zu:

Und im Brausen und Pfeifen und Schrillen zerbarst der Sarg und spie
tausendfältiges Gelächter aus.

Und aus tausend Fratzen von Kindern, Engeln, Eulen, Narren und
kindergrossen Schmetterlingen lachte und höhnte und brauste es wider
mich.

Grässlich erschrak ich darob: es warf mich nieder. Und ich schrie vor
Grausen, wie nie ich schrie.

Aber der eigne Schrei weckte mich auf:—und ich kam zu mir.—

Also erzählte Zarathustra seinen Traum und schwieg dann: denn er wusste
noch nicht die Deutung seines Traumes. Aber der jünger, den er am
meisten lieb hatte, erhob sich schnell, fasste die Hand Zarathustra’s
und sprach:

„Dein Leben selber deutet uns diesen Traum, oh Zarathustra!

Bist du nicht selber der Wind mit schrillem Pfeifen, der den Burgen des
Todes die Thore aufreisst?

Bist du nicht selber der Sarg voll bunter Bosheiten und Engelsfratzen
des Lebens?

Wahrlich, gleich tausendfältigem Kindsgelächter kommt Zarathustra in
alle Todtenkammern, lachend über diese Nacht- und Grabwächter, und wer
sonst mit düstern Schlüsseln rasselt.

Schrecken und umwerfen wirst du sie mit deinem Gelächter; Ohnmacht und
Wachwerden wird deine Macht über sie beweisen.

Und auch, wenn die lange Dämmerung kommt und die Todesmüdigkeit, wirst
du an unserm Himmel, nicht untergehn, du Fürsprecher des Lebens!

Neue Sterne liessest du uns sehen und neue Nachtherrlichkeiten;
wahrlich, das Lachen selber spanntest du wie ein buntes Gezelt über
uns.

Nun wird immer Kindes-Lachen aus Särgen quellen; nun wird immer
siegreich ein starker Wind kommen aller Todesmüdigkeit: dessen bist du
uns selber Bürge und Wahrsager!

Wahrlich, _sie selber träumtest du_, deine Feinde: das war dein
schwerster Traum!

Aber wie du von ihnen aufwachtest und zu dir kamst, also sollen sie
selber von sich aufwachen—und zu dir kommen!“—

So sprach der jünger; und alle Anderen drängten sich nun um Zarathustra
und ergriffen ihn bei den Händen und wollten ihn bereden, dass er vom
Bette und von der Traurigkeit lasse und zu ihnen zurückkehre.
Zarathustra aber sass aufgerichtet auf seinem Lager, und mit fremdem
Blicke. Gleichwie Einer, der aus langer Fremde heimkehrt, sah er auf
seine Jünger und prüfte ihre Gesichter; und noch erkannte er sie nicht.
Als sie aber ihn hoben und auf die Füsse stellten, siehe, da
verwandelte sich mit Einem Male sein Auge; er begriff Alles, was
geschehen war, strich sich den Bart und sagte mit starker Stimme:

„Wohlan! Diess nun hat seine Zeit; sorgt mir aber dafür, meine jünger,
dass wir eine gute Mahlzeit machen, und in Kürze! Also gedenke ich
Busse zu thun für schlimme Träume!

Der Wahrsager aber soll an meiner Seite essen und trinken: und
wahrlich, ich will ihm noch ein Meer zeigen, in dem er ertrinken kann!“

Also sprach Zarathustra. Darauf aber blickte er dem jünger, welcher den
Traumdeuter abgegeben hatte, lange in’s Gesicht und schüttelte dabei
den Kopf. -


Von der Erlösung

Als Zarathustra eines Tags über die grosse Brücke gieng, umringten ihn
die Krüppel und Bettler, und ein Bucklichter redete also zu ihm:

„Siehe, Zarathustra! Auch das Volk lernt von dir und gewinnt Glauben an
deine Lehre: aber dass es ganz dir glauben soll, dazu bedarf es noch
Eines—du musst erst noch uns Krüppel überreden! Hier hast du nun eine
schöne Auswahl und wahrlich, eine Gelegenheit mit mehr als Einem
Schopfe! Blinde kannst du heilen und Lahme laufen machen; und Dem, der
zuviel hinter sich hat, könntest du wohl auch ein Wenig abnehmen:—das,
meine ich, wäre die rechte Art, die Krüppel an Zarathustra glauben zu
machen!“

Zarathustra aber erwiderte Dem, der da redete, also: „Wenn man dem
Bucklichten seinen Buckel nimmt, so nimmt man ihm seinen Geist—also
lehrt das Volk. Und wenn man dem Blinden seine Augen giebt, so sieht er
zuviel schlimme Dinge auf Erden: also dass er Den verflucht, der ihn
heilte. Der aber, welcher den Lahmen laufen macht, der thut ihm den
grössten Schaden an: denn kaum kann er laufen, so gehn seine Laster mit
ihm durch—also lehrt das Volk über Krüppel. Und warum sollte
Zarathustra nicht auch vom Volke lernen, wenn das Volk von Zarathustra
lernt?

Das ist mir aber das Geringste, seit ich unter Menschen bin, dass ich
sehe: „Diesem fehlt ein Auge und jenem ein Ohr und einem Dritten das
Bein, und Andre giebt es, die verloren die Zunge oder die Nase oder den
Kopf.“

Ich sehe und sah Schlimmeres und mancherlei so Abscheuliches, dass ich
nicht von Jeglichem reden und von Einigem nicht einmal schweigen
möchte: nämlich Menschen, denen es an Allem fehlt, ausser dass sie Eins
zuviel haben—Menschen, welche Nichts weiter sind als ein grosses Auge,
oder ein grosses Maul oder ein grosser Bauch oder irgend etwas
Grosses,—umgekehrte Krüppel heisse ich Solche.

Und als ich aus meiner Einsamkeit kam und zum ersten Male über diese
Brücke gieng: da traute ich meinen Augen nicht und sah hin, und wieder
hin, und sagte endlich: „das ist ein Ohr! Ein Ohr, so gross wie ein
Mensch!“ Ich sah noch besser hin: und wirklich, unter dem Ohre bewegte
sich noch Etwas, das zum Erbarmen klein und ärmlich und schmächtig war.
Und wahrhaftig, das ungeheure Ohr sass auf einem kleinen dünnen
Stiele,—der Stiel aber war ein Mensch! Wer ein Glas vor das Auge nahm,
konnte sogar noch ein kleines neidisches Gesichtchen erkennen; auch,
dass ein gedunsenes Seelchen am Stiele baumelte. Das Volk sagte mir
aber, das grosse Ohr sei nicht nur ein Mensch, sondern ein grosser
Mensch, ein Genie. Aber ich glaubte dem Volke niemals, wenn es von
grossen Menschen redete—und behielt meinen Glauben bei, dass es ein
umgekehrter Krüppel sei, der an Allem zu wenig und an Einem zu viel
habe.“

Als Zarathustra so zu dem Bucklichten geredet hatte und zu Denen,
welchen er Mundstück und Fürsprecher war, wandte er sich mit tiefem
Unmuthe zu seinen Jüngern und sagte:

„Wahrlich, meine Freunde, ich wandle unter den Menschen wie unter den
Bruchstücken und Gliedmaassen von Menschen!

Diess ist meinem Auge das Fürchterliche, dass ich den Menschen
zertrümmert finde und zerstreuet wie über ein Schlacht- und
Schlächterfeld hin.

Und flüchtet mein Auge vom Jetzt zum Ehemals: es findet immer das
Gleiche: Bruchstücke und Gliedmaassen und grause Zufälle—aber keine
Menschen!

Das jetzt und das Ehemals auf Erden—ach! meine Freunde—das, ist _mein_
Unerträglichstes; und ich wüsste nicht zu leben, wenn ich nicht noch
ein Seher wäre, dessen, was kommen muss.

Ein Seher, ein Wollender, ein Schaffender, eine Zukunft selber und eine
Brücke zur Zukunft—und ach, auch noch gleichsam ein Krüppel an dieser
Brücke: das Alles ist Zarathustra.

Und auch ihr fragtet euch oft: „wer ist uns Zarathustra? Wie soll er
uns heissen?“ Und gleich mir selber gabt ihr euch Fragen zur Antwort.

Ist er ein Versprechender? Oder ein Erfüller? Ein Erobernder? Oder ein
Erbender? Ein Herbst? Oder eine Pflugschar? Ein Arzt? Oder ein
Genesener?

Ist er ein Dichter? Oder ein Wahrhaftiger? Ein Befreier? Oder ein
Bändiger? Ein Guter? Oder ein Böser?

Ich wandle unter Menschen als den Bruchstücken der Zukunft: jener
Zukunft, die ich schaue.

Und das ist all mein Dichten und Trachten, dass ich in Eins dichte und
zusammentragen was Bruchstück ist und Räthsel und grauser Zufall.

Und wie ertrüge ich es, Mensch zu sein, wenn der Mensch nicht auch
Dichter und Räthselrather und der Erlöser des Zufalls wäre!

Die Vergangnen zu erlösen und alles „Es war“ umzuschauen in ein „So
wollte ich es!“—das hiesse mir erst Erlösung!

Wille—so heisst der Befreier und Freudebringer: also lehrte ich euch,
meine Freunde! Und nun lernt diess hinzu: der Wille selber ist noch ein
Gefangener.

Wollen befreit: aber wie heisst Das, was auch den Befreier noch in
Ketten schlägt?

„Es war“: also heisst des Willens Zähneknirschen und einsamste Trübsal.
Ohnmächtig gegen Das, was gethan ist—ist er allem Vergangenen ein böser
Zuschauer.

Nicht zurück kann der Wille wollen; dass er die Zeit nicht brechen kann
und der Zeit Begierde,—das ist des Willens einsamste Trübsal.

Wollen befreit: was ersinnt sich das Wollen selber, dass es los seiner
Trübsal werde und seines Kerkers spotte?

Ach, ein Narr wird jeder Gefangene! Närrisch erlöst sich auch der
gefangene Wille.

Dass die Zeit nicht zurückläuft, das ist sein Ingrimm; „Das, was
war“—so heisst der Stein, den er nicht wälzen kann.

Und so wälzt er Steine aus Ingrimm und Unmuth und übt Rache an dem, was
nicht gleich ihm Grimm und Unmuth fühlt.

Also wurde der Wille, der Befreier, ein Wehethäter: und an Allem, was
leiden kann, nimmt er Rache dafür, dass er nicht zurück kann.

Diess, ja diess allein ist _Rache_ selber: des Willens Widerwille gegen
die Zeit und ihr „Es war.“

Wahrlich, eine grosse Narrheit wohnt in unserm Willen; und zum Fluche
wurde es allem Menschlichen, dass diese Narrheit Geist lernte!

Der Geist der Rache: meine Freunde, das war bisher der Menschen bestes
Nachdenken; und wo Leid war, da sollte immer Strafe sein.

„Strafe“ nämlich, so heisst sich die Rache selber: mit einem Lügenwort
heuchelt sie sich ein gutes Gewissen.

Und weil im Wollenden selber Leid ist, darob dass es nicht zurück
wollen kann, —also sollte Wollen selber und alles Leben—Strafe sein!

Und nun wälzte sich Wolke auf Wolke über den Geist: bis endlich der
Wahnsinn predigte: „Alles vergeht, darum ist Alles werth zu vergehn!“

„Und diess ist selber Gerechtigkeit, jenes Gesetz der Zeit, dass sie
ihre Kinder fressen muss“: also predigte der Wahnsinn.

„Sittlich sind die Dinge geordnet nach Recht und Strafe. Oh wo ist die
Erlösung vom Fluss der Dinge und der Strafe Dasein“? Also predigte der
Wahnsinn.

„Kann es Erlösung geben, wenn es ein ewiges Recht giebt? Ach, unwälzbar
ist der Stein „Es war“: ewig müssen auch alle Strafen sein!“ Also
predigte der Wahnsinn.

„Keine That kann vernichtet werden: wie könnte sie durch die Strafe
ungethan werden! Diess, diess ist das Ewige an der Strafe „Dasein“,
dass das Dasein auch ewig wieder That und Schuld sein muss!

Es sei denn, dass der Wille endlich sich selber erlöste und Wollen zu
Nicht-Wollen würde—“: doch ihr kennt, meine Brüder, diess Fabellied des
Wahnsinns!

Weg führte ich euch von diesen Fabelliedern, als ich euch lehrte: „der
Wille ist ein Schaffender.“

Alles „Es war“ ist ein Bruchstück, ein Räthsel, ein grauser Zufall—bis
der schaffende Wille dazu sagt: „aber so wollte ich es!“

Bis der schaffende Wille dazu sagt: „Aber so will ich es! So werde
ich’s wollen!“

Aber sprach er schon so? Und wann geschieht diess? Ist der Wille schon
abgeschirrt von seiner eignen Thorheit?

Wurde der Wille sich selber schon Erlöser und Freudebringer? Verlernte
er den Geist der Rache und alles Zähneknirschen?

Und wer lehrte ihn Versöhnung mit der Zeit, und Höheres als alle
Versöhnung ist?

Höheres als alle Versöhnung muss der Wille wollen, welcher der Wille
zur Macht ist—: doch wie geschieht ihm das? Wer lehrte ihn auch noch
das Zurückwollen?“

—Aber an dieser Stelle seiner Rede geschah es, dass Zarathustra
plötzlich innehielt und ganz einem Solchen gleich sah, der auf das
Äusserste erschrickt. Mit erschrecktem Auge blickte er auf seine
Jünger; sein Auge durchbohrte wie mit Pfeilen ihre Gedanken und
Hintergedanken. Aber nach einer kleinen Weile lachte er schon wieder
und sagte begütigt:

„Es ist schwer, mit Menschen zu leben, weil Schweigen so schwer ist.
Sonderlich für einen Geschwätzigen.“—

Also sprach Zarathustra. Der Bucklichte aber hatte dem Gespräche
zugehört und sein Gesicht dabei bedeckt; als er aber Zarathustra lachen
hörte, blickte er neugierig auf und sagte langsam:

„Aber warum redet Zarathustra anders zu uns als zu seinen Jüngern?“

Zarathustra antwortete: „Was ist da zum Verwundern! Mit Bucklichten
darf man schon bucklicht reden!“

„Gut, sagte der Bucklichte; und mit Schülern darf man schon aus der
Schule schwätzen.

Aber warum redet Zarathustra anders zu seinen Schülern—als zu sich
selber?“—


Von der Menschen-Klugheit

Nicht die Höhe: der Abhang ist das Furchtbare!

Der Abhang, wo der Blick _hinunter_ stürzt und die Hand _hinauf_
greift. Da schwindelt dem Herzen vor seinem doppelten Willen.

Ach, Freunde, errathet ihr wohl auch meines Herzens doppelten Willen?

Das, Das ist _mein_ Abhang und meine Gefahr, dass mein Blick in die
Höhe stürzt, und dass meine Hand sich halten und stützen möchte—an der
Tiefe!

An den Menschen klammert sich mein Wille, mit Ketten binde ich mich an
den Menschen, weil es mich hinauf reisst zum Obermenschen: denn dahin
will mein andrer Wille.

Und _dazu_ lebe ich blind unter den Menschen; gleich als ob ich sie
nicht kennte: dass meine Hand ihren Glauben an Festes nicht ganz
verliere.

Ich kenne euch Menschen nicht: diese Finsterniss und Tröstung ist oft
um mich gebreitet.

Ich sitze am Thorwege für jeden Schelm und frage: wer will mich
betrügen?

Das ist meine erste Menschen-Klugheit, dass ich mich betrügen lasse, um
nicht auf der Hut zu sein vor Betrügern.

Ach, wenn ich auf der Hut wäre vor dem Menschen: wie könnte meinem
Balle der Mensch ein Anker sein! Zu leicht risse es mich hinauf und
hinweg!

Diese Vorsehung ist über meinem Schicksal, dass ich ohne Vorsicht sein
muss.

Und wer unter Menschen nicht verschmachten will, muss lernen, aus allen
Gläsern zu trinken; und wer unter Menschen rein bleiben will, muss
verstehn, sich auch mit schmutzigem Wasser zu waschen.

Und also sprach ich oft mir zum Troste: „Wohlan! Wohlauf! Altes Herz!
Ein Unglück missrieth dir: geniesse diess als dein—Glück!“

Diess aber ist meine andre Menschen-Klugheit: ich schone die _Eitlen_
mehr als die Stolzen.

Ist nicht verletzte Eitelkeit die Mutter aller Trauerspiele? Wo aber
Stolz verletzt wird, da wächst wohl etwas Besseres noch, als Stolz ist.

Damit das Leben gut anzuschaun sei, muss sein Spiel gut gespielt
werden: dazu aber bedarf es guter Schauspieler.

Gute Schauspieler fand ich alle Eitlen: sie spielen und wollen, dass
ihnen gern zugeschaut werde,—all ihr Geist ist bei diesem Willen.

Sie führen sich auf, sie erfinden sich; in ihrer Nähe liebe ich’s, dem
Leben zuzuschaun,—es heilt von der Schwermuth.

Darum schone ich die Eitlen, weil sie mir Arzte sind meiner Schwermuth
und mich am Menschen fest halten als an einem Schauspiele.

Und dann: wer ermisst am Eitlen die ganze Tiefe seiner Bescheidenheit!
Ich bin ihm gut und mitleidig ob seiner Bescheidenheit.

Von euch will er seinen Glauben an sich lernen; er nährt sich an euren
Blicken, er frisst das Lob aus euren Händen.

Euren Lügen glaubt er noch, wenn ihr gut über ihn lügt: denn im
Tiefsten seufzt sein Herz: „was bin _ich_!“

Und wenn das die rechte Tugend ist, die nicht um sich selber weiss:
nun, der Eitle weiss nicht um seine Bescheidenheit!—

Das ist aber meine dritte Menschen-Klugheit, dass ich mir den Anblick
der Bösen nicht verleiden lasse durch eure Furchtsamkeit.

Ich bin selig, die Wunder zu sehn, welche heisse Sonne ausbrütet: Tiger
und Palmen und Klapperschlangen.

Auch unter Menschen giebt es schöne Brut heisser Sonne und viel
Wunderwürdiges an den Bösen.

Zwar, wie eure Weisesten mir nicht gar so weise erschienen: so fand ich
auch der Menschen Bosheit unter ihrem Rufe.

Und oft fragte ich mit Kopfschütteln: Warum noch klappern, ihr
Klapperschlangen?

Wahrlich, es giebt auch für das Böse noch eine Zukunft! Und der
heisseste Süden ist noch nicht entdeckt für den Menschen.

Wie Manches heisst jetzt schon ärgste Bosheit, was doch nur zwölf
Schuhe breit und drei Monate lang ist! Einst aber werden grössere
Drachen zur Welt kommen.

Denn dass dem Übermenschen sein Drache nicht fehle, der Über-Drache,
der seiner würdig ist: dazu muss viel heisse Sonne noch auf feuchten
Urwald glühen!

Aus euren Wildkatzen müssen erst Tiger geworden sein und aus euren
Giftkröten Krokodile: denn der gute Jäger soll eine gute Jagd haben!

Und wahrlich, ihr Guten und Gerechten! An euch ist Viel zum Lachen und
zumal eure Furcht vor dem, was bisher „Teufel“ hiess!

So fremd seid ihr dem Grossen mit eurer Seele, dass euch der Übermensch
_furchtbar_ sein würde in seiner Güte!

Und ihr Weisen und Wissenden, ihr würdet vor dem Sonnenbrande der
Weisheit flüchten, in dem der Übermensch mit Lust seine Nacktheit
badet!

Ihr höchsten Menschen, denen mein Auge begegnete! das ist mein Zweifel
an euch und mein heimliches Lachen: ich rathe, ihr würdet meinen
Übermenschen—Teufel heissen!

Ach, ich ward dieser Höchsten und Besten müde: aus ihrer „Höhe“ 
verlangte mich hinauf, hinaus, hinweg zu dem Übermenschen!

Ein Grausen überfiel mich, als ich diese Besten nackend sah: da wuchsen
mir die Flügel, fortzuschweben in ferne Zukünfte.

In fernere Zukünfte, in südlichere Süden, als je ein Bildner träumte:
dorthin, wo Götter sich aller Kleider schämen!

Aber verkleidet will ich _euch_ sehn, ihr Nächsten und Mitmenschen, und
gut geputzt, und eitel, und würdig, als „die Guten und Gerechten,“—

Und verkleidet will ich selber unter euch sitzen,—dass ich euch und
mich _verkenne_: das ist nämlich meine letzte Menschen-Klugheit.

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Die stillste Stunde

„Was geschah mir, meine Freunde? Ihr seht mich verstört, fortgetrieben,
unwillig-folgsam, bereit zu gehen—ach, von _euch_ fortzugehen!

Ja, noch Ein Mal muss Zarathustra in seine Einsamkeit: aber unlustig
geht diessmal der Bär zurück in seine Höhle!

Was geschah mir? Wer gebeut diess?—Ach, meine zornige Herrin will es
so, sie sprach zu mir: nannte ich je euch schon ihren Namen?

Gestern gen Abend sprach zu mir _meine stillste Stunde_: das ist der
Name meiner furchtbaren Herrin.

Und so geschah’s,—denn Alles muss ich euch sagen, dass euer Herz sich
nicht verhärte gegen den plötzlich Scheidenden!

Kennt ihr den Schrecken des Einschlafenden?—

Bis in die Zehen hinein erschrickt er, darob, dass ihm der Boden weicht
und der Traum beginnt.

Dieses sage ich euch zum Gleichniss. Gestern, zur stillsten Stunde,
wich mir der Boden: der Traum begann.

Der Zeiger rückte, die Uhr meines Lebens holte Athem—nie hörte ich
solche Stille um mich: also dass mein Herz erschrak.

Dann sprach es ohne Stimme zu mir: „Du weisst es, Zarathustra?“—

Und ich schrie vor Schrecken bei diesem Flüstern, und das Blut wich aus
meinem Gesichte: aber ich schwieg.

Da sprach es abermals ohne Stimme zu mir: „Du weisst es, Zarathustra,
aber du redest es nicht!“—

Und ich antwortete endlich gleich einem Trotzigen: „Ja, ich weiss es,
aber ich will es nicht reden!“

Da sprach es wieder ohne Stimme zu mir: „Du _willst_ nicht,
Zarathustra? Ist diess auch wahr? Verstecke dich nicht in deinen
Trotz!“—

Und ich weinte und zitterte wie ein Kind und sprach: „Ach, ich wollte
schon, aber wie kann ich es! Erlass mir diess nur! Es ist über meine
Kraft!“

Da sprach es wieder ohne Stimme zu mir: „Was liegt an dir, Zarathustra!
Sprich dein Wort und zerbrich!“—

Und ich antwortete: „Ach, ist es _mein_ Wort? Wer bin ich? Ich warte
des Würdigeren; ich bin nicht werth, an ihm auch nur zu zerbrechen.“

Da sprach es wieder ohne Stimme zu mir: „Was liegt an dir? Du bist mir
noch nicht demüthig genug. Die Demuth hat das härteste Fell.“—

Und ich antwortete: „Was trug nicht schon das Fell meiner Demuth! Am
Fusse wohne ich meiner Höhe: wie hoch meine Gipfel sind? Niemand sagte
es mir noch. Aber gut kenne ich meine Thäler.“

Da sprach es wieder ohne Stimme zu mir: „Oh Zarathustra, wer Berge zu
versetzen hat, der versetzt auch Thäler und Niederungen.“—

Und ich antwortete: „Noch versetzte mein Wort keine Berge, und was ich
redete, erreichte die Menschen nicht. Ich gieng wohl zu den Menschen,
aber noch langte ich nicht bei ihnen an.“

Da sprach es wieder ohne Stimme zu mir: „Was weisst du _davon_! Der
Thau fällt auf das Gras, wenn die Nacht am verschwiegensten ist.“—

Und ich antwortete: „sie verspotteten mich, als ich meinen eigenen Weg
fand und gieng; und in Wahrheit zitterten damals meine Füsse.“

Und so sprachen sie zu mir: „du verlerntest den Weg, nun verlernst du
auch das Gehen!“

Da sprach es wieder ohne Stimme zu mir: „Was liegt an ihrem Spotte! Du
bist Einer, der das Gehorchen verlernt hat: nun sollst du befehlen!

Weisst du nicht, _wer_ Allen am nöthigsten thut? Der Grosses befiehlt.

Grosses vollführen ist schwer: aber das Schwerere ist, Grosses
befehlen.

Das ist dein Unverzeihlichstes: du hast die Macht, und du willst nicht
herrschen.“—

Und ich antwortete: „Mir fehlt des Löwen Stimme zu allem Befehlen.“

Da sprach es wieder wie ein Flüstern zu mir: „Die stillsten Worte sind
es, welche den Sturm bringen. Gedanken, die mit Taubenfüssen kommen,
lenken die Welt.

Oh Zarathustra, du sollst gehen als ein Schatten dessen, was kommen
muss: so wirst du befehlen und befehlend vorangehen.“—

Und ich antwortete: „Ich schäme mich.“

Da sprach es wieder ohne Stimme zu mir: „Du musst noch Kind werden und
ohne Scham.

Der Stolz der Jugend ist noch auf dir, spät bist du jung geworden: aber
wer zum Kinde werden will, muss auch noch seine Jugend überwinden.“—

Und ich besann mich lange und zitterte. Endlich aber sagte ich, was ich
zuerst sagte: „Ich will nicht.“

Da geschah ein Lachen um mich. Wehe, wie diess Lachen mir die
Eingeweide zerriss und das Herz aufschlitzte!

Und es sprach zum letzten Male zu mir: „Oh Zarathustra, deine Früchte
sind reif, aber du bist nicht reif für deine Früchte!

So musst du wieder in die Einsamkeit: denn du sollst noch mürbe
werden.“—

Und wieder lachte es und floh: dann wurde es stille um mich wie mit
einer zwiefachen Stille. Ich aber lag am Boden, und der Schweiss floss
mir von den Gliedern.

—Nun hörtet ihr Alles, und warum ich in meine Einsamkeit zurück muss.
Nichts verschwieg ich euch, meine Freunde.

Aber auch diess hörtet ihr von mir, _wer_ immer noch aller Menschen
Verschwiegenster ist—und es sein will!

Ach meine Freunde! Ich hätte euch noch Etwas zu sagen, ich hätte euch
noch Etwas zu geben! Warum gebe ich es nicht? Bin ich denn geizig?“—

Als Zarathustra aber diese Worte gesprochen hatte, überfiel ihn die
Gewalt des Schmerzes und die Nähe des Abschieds von seinen Freunden,
also dass er laut weinte; und Niemand wusste ihn zu trösten. Des Nachts
aber gieng er allein fort und verliess seine Freunde.


Dritter Theil

„Ihr seht nach Oben, wenn ihr nach Erhebung verlangt. Und ich sehe
hinab, weil ich erhoben bin.
    Wer von euch kann zugleich lachen und erhoben sein?
    Wer auf den höchsten Bergen steigt, der lacht über alle
    Trauer-Spiele und Trauer-Ernste.“

Zarathustra, vom Lesen und Schreiben.


Der Wanderer

Um Mitternacht war es, da nahm Zarathustra seinen Weg über den Rücken
der Insel, dass er mit dem frühen Morgen an das andre Gestade käme:
denn dort wollte er zu Schiff steigen. Es gab nämlich allda eine gute
Rhede, an der auch fremde Schiffe gern vor Anker giengen; die nahmen
Manchen mit sich, der von den glückseligen Inseln über das Meer wollte.
Als nun Zarathustra so den Berg hinanstieg, gedachte er unterwegs des
vielen einsamen Wanderns von Jugend an, und wie viele Berge und Rücken
und Gipfel er schon gestiegen sei.

Ich bin ein Wanderer und ein Bergsteiger, sagte er zu seinem Herzen,
ich liebe die Ebenen nicht und es scheint, ich kann nicht lange still
sitzen.

Und was mir nun auch noch als Schicksal und Erlebniss komme,—ein
Wandern wird darin sein und ein Bergsteigen: man erlebt endlich nur
noch sich selber.

Die Zeit ist abgeflossen, wo mir noch Zufälle begegnen durften; und was
_könnte_ jetzt noch zu mir fallen, was nicht schon mein Eigen wäre!

Es kehrt nur zurück, es kommt mir endlich heim—mein eigen Selbst, und
was von ihm lange in der Fremde war und zerstreut unter alle Dinge und
Zufälle.

Und noch Eins weiss ich: ich stehe jetzt vor meinem letzten Gipfel und
vor dem, was mir am längsten aufgespart war. Ach, meinen härtesten Weg
muss ich hinan! Ach, ich begann meine einsamste Wanderung!

Wer aber meiner Art ist, der entgeht einer solchen Stunde nicht: der
Stunde, die zu ihm redet: „Jetzo erst gehst du deinen Weg der Grösse!
Gipfel und Abgrund—das ist jetzt in Eins beschlossen!

Du gehst deinen Weg der Grösse: nun ist deine letzte Zuflucht worden,
was bisher deine letzte Gefahr hiess!

Du gehst deinen Weg der Grösse: das muss nun dein bester Muth sein,
dass es hinter dir keinen Weg mehr giebt!

Du gehst deinen Weg der Grösse; hier soll dir Keiner nachschleichen!
Dein Fuss selber löschte hinter dir den Weg aus, und über ihm steht
geschrieben: Unmöglichkeit.

Und wenn dir nunmehr alle Leitern fehlen, so musst du verstehen, noch
auf deinen eigenen Kopf zu steigen: wie wolltest du anders aufwärts
steigen?

Auf deinen eigenen Kopf und hinweg über dein eigenes Herz! Jetzt muss
das Mildeste an dir noch zum Härtesten werden.

Wer sich stets viel geschont hat, der kränkelt zuletzt an seiner vielen
Schonung. Gelobt sei, was hart macht! Ich lobe das Land nicht, wo
Butter und Honig—fliesst!

Von sich _absehn_ lernen ist nöthig, um _Viel_ zu sehn:—diese Härte
thut jedem Berge-Steigenden Noth.

Wer aber mit den Augen zudringlich ist als Erkennender, wie sollte der
von allen Dingen mehr als ihre vorderen Gründe sehn!

Du aber, oh Zarathustra, wolltest aller Dinge Grund schaun und
Hintergrund: so musst du schon über dich selber steigen,—hinan, hinauf,
bis du auch deine Sterne noch _unter_ dir hast!

Ja! Hinab auf mich selber sehn und noch auf meine Sterne: das erst
hiesse mir mein _Gipfel_, das blieb mir noch zurück als mein _letzter_
Gipfel!—“

Also sprach Zarathustra im Steigen zu sich, mit harten Sprüchlein sein
Herz tröstend: denn er war wund am Herzen wie noch niemals zuvor. Und
als er auf die Höhe des Bergrückens kam, siehe, da lag das andere Meer
vor ihm ausgebreitet: und er stand still und schwieg lange. Die Nacht
aber war kalt in dieser Höhe und klar und hellgestirnt.

Ich erkenne mein Loos, sagte er endlich mit Trauer. Wohlan! Ich bin
bereit. Eben begann meine letzte Einsamkeit.

Ach, diese schwarze traurige See unter mir! Ach, diese schwangere
nächtliche Verdrossenheit! Ach, Schicksal und See! Zu euch muss ich nun
_hinab_ steigen!

Vor meinem höchsten Berge stehe ich und vor meiner längsten Wanderung:
darum muss ich erst tiefer hinab als ich jemals stieg:

—tiefer hinab in den Schmerz als ich jemals stieg, bis hinein in seine
schwärzeste Fluth! So will es mein Schicksal: Wohlan! Ich bin bereit.

Woher kommen die höchsten Berge? so fragte ich einst. Da lernte ich,
dass sie aus dem Meere kommen.

Diess Zeugniss ist in ihr Gestein geschrieben und in die Wände ihrer
Gipfel. Aus dem Tiefsten muss das Höchste zu seiner Höhe kommen.—

Also sprach Zarathustra auf der Spitze des Berges, wo es kalt war; als
er aber in die Nähe des Meeres kam und zuletzt allein unter den Klippen
stand, da war er unterwegs müde geworden und sehnsüchtiger als noch
zuvor.

Es schläft jetzt Alles noch, sprach er; auch das Meer schläft.
Schlaftrunken und fremd blickt sein Auge nach mir.

Aber es athmet warm, das fühle ich. Und ich fühle auch, dass es träumt.
Es windet sieh träumend auf harten Kissen.

Horch! Horch! Wie es stöhnt von bösen Erinnerungen! Oder bösen
Erwartungen?

Ach, ich bin traurig mit dir, du dunkles Ungeheuer, und mir selber noch
gram um deinetwillen.

Ach, dass meine Hand nicht Stärke genug hat! Gerne, wahrlich, möchte
ich dich von bösen Träumen erlösen!—

Und indem Zarathustra so sprach, lachte er mit Schwermuth und
Bitterkeit über sich selber. „Wie! Zarathustra! sagte er, willst du
noch dem Meere Trost singen?

Ach, du liebreicher Narr Zarathustra, du Vertrauens-Überseliger! Aber
so warst du immer: immer kamst du vertraulich zu allem Furchtbaren.

Jedes Ungethüm wolltest du noch streicheln. Ein Hauch warmen Athems,
ein Wenig weiches Gezottel an der Tatze—: und gleich warst du bereit,
es zu lieben und zu locken.

Die _Liebe_ ist die Gefahr des Einsamsten, die Liebe zu Allem, wenn es
nur lebt! Zum Lachen ist wahrlich meine Narrheit und meine
Bescheidenheit in der Liebe!“—

Also sprach Zarathustra und lachte dabei zum andern Male: da aber
gedachte er seiner verlassenen Freunde—, und wie als ob er sich mit
seinen Gedanken an ihnen vergangen habe, zürnte er sich ob seiner
Gedanken. Und alsbald geschah es, dass der Lachende weinte:—vor Zorn
und Sehnsucht weinte Zarathustra bitterlich.


Vom Gesicht und Räthsel

1.

Als es unter den Schiffsleuten ruchbar wurde, dass Zarathustra auf dem
Schiffe sei,—denn es war ein Mann zugleich mit ihm an Bord gegangen,
der von den glückseligen Inseln kam—da entstand eine grosse Neugierde
und Erwartung. Aber Zarathustra schwieg zwei Tage und war kalt und taub
vor Traurigkeit, also, dass er weder auf Blicke noch auf Fragen
antwortete. Am Abende aber des zweiten Tages that er seine Ohren wieder
auf, ob er gleich noch schwieg: denn es gab viel Seltsames und
Gefährliches auf diesem Schiffe anzuhören, welches weither kam und noch
weiterhin wollte. Zarathustra aber war ein Freund aller Solchen, die
weite Reisen thun und nicht ohne Gefahr leben mögen. Und siehe! zuletzt
wurde ihm im Zuhören die eigne Zunge gelöst, und das Eis seines Herzens
brach: —da begann er also zu reden:

Euch, den kühnen Suchern, Versuchern, und wer je sich mit listigen
Segeln auf furchtbare Meere einschiffte,—

euch, den Räthsel-Trunkenen, den Zwielicht-Frohen, deren Seele mit
Flöten zu jedem Irr-Schlunde gelockt wird:

—denn nicht wollt ihr mit feiger Hand einem Faden nachtasten; und, wo
ihr _errathen_ könnt, da hasst ihr es, zu _erschliessen_—

euch allein erzähle ich das Räthsel, das ich _sah_,—das Gesicht des
Einsamsten.—

Düster gierig ich jüngst durch leichenfarbne Dämmerung,—düster und
hart, mit gepressten Lippen. Nicht nur Eine Sonne war mir
untergegangen.

Ein Pfad, der trotzig durch Geröll stieg, ein boshafter, einsamer, dem
nicht Kraut, nicht Strauch mehr zusprach: ein Bergpfad knirschte unter
dem Trotz meines Fusses.

Stumm über höhnischem Geklirr von Kieseln schreitend, den Stein
zertretend, der ihn gleiten liess: also zwang mein Fuss sich aufwärts.

Aufwärts:—dem Geiste zum Trotz, der ihn abwärts zog, abgrundwärts zog,
dem Geiste der Schwere, meinem Teufel und Erzfeinde.

Aufwärts:—obwohl er auf mir sass, halb Zwerg, halb Maulwurf; lahm;
lähmend; Blei durch mein Ohr, Bleitropfen-Gedanken in mein Hirn
träufelnd.

„Oh Zarathustra, raunte er höhnisch Silb’ um Silbe, du Stein der
Weisheit! Du warfst dich hoch, aber jeder geworfene Stein muss—fallen!

Oh Zarathustra, du Stein der Weisheit, du Schleuderstein, du
Stern-Zertrümmerer! Dich selber warfst du so hoch,—aber jeder geworfene
Stein - muss fallen!

Verurtheilt zu dir selber und zur eignen Steinigung: oh Zarathustra,
weit warfst du ja den Stein,—aber auf _dich_ wird er zurückfallen!“

Drauf schwieg der Zwerg; und das währte lange. Sein Schweigen aber
drückte mich; und solchermaassen zu Zwein ist man wahrlich einsamer als
zu Einem!

Ich stieg, ich stieg, ich träumte, ich dachte,—aber Alles drückte mich.
Einem Kranken glich ich, den seine schlimme Marter müde macht, und den
wieder ein schlimmerer Traum aus dem Einschlafen weckt.—

Aber es giebt Etwas in mir, das ich Muth heisse: das schlug bisher mir
jeden Unmuth todt. Dieser Muth hiess mich endlich stille stehn und
sprechen: „Zwerg! Du! Oder ich!“—

Muth nämlich ist der beste Todtschläger,—Muth, welcher _angreift_: denn
in jedem Angriffe ist klingendes Spiel.

Der Mensch aber ist das muthigste Thier: damit überwand er jedes Thier.
Mit klingendem Spiele überwand er noch jeden Schmerz; Menschen-Schmerz
aber ist der tiefste Schmerz.

Der Muth schlägt auch den Schwindel todt an Abgründen: und wo stünde
der Mensch nicht an Abgründen! Ist Sehen nicht selber—Abgründe sehen?

Muth ist der beste Todtschläger: der Muth schlägt auch das Mitleiden
todt. Mitleiden aber ist der tiefste Abgrund: so tief der Mensch in das
Leben sieht, so tief sieht er auch in das Leiden.

Muth aber ist der beste Todtschläger, Muth, der angreift: der schlägt
noch den Tod todt, denn er spricht: „War _das_ das Leben? Wohlan! Noch
Ein Mal!“

In solchem Spruche aber ist viel klingendes Spiel. Wer Ohren hat, der
höre.—

2.

„Halt! Zwerg! sprach ich. Ich! Oder du! Ich aber bin der Stärkere von
uns Beiden—: du kennst meinen abgründlichen Gedanken nicht!
_Den_—könntest du nicht tragen!“—

Da geschah, was mich leichter machte: denn der Zwerg sprang mir von der
Schulter, der Neugierige! Und er hockte sich auf einen Stein vor mich
hin. Es war aber gerade da ein Thorweg, wo wir hielten.

„Siehe diesen Thorweg! Zwerg! sprach ich weiter: der hat zwei
Gesichter. Zwei Wege kommen hier zusammen: die gieng noch Niemand zu
Ende.

Diese lange Gasse zurück: die währt eine Ewigkeit. Und jene lange Gasse
hinaus —das ist eine andre Ewigkeit.

Sie widersprechen sich, diese Wege; sie stossen sich gerade vor den
Kopf:—und hier, an diesem Thorwege, ist es, wo sie zusammen kommen. Der
Name des Thorwegs steht oben geschrieben: „Augenblick“.

Aber wer Einen von ihnen weiter gienge—und immer weiter und immer
ferner: glaubst du, Zwerg, dass diese Wege sich ewig widersprechen?“—

„Alles Gerade lügt, murmelte verächtlich der Zwerg. Alle Wahrheit ist
krumm, die Zeit selber ist ein Kreis.“

„Du Geist der Schwere! sprach ich zürnend, mache dir es nicht zu
leicht! Oder ich lasse dich hocken, wo du hockst, Lahmfuss,—und ich
trug dich _hoch_!

Siehe, sprach ich weiter, diesen Augenblick! Von diesem Thorwege
Augenblick läuft eine lange ewige Gasse _rückwärts_ hinter uns liegt
eine Ewigkeit.

Muss nicht, was laufen _kann_ von allen Dingen, schon einmal diese
Gasse gelaufen sein? Muss nicht, was geschehn _kann_ von allen Dingen,
schon einmal geschehn, gethan, vorübergelaufen sein?

Und wenn Alles schon dagewesen ist: was hältst du Zwerg von diesem
Augenblick? Muss auch dieser Thorweg nicht schon—dagewesen sein?

Und sind nicht solchermaassen fest alle Dinge verknotet, dass dieser
Augenblick _alle_ kommenden Dinge nach sich zieht? _Also_—- sich selber
noch?

Denn, was laufen _kann_ von allen Dingen: auch in dieser langen Gasse
_hinaus_—_muss_ es einmal noch laufen!—

Und diese langsame Spinne, die im Mondscheine kriecht, und dieser
Mondschein selber, und ich und du im Thorwege, zusammen flüsternd, von
ewigen Dingen flüsternd—müssen wir nicht Alle schon dagewesen sein?

—und wiederkommen und in jener anderen Gasse laufen, hinaus, vor uns,
in dieser langen schaurigen Gasse—müssen wir nicht ewig wiederkommen?—“

Also redete ich, und immer leiser: denn ich fürchtete mich vor meinen
eignen Gedanken und Hintergedanken. Da, plötzlich, hörte ich einen Hund
nahe _heulen_.

Hörte ich jemals einen Hund so heulen? Mein Gedanke lief zurück. Ja!
Als ich Kind war, in fernster Kindheit:

—da hörte ich einen Hund so heulen. Und sah ihn auch, gesträubt, den
Kopf nach Oben, zitternd, in stillster Mitternacht, wo auch Hunde an
Gespenster glauben:

—also dass es mich erbarmte. Eben nämlich gieng der volle Mond,
todtschweigsam, über das Haus, eben stand er still, eine runde
Gluth,—still auf flachem Dache, gleich als auf fremdem Eigenthume:—

darob entsetzte sich damals der Hund: denn Hunde glauben an Diebe und
Gespenster. Und als ich wieder so heulen hörte, da erbarmte es mich
abermals.

Wohin war jetzt Zwerg? und Thorweg? Und Spinne? Und alles Flüstern?
Träumte ich denn? Wachte ich auf? Zwischen wilden Klippen stand ich mit
Einem Male, allein, öde, im ödesten Mondscheine.

Aber da lag ein Mensch! Und da! Der Hund, springend, gesträubt,
winselnd,—jetzt sah er mich kommen—da heulte er wieder, da _schrie_
er:—hörte ich je einen Hund so Hülfe schrein?

Und, wahrlich, was ich sah, desgleichen sah ich nie. Einen jungen
Hirten sah ich, sich windend, würgend, zuckend, verzerrten Antlitzes,
dem eine schwarze schwere Schlange aus dem Munde hieng.

Sah ich je so viel Ekel und bleiches Grauen auf Einem Antlitze? Er
hatte wohl geschlafen? Da kroch ihm die Schlange in den Schlund—da biss
sie sich fest.

Meine Hand riss die Schlange und riss:—umsonst! sie riss die Schlange
nicht aus dem Schlunde. Da schrie es aus mir: „Beiss zu! Beiss zu!

Den Kopf ab! Beiss zu!“—so schrie es aus mir, mein Grauen, mein Hass,
mein Ekel, mein Erbarmen, all mein Gutes und Schlimmes schrie mit Einem
Schrei aus mir.—

Ihr Kühnen um mich! Ihr Sucher, Versucher, und wer von euch mit
listigen Segeln sich in unerforschte Meere einschiffte! Ihr
Räthsel-Frohen!

So rathet mir doch das Räthsel, das ich damals schaute, so deutet mir
doch das Gesicht des Einsamsten!

Denn ein Gesicht war’s und ein Vorhersehn:—_was_ sah ich damals im
Gleichnisse? Und _wer_ ist, der einst noch kommen muss?

_Wer_ ist der Hirt, dem also die Schlange in den Schlund kroch? _Wer_
ist der Mensch, dem also alles Schwerste, Schwärzeste in den Schlund
kriechen wird?

—Der Hirt aber biss, wie mein Schrei ihm rieth; er biss mit gutem
Bisse! Weit weg spie er den Kopf der Schlange—: und sprang empor.—

Nicht mehr Hirt, nicht mehr Mensch,—ein Verwandelter, ein Umleuchteter,
welcher _lachte_! Niemals noch auf Erden lachte je ein Mensch, wie _er_
lachte!

Oh meine Brüder, ich hörte ein Lachen, das keines Menschen Lachen
war,—- und nun frisst ein Durst an mir, eine Sehnsucht, die nimmer
stille wird.

Meine Sehnsucht nach diesem Lachen frisst an mir: oh wie ertrage ich
noch zu leben! Und wie ertrüge ich’s, jetzt zu sterben!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von der Seligkeit wider Willen

Mit solchen Räthseln und Bitternissen im Herzen fuhr Zarathustra über
das Meer. Als er aber vier Tagereisen fern war von den glückseligen
Inseln und von seinen Freunden, da hatte er allen seinen Schmerz
überwunden—: siegreich und mit festen Füssen stand er wieder auf seinem
Schicksal. Und damals redete Zarathustra also zu seinem frohlockenden
Gewissen:

„Allein bin ich wieder und will es sein, allein mit reinem Himmel und
freiem Meere; und wieder ist Nachmittag um mich.

Des Nachmittags fand ich zum ersten Male einst meine Freunde, des
Nachmittags auch zum anderen Male:—zur Stunde, da alles Licht stiller
wird.

Denn was von Glück noch unterwegs ist zwischen Himmel und Erde, das
sucht sich nun zur Herberge noch eine lichte Seele: _vor Glück_ ist
alles Licht jetzt stiller worden.

Oh Nachmittag meines Lebens! Einst stieg auch _mein_ Glück zu Thale,
dass es sich eine Herberge suche: da fand es diese offnen
gastfreundlichen Seelen.

Oh Nachmittag meines Lebens! Was gab ich nicht hin, dass ich Eins
hätte: diese lebendige Pflanzung meiner Gedanken und diess Morgenlicht
meiner höchsten Hoffnung!

Gefährten suchte einst der Schaffende und Kinder _seiner_ Hoffnung: und
siehe, es fand sich, dass er sie nicht finden könne, es sei denn, er
schaffe sie selber erst.

Also bin ich mitten in meinem Werke, zu meinen Kindern gehend und von
ihnen kehrend: um seiner Kinder willen muss Zarathustra sich selbst
vollenden.

Denn von Grund aus liebt man nur sein Kind und Werk; und wo grosse
Liebe zu sich selber ist, da ist sie der Schwangerschaft Wahrzeichen:
so fand ich’s.

Noch grünen mir meine Kinder in ihrem ersten Frühlinge, nahe bei
einander stehend und gemeinsam von Winden geschüttelt, die Bäume meines
Gartens und besten Erdreichs.

Und wahrlich! Wo solche Bäume bei einander stehn, da _sind_ glückselige
Inseln!

Aber einstmals will ich sie ausheben und einen jeden für sich allein
stellen: dass er Einsamkeit lerne und Trotz und Vorsicht.

Knorrig und gekrümmt und mit biegsamer Härte soll er mir dann am Meere
dastehn, ein lebendiger Leuchtthurm unbesiegbaren Lebens.

Dort, wo die Stürme hinab in’s Meer stürzen, und des Gebirgs Rüssel
Wasser trinkt, da soll ein jeder einmal seine Tag- und Nachtwachen
haben, zu _seiner_ Prüfung und Erkenntniss.

Erkannt und geprüft soll er werden, darauf, ob er meiner Art und
Abkunft ist,—ob er eines langen Willens Herr sei, schweigsam, auch wenn
er redet, und nachgebend also, dass er im Geben _nimmt_:—

—dass er einst mein Gefährte werde und ein Mitschaffender und
Mitfeiernder Zarathustra’s—: ein Solcher, der mir meinen Willen auf
meine Tafeln schreibt: zu aller Dinge vollerer Vollendung.

Und um seinetwillen und seines Gleichen muss ich selber _mich_
vollenden: darum weiche ich jetzt meinem Glücke aus und biete mich
allem Unglücke an—zu _meiner_ letzten Prüfung und Erkenntniss.

Und wahrlich, Zeit war’s, dass ich gierig; und des Wanderers Schatten
und die längste Weile und die stillste Stunde—alle redeten mir zu: „es
ist höchste Zeit!“

Der Wind blies mir durch’s Schlüsselloch und sagte „Komm!“ Die Thür
sprang mir listig auf und sagte „Geh!“

Aber ich lag angekettet an die Liebe zu meinen Kindern: das Begehren
legte mir diese Schlinge, das Begehren nach Liebe, dass ich meiner
Kinder Beute würde und mich an sie verlöre.

Begehren—das heisst mir schon: mich verloren haben. Ich habe euch,
meine Kinder! In diesem Haben soll Alles Sicherheit und Nichts Begehren
sein.

Aber brütend lag die Sonne meiner Liebe auf mir, im eignen Safte kochte
Zarathustra,—da flogen Schatten und Zweifel über mich weg.

Nach Frost und Winter gelüstete mich schon: „oh dass Frost und Winter
mich wieder knacken und knirschen machten!“ seufzte ich:—da stiegen
eisige Nebel aus mir auf.

Meine Vergangenheit brach ihm Gräber, manch lebendig begrabner Schmerz
wachte auf—: ausgeschlafen hatte er sich nur, versteckt in
Leichen-Gewänder.

Also rief mir Alles in Zeichen zu: „es ist Zeit!“—Aber ich—hörte nicht:
bis endlich mein Abgrund sich rührte und mein Gedanke mich biss.

Ach, abgründlicher Gedanke, der du _mein_ Gedanke bist! Wann finde ich
die Stärke, dich graben zu hören und nicht mehr zu zittern?

Bis zur Kehle hinauf klopft mir das Herz, wenn ich dich graben höre!
Dein Schweigen noch will mich würgen, du abgründlich Schweigender!

Noch wagte ich niemals, dich _herauf_ zu rufen: genug schon, dass ich
dich mit mir—trug! Noch war ich nicht stark genug zum letzten
Löwen-Übermuthe und -Muthwillen.

Genug des Furchtbaren war mir immer schon deine Schwere: aber einst
soll ich noch die Stärke finden und die Löwen-Stimme, die dich herauf
ruft!

Wenn ich mich dessen erst überwunden habe, dann will ich mich auch des
Grösseren noch überwinden; und ein _Sieg_ soll meiner Vollendung Siegel
sein!—

Inzwischen treibe ich noch auf ungewissen Meeren; der Zufall
schmeichelt mir, der glattzüngige; vorwärts und rückwärts schaue ich—,
noch schaue ich kein Ende.

Noch kam mir die Stunde meines letzten Kampfes nicht,—oder kommt sie
wohl mir eben? Wahrlich, mit tückischer Schönheit schaut mich rings
Meer und Leben an!

Oh Nachmittag meines Lebens! Oh Glück vor Abend! Oh Hafen auf hoher
See! Oh Friede im Ungewissen! Wie misstraue ich euch Allen!

Wahrlich, misstrauisch bin ich gegen eure tückische Schönheit! Dem
Liebenden gleiche ich, der allzusammtenem Lächeln misstraut.

Wie er die Geliebteste vor sich her stösst, zärtlich noch in seiner
Härte, der Eifersüchtige—, also stosse ich diese selige Stunde vor mir
her.

Hinweg mit dir, du selige Stunde! Mit dir kam mir eine Seligkeit wider
Willen! Willig zu meinem tiefsten Schmerze stehe ich hier:—zur Unzeit
kamst du!

Hinweg mit dir, du selige Stunde! Lieber nimm Herberge dort—bei meinen
Kindern! Eile! und segne sie vor Abend noch mit _meinem_ Glücke!

Da naht schon der Abend: die Sonne sinkt. Dahin—mein Glück!—“

Also sprach Zarathustra. Und er wartete auf sein Unglück die ganze
Nacht: aber er wartete umsonst. Die Nacht blieb hell und still, und das
Glück selber kam ihm immer näher und näher. Gegen Morgen aber lachte
Zarathustra zu seinem Herzen und sagte spöttisch: „das Glück läuft mir
nach. Das kommt davon, dass ich nicht den Weibern nachlaufe. Das Glück
aber ist ein Weib.“


Vor Sonnen-Aufgang

Oh Himmel über mir, du Reiner! Tiefer! Du Licht-Abgrund! Dich schauend
schaudere ich vor göttlichen Begierden.

In deine Höhe mich zu werfen—das ist _meine_ Tiefe! In deine Reinheit
mich zu bergen—das ist _meine_ Unschuld!

Den Gott verhüllt seine Schönheit: so verbirgst du deine Sterne. Du
redest nicht: _so_ kündest du mir deine Weisheit.

Stumm über brausendem Meere bist du heut mir aufgegangen, deine Liebe
und deine Scham redet Offenbarung zu meiner brausenden Seele.

Dass du schön zu mir kamst, verhüllt in deine Schönheit, dass du stumm
zu mir sprichst, offenbar in deiner Weisheit:

Oh wie erriethe ich nicht alles Schamhafte deiner Seele! _Vor_ der
Sonne kamst du zu mir, dem Einsamsten.

Wir sind Freunde von Anbeginn: uns ist Gram und Grauen und Grund
gemeinsam; noch die Sonne ist uns gemeinsam.

Wir reden nicht zu einander, weil wir zu Vieles wissen—: wir schweigen
uns an, wir lächeln uns unser Wissen zu.

Bist du nicht das Licht zu meinem Feuer? Hast du nicht die
Schwester-Seele zu meiner Einsicht?

Zusammen lernten wir Alles; zusammen lernten wir über uns zu uns selber
aufsteigen und wolkenlos lächeln:—

—wolkenlos hinab lächeln aus lichten Augen und aus meilenweiter Ferne,
wenn unter uns Zwang und Zweck und Schuld wie Regen dampfen.

Und wanderte ich allein: _wes_ hungerte meine Seele in Nächten und
Irr-Pfaden? Und stieg ich Berge, _wen_ suchte ich je, wenn nicht dich,
auf Bergen?

Und all mein Wandern und Bergsteigen: eine Noth war’s nur und ein
Behelf des Unbeholfenen:—_fliegen_ allein will mein ganzer Wille, in
_dich_ hinein fliegen!

Und wen hasste ich mehr, als ziehende Wolken und Alles, was dich
befleckt? Und meinen eignen Hass hasste ich noch, weil er dich
befleckte!

Den ziehenden Wolken bin ich gram, diesen schleichenden Raub-Katzen:
sie nehmen dir und mir, was uns gemein ist,—das ungeheure unbegrenzte
Ja- und Amen-sagen.

Diesen Mittlern und Mischern sind wir gram, den ziehenden Wolken:
diesen Halb- und Halben, welche weder segnen lernten, noch von Grund
aus fluchen.

Lieber will ich noch unter verschlossnem Himmel in der Tonne sitzen,
lieber ohne Himmel im Abgrund sitzen, als dich, Licht-Himmel, mit
Zieh-Wolken befleckt sehn!

Und oft gelüstete mich, sie mit zackichten Blitz-Golddrähten
festzuheften, dass ich, gleich dem Donner, auf ihrem Kessel-Bauche die
Pauke schlüge:—

—ein zorniger Paukenschläger, weil sie mir dein Ja! und Amen! rauben,
du Himmel über mir, du Reiner! Lichter! Du Licht-Abgrund!—weil sie dir
_mein_ Ja! und Amen! rauben.

Denn lieber noch will ich Lärm und Donner und Wetter-Flüche, als diese
bedächtige zweifelnde Katzen-Ruhe; und auch unter Menschen hasse ich am
besten alle Leisetreter und Halb- und Halben und zweifelnde, zögernde
Zieh-Wolken.

Und „wer nicht segnen kann, der soll fluchen _lernen_!“—diese helle
Lehre fiel mir aus hellem Himmel, dieser Stern steht auch noch in
schwarzen Nächten an meinem Himmel.

Ich aber bin ein Segnender und ein Ja-sager, wenn du nur um mich bist,
du Reiner! Lichter! Du Licht-Abgrund!—in alle Abgründe trage ich da
noch mein segnendes Ja-sagen.

Zum Segnenden bin ich worden und zum Ja-sagenden: und dazu rang ich
lange und war ein Ringer, dass ich einst die Hände frei bekäme zum
Segnen.

Das aber ist mein Segnen: über jedwedem Ding als sein eigener Himmel
stehn, als sein rundes Dach, seine azurne Glocke und ewige Sicherheit:
und selig ist, wer also segnet!

Denn alle Dinge sind getauft am Borne der Ewigkeit und jenseits von Gut
und Böse; Gut und Böse selber aber sind nur Zwischenschatten und
feuchte Trübsale und Zieh-Wolken.

Wahrlich, ein Segnen ist es und kein Lästern, wenn ich lehre: „über
allen Dingen steht der Himmel Zufall, der Himmel Unschuld, der Himmel
Ohngefähr, der Himmel Übermuth.“

„Von Ohngefähr“—das ist der älteste Adel der Welt, den gab ich allen
Dingen zurück, ich erlöste sie von der Knechtschaft unter dem Zwecke.

Diese Freiheit und Himmels-Heiterkeit stellte ich gleich azurner Glocke
über alle Dinge, als ich lehrte, dass über ihnen und durch sie kein
„ewiger Wille“ —will.

Diesen Übermuth und diese Narrheit stellte ich an die Stelle jenes
Willens, als ich lehrte: „bei Allem ist Eins unmöglich—Vernünftigkeit!“

Ein _Wenig_ Vernunft zwar, ein Same der Weisheit zerstreut von Stern zu
Stern,—dieser Sauerteig ist allen Dingen eingemischt: um der Narrheit
willen ist Weisheit allen Dingen eingemischt!

Ein Wenig Weisheit ist schon möglich; aber diese selige Sicherheit fand
ich an allen Dingen: dass sie lieber noch auf den Füssen des
Zufalls—_tanzen_.

Oh Himmel über mir, du Reiner! Hoher! Das ist mir nun deine Reinheit,
dass es keine ewige Vernunft-Spinne und -Spinnennetze giebt:—

—dass du mir ein Tanzboden bist für göttliche Zufälle, dass du mir ein
Göttertisch bist für göttliche Würfel und Würfelspieler!—

Doch du erröthest? Sprach ich Unaussprechbares? Lästerte ich, indem ich
dich segnen wollte?

Oder ist es die Scham zu Zweien, welche dich erröthen machte?—Heissest
du mich gehn und schweigen, weil nun—der _Tag_ kommt?

Die Welt ist tief—: und tiefer als je der Tag gedacht hat. Nicht Alles
darf vor dem Tage Worte haben. Aber der Tag kommt: so scheiden wir nun!

Oh Himmel über mir, du Schamhafter! Glühender! Oh du mein Glück vor
Sonnen-Aufgang! Der Tag kommt: so scheiden wir nun!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von der verkleinernden Tugend

1.

Als Zarathustra wieder auf dem festen Lande war, gieng er nicht stracks
auf sein Gebirge und seine Höhle los, sondern that viele Wege und
Fragen und erkundete diess und das, also, dass er von sich selber im
Scherze sagte: „siehe einen Fluss, der in vielen Windungen zurück zur
Quelle fliesst!“ Denn er wollte in Erfahrung bringen, was sich
inzwischen _mit dem Menschen_ zugetragen habe: ob er grösser oder
kleiner geworden sei. Und ein Mal sah er eine Reihe neuer Häuser; da
wunderte er sich und sagte:

„Was bedeuten diese Häuser? Wahrlich, keine grosse Seele stellte sie
hin, sich zum Gleichnisse!

Nahm wohl ein blödes Kind sie aus seiner Spielschachtel? Dass doch ein
anderes Kind sie wieder in seine Schachtel thäte!

Und diese Stuben und Kammern: können _Männer_ da aus- und eingehen?
Gemacht dünken sie mich für Seiden-Puppen; oder für Naschkatzen, die
auch wohl an sich naschen lassen.“

Und Zarathustra blieb stehn und dachte nach. Endlich sagte er betrübt:
„Es ist _Alles_ kleiner geworden!

Überall sehe ich niedrigere Thore: wer _meiner_ Art ist, geht da wohl
noch hindurch, aber—er muss sich bücken!

Oh wann komme ich wieder in meine Heimat, wo ich mich nicht mehr bücken
muss—nicht mehr bücken muss vor den Kleinen!“—Und Zarathustra seufzte
und blickte in die Ferne.—

Desselbigen Tages aber redete er seine Rede über die verkleinernde
Tugend.

2.

Ich gehe durch diess Volk und halte meine Augen offen: sie vergeben mir
es nicht, dass ich auf ihre Tugenden nicht neidisch bin.

Sie beissen nach mir, weil ich zu ihnen sage: für kleine Leute sind
kleine Tugenden nöthig—und weil es mir hart eingeht, dass kleine Leute
_nöthig_ sind!

Noch gleiche ich dem Hahn hier auf fremdem Gehöfte, nach dem auch die
Hennen beissen; doch darob bin ich diesen Hennen nicht ungut.

Ich bin höflich gegen sie wie gegen alles kleine Ärgerniss; gegen das
Kleine stachlicht zu sein dünkt mich eine Weisheit für Igel.

Sie reden Alle von mir, wenn sie Abends um’s Feuer sitzen,—sie reden
von mir, aber Niemand denkt—an mich!

Diess ist die neue Stille, die ich lernte: ihr Lärm um mich breitet
einen Mantel über meine Gedanken.

Sie lärmen unter einander: „was will uns diese düstere Wolke? sehen wir
zu, dass sie uns nicht eine Seuche bringe!“

Und jüngst riss ein Weib sein Kind an sich, das zu mir wollte: „nehmt
die Kinder weg! schrie es; solche Augen versengen Kinder-Seelen.“

Sie husten, wenn ich rede: sie meinen, Husten sei ein Einwand gegen
starke Winde,—sie errathen Nichts vom Brausen meines Glückes!

„Wir haben noch keine Zeit für Zarathustra“—so wenden sie ein; aber was
liegt an einer Zeit, die für Zarathustra „keine Zeit hat“?

Und wenn sie gar mich rühmen: wie könnte ich wohl auf _ihrem_ Ruhme
einschlafen? Ein Stachel-Gürtel ist mir ihr Lob: es kratzt mich noch,
wenn ich es von mir thue.

Und auch das lernte ich unter ihnen: der Lobende stellt sich, als gäbe
er zurück, in Wahrheit aber will er mehr beschenkt sein!

Fragt meinen Fuss, ob ihm ihre Lob- und Lock-Weise gefällt! Wahrlich,
nach solchem Takt und Tiktak mag er weder tanzen, noch stille stehn.

Zur kleinen Tugend möchten sie mich locken und loben; zum Tiktak des
kleinen Glücks möchten sie meinen Fuss überreden.

Ich gehe durch diess Volk und halte die Augen offen: sie sind _kleiner_
geworden und werden immer kleiner:—das aber macht ihre Lehre von Glück
und Tugend.

Sie sind nämlich auch in der Tugend bescheiden—denn sie wollen Behagen.
Mit Behagen aber verträgt sich nur die bescheidene Tugend.

Wohl lernen auch sie auf ihre Art Schreiten und Vorwärts-Schreiten: das
heisse ich ihr _Humpeln_—. Damit werden sie jedem zum Anstosse, der
Eile hat.

Und Mancher von ihnen geht vorwärts und blickt dabei zurück, mit
versteiftem Nacken: dem renne ich gern wider den Leib.

Fuss und Augen sollen nicht lügen, noch sich einander Lügen strafen.
Aber es ist viel Lügnerei bei den kleinen Leuten.

Einige von ihnen wollen, aber die Meisten werden nur gewollt. Einige
von ihnen sind ächt, aber die Meisten sind schlechte Schauspieler.

Es giebt Schauspieler wider Wissen unter ihnen und Schauspieler wider
Willen—, die Ächten sind immer selten, sonderlich die ächten
Schauspieler.

Des Mannes ist hier wenig: darum vermännlichen sich ihre Weiber. Denn
nur wer Mannes genug ist, wird im Weibe _das Weib_—erlösen.

Und diese Heuchelei fand ich unter ihnen am schlimmsten: dass auch Die,
welche befehlen, die Tugenden Derer heucheln, welche dienen.

„Ich diene, du dienst, wir dienen“ —so betet hier auch die Heuchelei
der Herrschenden,—und wehe, wenn der erste Herr _nur_ der erste Diener
ist!

Ach, auch in ihre Heucheleien verflog sich wohl meines Auges Neugier;
und gut errieth ich all ihr Fliegen-Glück und ihr Summen um besonnte
Fensterscheiben.

Soviel Güte, soviel Schwäche sehe ich. Soviel Gerechtigkeit und
Mitleiden, soviel Schwäche.

Rund, rechtlich und gütig sind sie mit einander, wie Sandkörnchen rund,
rechtlich und gütig mit Sandkörnchen sind.

Bescheiden ein kleines Glück umarmen—das heissen sie „Ergebung“! und
dabei schielen sie bescheiden schon nach einem neuen kleinen Glücke
aus.

Sie wollen im Grunde einfältiglich Eins am meisten: dass ihnen Niemand
wehe thue. So kommen sie jedermann zuvor und thun ihm wohl.

Diess aber ist _Feigheit_: ob es schon „Tugend“ heisst.—

Und wenn sie einmal rauh reden, diese kleinen Leute: _ich_ höre darin
nur ihre Heiserkeit,—jeder Windzug nämlich macht sie heiser.

Klug sind sie, ihre Tugenden haben kluge Finger. Aber ihnen fehlen die
Fäuste, ihre Finger wissen nicht, sich hinter Fäuste zu verkriechen.

Tugend ist ihnen das, was bescheiden und zahm macht: damit machten sie
den Wolf zum Hunde und den Menschen selber zu des Menschen bestem
Hausthiere.

„Wir setzten unsern Stuhl in die _Mitte_—das sagt mir ihr
Schmunzeln—und ebenso weit weg von sterbenden Fechtern wie von
vergnügten Säuen.“

Diess aber ist—_Mittelmässigkeit_: ob es schon Mässigkeit heisst.—

3.

Ich gehe durch diess Volk und lasse manches Wort fallen: aber sie
wissen weder zu nehmen noch zu behalten.

Sie wundern sich, dass ich nicht kam, auf Lüste und Laster zu lästern;
und wahrlich, ich kam auch nicht, dass ich vor Taschendieben warnte!

Sie wundern sich, dass ich nicht bereit bin, ihre Klugheit noch zu
witzigen und zu spitzigen: als ob sie noch nicht genug der Klüglinge
hätten, deren Stimme mir gleich Schieferstiften kritzelt!

Und wenn ich rufe: „Flucht allen feigen Teufeln in euch, die gerne
winseln und Hände falten und anbeten möchten“ : so rufen sie:
„Zarathustra ist gottlos“.

Und sonderlich rufen es ihre Lehrer der Ergebung—; aber gerade ihnen
liebe ich’s, in das Ohr zu schrein: Ja! Ich _bin_ Zarathustra, der
Gottlose!

Diese Lehrer der Ergebung! Überall hin, wo es klein und krank und
grindig ist, kriechen sie, gleich Läusen; und nur mein Ekel hindert
mich, sie zu knacken.

Wohlan! Diess ist meine Predigt für _ihre_ Ohren: ich bin Zarathustra,
der Gottlose, der da spricht „wer ist gottloser denn ich, dass ich mich
seiner Unterweisung freue?“

Ich bin Zarathustra, der Gottlose: wo finde ich Meines-Gleichen? Und
alle Die sind Meines-Gleichen, die sich selber ihren Willen geben und
alle Ergebung von sich abthun.

Ich bin Zarathustra, der Gottlose: ich koche mir noch jeden Zufall in
_meinem_ Topfe. Und erst, wenn er da gar gekocht ist, heisse ich ihn
willkommen, als _meine_ Speise.

Und wahrlich, mancher Zufall kam herrisch zu mir: aber herrischer noch
sprach zu ihm mein _Wille_,—da lag er schon bittend auf den Knieen—

—bittend, dass er Herberge finde und Herz bei mir, und schmeichlerisch
zuredend: „sieh doch; oh Zarathustra, wie nur Freund zu Freunde
kommt!“—

Doch was rede ich, wo Niemand _meine_ Ohren hat! Und so will ich es
hinaus in alle Winde rufen:

Ihr werdet immer kleiner, ihr kleinen Leute! Ihr bröckelt ab, ihr
Behaglichen! Ihr geht mir noch zu Grunde—

—an euren vielen kleinen Tugenden, an eurem vielen kleinen Unterlassen,
an eurer vielen kleinen Ergebung!

Zu viel schonend, zu viel nachgebend: so ist euer Erdreich! Aber dass
ein Baum _gross_ werde, dazu will er um harte Felsen harte Wurzeln
schlagen!

Auch was ihr unterlasse, webt am Gewebe aller Menschen-Zukunft; auch
euer Nichts ist ein Spinnennetz und eine Spinne, die von der Zukunft
Blute lebt.

Und wenn ihr nehmt, so ist es wie stehlen, ihr kleinen Tugendhaften;
aber noch unter Schelmen spricht die _Ehre_: „man soll nur stehlen, wo
man nicht rauben kann.“

„Es giebt sich“—das ist auch eine Lehre der Ergebung. Aber ich sage
euch, ihr Behaglichen: _es nimmt sich_ und wird immer mehr noch von
euch nehmen!

Ach, dass ihr alles _halbe_ Wollen von euch abthätet und entschlossen
würdet zur Trägheit wie zur That!

Ach, dass ihr mein Wort verstündet: „thut immerhin, was ihr wollt,—aber
seid erst Solche, die _wollen können_!“

„Liebt immerhin euren Nächsten gleich euch,—aber seid mir erst solche,
die _sich selber lieben_—

—mit der grossen Liebe lieben, mit der grossen Verachtung lieben!“ Also
spricht Zarathustra, der Gottlose.—

Doch was rede ich, wo Niemand _meine_ Ohren hat! Es ist hier noch eine
Stunde zu früh für mich.

Mein eigner Vorläufer bin ich unter diesem Volke, mein eigner
Hahnen-Ruf durch dunkle Gassen.

Aber _ihre_ Stunde kommt! Und es kommt auch die meine! Stündlich werden
sie kleiner, ärmer, unfruchtbarer,—armes Kraut! armes Erdreich!

Und _bald_ sollen sie mir dastehn wie dürres Gras und Steppe, und
wahrlich! ihrer selber müde—und mehr, als nach Wasser, nach _Feuer_
lechzend!

Oh gesegnete Stunde des Blitzes! Oh Geheimniss vor Mittag!—Laufende
Feuer will ich einst noch aus ihnen machen und Verkünder mit
Flammen-Zungen:—

—verkünden sollen sie einst noch mit Flammen-Zungen: Er kommt, er ist
nahe, der grosse Mittag!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Auf dem Ölberge

Der Winter, ein schlimmer Gast, sitzt bei mir zu Hause; blau sind meine
Hände von seiner Freundschaft Händedruck.

Ich ehre ihn, diesen schlimmen Gast, aber lasse gerne ihn allein
sitzen. Gerne laufe ich ihm davon; und, läuft man _gut_, so entläuft
man ihm!

Mit warmen Füssen und warmen Gedanken laufe ich dorthin, wo der Wind
stille steht,—zum Sonnen-Winkel meines Ölbergs.

Da lache ich meines gestrengen Gastes und bin ihm noch gut, dass er zu
Hause mir die Fliegen wegfängt und vielen kleinen Lärm stille macht.

Er leidet es nämlich nicht, wenn eine Mücke singen will, oder gar zwei;
noch die Gasse macht er einsam, dass der Mondschein drin Nachts sich
fürchtet.

Ein harter Gast ist er,—aber ich ehre ihn, und nicht bete ich, gleich
den Zärtlingen, zum dickbäuchichten Feuer-Götzen.

Lieber noch ein Wenig zähneklappern als Götzen anbeten!—so will’s meine
Art. Und sonderlich bin ich allen brünstigen dampfenden dumpfigen
Feuer-Götzen gram.

Wen ich liebe, den liebe ich Winters besser als Sommers; besser spotte
ich jetzt meiner Feinde und herzhafter, seit der Winter mir im Hause
sitzt.

Herzhaft wahrlich, selbst dann noch, wenn ich zu Bett _krieche_—: da
lacht und muthwillt noch mein verkrochenes Glück; es lacht noch mein
Lügen-Traum.

Ich—ein Kriecher? Niemals kroch ich im Leben vor Mächtigen; und log ich
je, so log ich aus Liebe. Desshalb bin ich froh auch im Winter-Bette.

Ein geringes Bett wärmt mich mehr als ein reiches, denn ich bin
eifersüchtig auf meine Armuth. Und im Winter ist sie mir am treuesten.

Mit einer Bosheit beginne ich jeden Tag, ich spotte des Winters mit
einem kalten Bade: darob brummt mein gestrenger Hausfreund.

Auch kitzle ich ihn gerne mit einem Wachskerzlein: dass er mir endlich
den Himmel herauslasse aus aschgrauer Dämmerung.

Sonderlich boshaft bin ich nämlich des Morgens: zur frühen Stunde, da
der Eimer am Brunnen klirrt und die Rosse warm durch graue Gassen
wiehern:—

Ungeduldig warte ich da, dass mir endlich der lichte Himmel aufgehe,
der schneebärtige Winter-Himmel, der Greis und Weisskopf,—

—der Winter-Himmel, der schweigsame, der oft noch seine Sonne
verschweigt!

Lernte ich wohl von ihm das lange lichte Schweigen? Oder lernte er’s
von mir? Oder hat ein jeder von uns es selbst erfunden?

Aller guten Dinge Ursprung ist tausendfältig,—alle guten muthwilligen
Dinge springen vor Lust in’s Dasein: wie sollten sie das immer nur—Ein
Mal thun!

Ein gutes muthwilliges Ding ist auch das lange Schweigen und gleich dem
Winter-Himmel blicken aus lichtem rundäugichten Antlitze:—

—gleich ihm seine Sonne verschweigen und seinen unbeugsamen
Sonnen-Willen: wahrlich, diese Kunst und diesen Winter-Muthwillen
lernte ich _gut_!

Meine liebste Bosheit und Kunst ist es, dass mein Schweigen lernte,
sich nicht durch Schweigen zu verrathen.

Mit Worten und Würfeln klappernd überliste ich mir die feierlichen
Warter: allen diesen gestrengen Aufpassern soll mein Wille und Zweck
entschlüpfen.

Dass mir Niemand in meinen Grund und letzten Willen hinab sehe,—dazu
erfand ich mir das lange lichte Schweigen.

So manchen Klugen fand ich: der verschleierte sein Antlitz und trübte
sein Wasser, dass Niemand ihm hindurch und hinunter sehe.

Aber zu ihm gerade kamen die klügeren Misstrauer und Nussknacker: ihm
gerade fischte man seinen verborgensten Fisch heraus!

Sondern die Hellen, die Wackern, die Durchsichtigen—das sind mir die
klügsten Schweiger: denen so _tief_ ihr Grund ist, dass auch das
hellste Wasser ihn nicht—verräth.—

Du schneebärtiger schweigender Winter-Himmel, du rundäugichter
Weisskopf über mir! Oh du himmlisches Gleichniss meiner Seele und ihres
Muthwillens!

Und _muss_ ich mich nicht verbergen, gleich Einem, der Gold verschluckt
hat,—dass man mir nicht die Seele aufschlitze?

_Muss_ ich nicht Stelzen tragen, dass sie meine langen Beine
_übersehen_,—alle diese Neidbolde und Leidholde, die um mich sind?

Diese räucherigen, stubenwarmen, verbrauchten, vergrünten, vergrämelten
Seelen —wie _könnte_ ihr Neid mein Glück ertragen!

So zeige ich ihnen nur das Eis und den Winter auf meinen Gipfeln—und
_nicht_, dass mein Berg noch alle Sonnengürtel um sich schlingt!

Sie hören nur meine Winter-Stürme pfeifen: und _nicht_, dass ich auch
über warme Meere fahre, gleich sehnsüchtigen, schweren, heissen
Südwinden.

Sie erbarmen sich noch meiner Unfälle und Zufälle:—aber _mein_ Wort
heisst: „lasst den Zufall zu mir kommen: unschuldig ist er, wie ein
Kindlein!“

Wie _könnten_ sie mein Glück ertragen, wenn ich nicht Unfälle und
Winter-Nöthe und Eisbären-Mützen und Schneehimmel-Hüllen um mein Glück
legte!

—wenn ich mich nicht selbst ihres _Mitleids_ erbarmte—des Mitleids
dieser Neidbolde und Leidholde!

—wenn ich nicht selber vor ihnen seufzte und frostklapperte und mich
geduldsam in ihr Mitleid wickeln _liesse_!

Diess ist der weise Muthwille und Wohlwille meiner Seele, dass sie
ihren Winter und ihre Froststürme _nicht verbirgt_; sie verbirgt auch
ihre Frostbeulen nicht.

Des Einen Einsamkeit ist die Flucht des Kranken; des Andern Einsamkeit
die Flucht _vor_ den Kranken.

Mögen sie mich klappern und seufzen _hören_ vor Winterkälte, alle diese
armen scheelen Schelme um mich! Mit solchem Geseufz und Geklapper
flüchte ich noch vor ihren geheizten Stuben.

Mögen sie mich bemitleiden und bemitseufzen ob meiner Frostbeulen: „am
Eis der Erkenntniss _erfriert_ er uns noch!“—so klagen sie.

Inzwischen laufe ich mit warmen Füssen kreuz und quer auf meinem
Ölberge: im Sonnen-Winkel meines Ölberges singe und spotte ich alles
Mitleids.—

Also sang Zarathustra.


Vom Vorübergehen

Also, durch viel Volk und vielerlei Städte langsam hindurchschreitend,
gierig Zarathustra auf Umwegen zurück zu seinem Gebirge und seiner
Höhle. Und siehe, dabei kam er unversehens auch an das Stadtthor der
_grossen Stadt_: hier aber sprang ein schäumender Narr mit
ausgebreiteten Händen auf ihn zu und trat ihm in den Weg. Diess aber
war der selbige Narr, welchen das Volk „den Affen Zarathustra’s“ hiess:
denn er hatte ihm Etwas vom Satz und Fall der Rede abgemerkt und borgte
wohl auch gerne vom Schatze seiner Weisheit. Der Narr aber redete also
zu Zarathustra:

„Oh Zarathustra, hier ist die grosse Stadt: hier hast du Nichts zu
suchen und Alles zu verlieren.

Warum wolltest du durch diesen Schlamm waten? Habe doch Mitleiden mit
deinem Fusse! Speie lieber auf das Stadtthor und—kehre um!

Hier ist die Hölle für Einsiedler-Gedanken: hier werden grosse Gedanken
lebendig gesotten und klein gekocht.

Hier verwesen alle grossen Gefühle: hier dürfen nur klapperdürre
Gefühlchen klappern!

Riechst du nicht schon die Schlachthäuser und Garküchen des Geistes?
Dampft nicht diese Stadt vom Dunst geschlachteten Geistes?

Siehst du nicht die Seelen hängen wie schlaffe schmutzige Lumpen?—Und
sie machen noch Zeitungen aus diesen Lumpen!

Hörst du nicht, wie der Geist hier zum Wortspiel wurde? Widriges
Wort-Spülicht bricht er heraus!—Und sie machen noch Zeitungen aus
diesem Wort-Spülicht.

Sie hetzen einander und wissen nicht, wohin? Sie erhitzen einander und
wissen nicht, warum? Sie klimpern mit ihrem Bleche, sie klingeln mit
ihrem Golde.

Sie sind kalt und suchen sich Wärme bei gebrannten Wassern; sie sind
erhitzt und suchen Kühle bei gefrorenen Geistern; sie sind Alle siech
und süchtig an öffentlichen Meinungen.

Alle Lüste und Laster sind hier zu Hause; aber es giebt hier auch
Tugendhafte, es giebt viel anstellige angestellte Tugend:—

Viel anstellige Tugend mit Schreibfingern und hartem Sitz- und
Warte-Fleische, gesegnet mit kleinen Bruststernen und ausgestopften
steisslosen Töchtern.

Es giebt hier auch viel Frömmigkeit und viel gläubige
Speichel-Leckerei, Schmeichel-Bäckerei vor dem Gott der Heerschaaren.

„Von Oben“ her träufelt ja der Stern und der gnädige Speichel; nach
Oben hin sehnt sich jeder sternenlose Busen.

Der Mond hat seinen Hof, und der Hof hat seine Mondkälber: zu Allem
aber, was vom Hofe kommt, betet das Bettel-Volk und alle anstellige
Bettel-Tugend.

„Ich diene, du dienst, wir dienen“—so betet alle anstellige Tugend
hinauf zum Fürsten: dass der verdiente Stern sich endlich an den
schmalen Busen hefte!

Aber der Mond dreht sich noch um alles Irdische: so dreht sich auch der
Fürst noch um das Aller-Irdischste—: das aber ist das Gold der Krämer.

Der Gott der Heerschaaren ist kein Gott der Goldbarren; der Fürst
denkt, aber der Krämer—lenkt!

Bei Allem, was licht und stark und gut in dir ist, oh Zarathustra!
Speie auf diese Stadt der Krämer und kehre um!

Hier fliesst alles Blut faulicht und lauicht und schaumicht durch alle
Adern: speie auf die grosse Stadt, welche der grosse Abraum ist, wo
aller Abschaum zusammenschäumt!

Speie auf die Stadt der eingedrückten Seelen und schmalen Brüste, der
spitzen Augen, der klebrigen Finger—

—auf die Stadt der Aufdringlinge, der Unverschämten, der Schreib- und
Schreihälse, der überheizten Ehrgeizigen:—

—wo alles Anbrüchige, Anrüchige, Lüsterne, Düsterne, Übermürbe,
Geschwürige, Verschwörerische zusammenschwärt:—

—speie auf die grosse Stadt und kehre um!“—

Hier aber unterbrach Zarathustra den schäumenden Narren und hielt ihm
den Mund zu.

„Höre endlich auf! rief Zarathustra, mich ekelt lange schon deiner Rede
und deiner Art!

Warum wohntest du so lange am Sumpfe, dass du selber zum Frosch und zur
Kröte werden musstest?

Fliesst dir nicht selber nun ein faulichtes schaumichtes Sumpf-Blut
durch die Adern, dass du also quaken und lästern lerntest?

Warum giengst du nicht in den Wald? Oder pflügtest die Erde? Ist das
Meer nicht voll von grünen Eilanden?

Ich verachte dein Verachten; und wenn du mich warntest,—warum warntest
du dich nicht selber?

Aus der Liebe allein soll mir mein Verachten und mein warnender Vogel
auffliegen: aber nicht aus dem Sumpfe!—

Man heisst dich meinen Affen, du schäumender Narr: aber ich heisse dich
mein Grunze-Schwein,—durch Grunzen verdirbst du mir noch mein Lob der
Narrheit.

Was war es denn, was dich zuerst grunzen machte? Dass Niemand dir genug
_geschmeichelt_ hat:—darum setztest du dich hin zu diesem Unrathe, dass
du Grund hättest viel zu grunzen,—

—dass du Grund hättest zu vieler _Rache_! Rache nämlich, du eitler
Narr, ist all dein Schäumen, ich errieth dich wohl!

Aber dein Narren-Wort thut _mir_ Schaden, selbst, wo du Recht hast! Und
wenn Zarathustra’s Wort sogar hundert Mal Recht _hätte_: du würdest mit
meinem Wort immer—Unrecht _thun_!“

Also sprach Zarathustra; und er blickte die grosse Stadt an, seufzte
und schwieg lange. Endlich redete er also:

Mich ekelt auch dieser grossen Stadt und nicht nur dieses Narren. Hier
und dort ist Nichts zu bessern, Nichts zu bösern.

Wehe dieser grossen Stadt!—Und ich wollte, ich sähe schon die
Feuersäule, in der sie verbrannt wird!

Denn solche Feuersäulen müssen dem grossen Mittage vorangehn. Doch
diess hat seine Zeit und sein eigenes Schicksal.—

Diese Lehre aber gebe ich dir, du Narr, zum Abschiede: wo man nicht
mehr lieben kann, da soll man—_vorübergehn_!—

Also sprach Zarathustra und gieng an dem Narren und der grossen Stadt
vorüber.


Von den Abtrünnigen

1.

Ach, liegt Alles schon welk und grau, was noch jüngst auf dieser Wiese
grün und bunt stand? Und wie vielen Honig der Hoffnung trug ich von
hier in meine Bienenkörbe!

Diese jungen Herzen sind alle schon alt geworden,—und nicht alt einmal!
nur müde, gemein, bequem:—sie heissen es „Wir sind wieder fromm
geworden.“

Noch jüngst sah ich sie in der Frühe auf tapferen Füssen hinauslaufen:
aber ihre Füsse der Erkenntniss wurden müde, und nun verleumden sie
auch noch ihre Morgen-Tapferkeit!

Wahrlich, Mancher von ihnen hob einst die Beine wie ein Tänzer, ihm
winkte das Lachen in meiner Weisheit:—da besann er sich. Eben sah ich
ihn krumm—zum Kreuze kriechen.

Um Licht und Freiheit flatterten sie einst gleich Mücken und jungen
Dichtern. Ein Wenig älter, ein Wenig kälter: und schon sind sie Dunkler
und Munkler und Ofenhocker.

Verzagte ihnen wohl das Herz darob, dass mich die Einsamkeit verschlang
gleich einem Wallfische? Lauschte ihr Ohr wohl sehnsüchtig-lange
_umsonst_ nach mir und meinen Trompeten- und Herolds-Rufen?

—Ach! Immer sind ihrer nur Wenige, deren Herz einen langen Muth und
Übermuth hat; und solchen bleibt auch der Geist geduldsam. Der Rest
aber ist _feige_.

Der Rest: das sind immer die Allermeisten, der Alltag, der Überfluss,
die Viel-zu-Vielen—diese alle sind feige!—

Wer meiner Art ist, dem werden auch die Erlebnisse meiner Art über den
Weg laufen: also, dass seine ersten Gesellen Leichname und
Possenreisser sein müssen.

Seine zweiten Gesellen aber—die werden sich seine _Gläubigen_ heissen:
ein lebendiger Schwarm, viel Liebe, viel Thorheit, viel unbärtige
Verehrung.

An diese Gläubigen soll Der nicht sein Herz binden, wer meiner Art
unter Menschen ist; an diese Lenze und bunte Wiesen soll Der nicht
glauben, wer die flüchtig-feige Menschenart kennt!

_Könnten_ sie anders, so würden sie auch anders _wollen_. Halb- und
Halbe verderben alles Ganze. Dass Blätter welk werden,—was ist da zu
klagen!

Lass sie fahren und fallen, oh Zarathustra, und klage nicht! Lieber
noch blase mit raschelnden Winden unter sie,—

—blase unter diese Blätter, oh Zarathustra: dass alles _Welke_
schneller noch von dir davonlaufen!—

2.

„Wir sind wieder fromm geworden“ —so bekennen diese Abtrünnigen; und
Manche von ihnen sind noch zu feige, also zu bekennen.

Denen sehe ich in’s Auge,—denen sage ich es in’s Gesicht und in die
Röthe ihrer Wangen: ihr seid Solche, welche wieder _beten_!

Es ist aber eine Schmach, zu beten! Nicht für Alle, aber für dich und
mich und wer auch im Kopfe sein Gewissen hat. Für _dich_ ist es eine
Schmach, zu beten!

Du weisst es wohl: dein feiger Teufel in dir, der gerne Hände-falten
und Hände-in-den-Schooss-legen und es bequemer haben möchte:—dieser
feige Teufel redet dir zu „es _giebt_ einen Gott!“

_Damit_ aber gehörst du zur lichtscheuen Art, denen Licht nimmer Ruhe
lässt; nun musst du täglich deinen Kopf tiefer in Nacht und Dunst
stecken!

Und wahrlich, du wähltest die Stunde gut: denn eben wieder fliegen die
Nachtvögel aus. Die Stunde kam allem lichtscheuen Volke, die Abend- und
Feierstunde, wo es nicht—„feiert.“

Ich höre und rieche es: es kam ihre Stunde für Jagd und Umzug, nicht
zwar für eine wilde Jagd, sondern für eine zahme lahme schnüffelnde
Leisetreter- und Leisebeter-Jagd,—

—für eine Jagd auf seelenvolle Duckmäuser: alle Herzens- Mausefallen
sind jetzt wieder aufgestellt! Und wo ich einen Vorhang aufhebe, da
kommt ein Nachtfalterchen herausgestürzt.

Hockte es da wohl zusammen mit einem andern Nachtfalterchen? Denn
überall rieche ich kleine verkrochne Gemeinden; und wo es Kämmerlein
giebt, da giebt es neue Bet-Brüder drin und den Dunst von Bet-Brüdern.

Sie sitzen lange Abende bei einander und sprechen: lasset uns wieder
werden wie die Kindlein und „lieber Gott“ sagen!—an Mund und Magen
verdorben durch die frommen Zuckerbäcker.

Oder sie sehen lange Abende einer listigen lauernden Kreuzspinne zu,
welche den Spinnen selber Klugheit predigt und also lehrt: „unter
Kreuzen ist gut spinnen!“

Oder sie sitzen Tags über mit Angelruthen an Sümpfen und glauben sich
_tief_ damit; aber wer dort fischt, wo es keine Fische giebt, den
heisse ich noch nicht einmal oberflächlich!

Oder sie lernen fromm-froh die Harfe schlagen bei einem Lieder-Dichter,
der sich gern jungen Weibchen in’s Herz harfnen möchte:—denn er wurde
der alten Weibchen müde und ihres Lobpreisens.

Oder sie lernen gruseln bei einem gelehrten Halb-Tollen, der in dunklen
Zimmern wartet, dass ihm die Geister kommen—und der Geist ganz
davonläuft!

Oder sie horchen einem alten umgetriebnen Schnurr- und Knurrpfeifer zu,
der trüben Winden die Trübsal der Töne ablernte; nun pfeift er nach dem
Winde und predigt in trüben Tönen Trübsal.

Und Einige von ihnen sind sogar Nachtwächter geworden: die verstehen
jetzt in Hörner zu blasen und Nachts umherzugehn und alte Sachen
aufzuwecken, die lange schon eingeschlafen sind.

Fünf Worte von alten Sachen hörte ich gestern Nachts an der
Garten-Mauer: die kamen von solchen alten betrübten trocknen
Nachtwächtern.

„Für einen Vater sorgt er nicht genug um seine Kinder: Menschen-Väter
thun diess besser!“—

„Er ist zu alt! Er sorgt schon gar nicht mehr um seine Kinder“—also
antwortete der andere Nachtwächter.

„_Hat_ er denn Kinder? Niemand kann’s beweisen, wenn er’s selber nicht
beweist! Ich wollte längst, er bewiese es einmal gründlich.“

„Beweisen? Als ob _Der_ je Etwas bewiesen hätte! Beweisen fällt ihm
schwer; er hält grosse Stücke darauf, dass man ihm glaubt.“

„Ja! Ja! Der Glaube macht ihn selig, der Glaube an ihn. Das ist so die
Art alter Leute! So geht’s uns auch!“—

—Also sprachen zu einander die zwei alten Nachtwächter und
Lichtscheuchen, und tuteten darauf betrübt in ihre Hörner: so geschah’s
gestern Nachts an der Garten-Mauer.

Mir aber wand sich das Herz vor Lachen und wollte brechen und wusste
nicht, wohin? und sank in’s Zwerchfell.

Wahrlich, das wird noch mein Tod sein, dass ich vor Lachen ersticke,
wenn ich Esel betrunken sehe und Nachtwächter also an Gott zweifeln
höre.

Ist es denn nicht _lange_ vorbei auch für alle solche Zweifel? Wer darf
noch solche alte eingeschlafne lichtscheue Sachen aufwecken!

Mit den alten Göttern gieng es ja lange schon zu Ende:—und wahrlich,
ein gutes fröhliches Götter-Ende hatten sie!

Sie „dämmerten“  sich nicht zu Tode,—das lügt man wohl! Vielmehr: sie
haben sich selber einmal zu Tode—_gelacht_!

Das geschah, als das gottloseste Wort von einem Gotte selber
ausgieng,—das Wort: „Es ist Ein Gott! Du sollst keinen andern Gott
haben neben mir!“—

—ein alter Grimm-Bart von Gott, ein eifersüchtiger vergass sich also:

Und alle Götter lachten damals und wackelten auf ihren Stühlen und
riefen: „Ist das nicht eben Göttlichkeit, dass es Götter, aber keinen
Gott giebt?“

Wer Ohren hat, der höre.—

Also redete Zarathustra in der Stadt, die er liebte und welche
zubenannt ist die bunte Kuh. Von hier nämlich hatte er nur noch zwei
Tage zu gehen, dass er wieder in seine Höhle käme und zu seinen
Thieren; seine Seele aber frohlockte beständig ob der Nähe seiner
Heimkehr.—


Die Heimkehr

Oh Einsamkeit! Du meine _Heimat_ Einsamkeit! Zu lange lebte ich wild in
wilder Fremde, als dass ich nicht mit Thränen zu dir heimkehrte!

Nun drohe mir nur mit dem Finger, wie Mütter drohn, nein lächle mir zu,
wie Mütter lächeln, nun sprich nur: „Und wer war das, der wie ein
Sturmwind einst von mir davonstürmte?—

—der scheidend rief: zu lange sass ich bei der Einsamkeit, da verlernte
ich das Schweigen! _Das_—lerntest du nun wohl?

Oh Zarathustra, Alles weiss ich: und dass du unter den Vielen
_verlassener_ warst, du Einer, als je bei mir!

Ein Anderes ist Verlassenheit, ein Anderes Einsamkeit: _Das_—lerntest
du nun! Und dass du unter Menschen immer wild und fremd sein wirst:

-Wild und fremd auch noch, wenn sie dich lieben: denn zuerst von Allem
wollen sie _geschont_ sein!

Hier aber bist du bei dir zu Heim und Hause; hier kannst du Alles
hinausreden und alle Gründe ausschütten, Nichts schämt sich hier
versteckter, verstockter Gefühle.

Hier kommen alle Dinge liebkosend zu deiner Rede und schmeicheln dir:
denn sie wollen auf deinem Rücken reiten. Auf jedem Gleichniss reitest
du hier zu jeder Wahrheit.

Aufrecht und aufrichtig darfst du hier zu allen Dingen reden: und
wahrlich, wie Lob klingt es ihren Ohren, dass Einer mit allen
Dingen—gerade redet!

Ein Anderes aber ist Verlassensein. Denn, weisst du noch, oh
Zarathustra? Als damals dein Vogel über dir schrie, als du im Walde
standest, unschlüssig, wohin? unkundig, einem Leichnam nahe:—

—als du sprachst: mögen mich meine Thiere führen! Gefährlicher fand
ich’s unter Menschen, als unter Thieren:—_Das_ war Verlassenheit!

Und weisst du noch, oh Zarathustra? Als du auf deiner Insel sassest,
unter leeren Eimern ein Brunnen Weins, gebend und ausgebend, unter
Durstigen schenkend und ausschenkend:

—bis du endlich durstig allein unter Trunkenen sassest und nächtlich
klagtest „ist Nehmen nicht seliger als Geben? Und Stehlen noch seliger
als Nehmen?“—_Das_ war Verlassenheit!

Und weisst du noch, oh Zarathustra? Als deine stillste Stunde kam und
dich von dir selber forttrieb, als sie mit bösem Flüstern sprach:
„Sprich und zerbrich!“ -

—als sie dir all dein Warten und Schweigen leid machte und deinen
demüthigen Muth entmuthigte: _Das_ war Verlassenheit!“—

Oh Einsamkeit! Du meine Heimat Einsamkeit! Wie selig und zärtlich redet
deine Stimme zu mir!

Wir fragen einander nicht, wir klagen einander nicht, wir gehen offen
mit einander durch offne Thüren.

Denn offen ist es bei dir und hell; und auch die Stunden laufen hier
auf leichteren Füssen. Im Dunklen nämlich trägt man schwerer an der
Zeit, als im Lichte.

Hier springen mir alles Seins Worte und Wort-Schreine auf: alles Sein
will hier Wort werden, alles Werden will hier von mir reden lernen.

Da unten aber—da ist alles Reden umsonst! Da ist Vergessen und
Vorübergehn die beste Weisheit: _Das_—lernte ich nun!

Wer Alles bei den Menschen begreifen wollte, der müsste Alles
angreifen. Aber dazu habe ich zu reinliche Hände.

Ich mag schon ihren Athem nicht einathmen; ach, dass ich so lange unter
ihrem Lärm und üblem Athem lebte!

Oh selige Stille um mich! Oh reine Gerüche um mich! Oh wie aus tiefer
Brust diese Stille reinen Athem holt! Oh wie sie horcht, diese selige
Stille!

Aber da unten—da redet Alles, da wird Alles überhört. Man mag seine
Weisheit mit Glocken einläuten: die Krämer auf dem Markte werden sie
mit Pfennigen überklingeln!

Alles bei ihnen redet, Niemand weiss mehr zu verstehn. Alles fällt in’s
Wasser, Nichts fällt mehr in tiefe Brunnen.

Alles bei ihnen redet, Nichts geräth mehr und kommt zu Ende. Alles
gackert, aber wer will noch still auf dem Neste sitzen und Eier brüten?

Alles bei ihnen redet, Alles wird zerredet. Und was gestern noch zu
hart war für die Zeit selber und ihren Zahn: heute hängt es zerschabt
und zernagt aus den Mäulern der Heutigen.

Alles bei ihnen redet, Alles wird verrathen. Und was einst Geheimniss
hiess und Heimlichkeit tiefer Seelen, heute gehört es den
Gassen-Trompetern und andern Schmetterlingen.

Oh Menschenwesen, du wunderliches! Du Lärm auf dunklen Gassen! Nun
liegst du wieder hinter mir:—meine grösste Gefahr liegt hinter mir!

Im Schonen und Mitleiden lag immer meine grösste Gefahr; und alles
Menschenwesen will geschont und gelitten sein.

Mit verhaltenen Wahrheiten, mit Narrenhand und vernarrtem Herzen und
reich an kleinen Lügen des Mitleidens:—also lebte ich immer unter
Menschen.

Verkleidet sass ich unter ihnen, bereit, _mich_ zu verkennen, dass ich
_sie_ ertrüge, und gern mir zuredend „du Narr, du kennst die Menschen
nicht!“

Man verlernt die Menschen, wenn man unter Menschen lebt: zu viel
Vordergrund ist an allen Menschen,—was sollen da weitsichtige,
weit-süchtige Augen!

Und wenn sie mich verkannten: ich Narr schonte sie darob mehr, als
mich: gewohnt zur Härte gegen mich und oft noch an mir selber mich
rächend für diese Schonung.

Zerstochen von giftigen Fliegen und ausgehöhlt, dem Steine gleich, von
vielen Tropfen Bosheit, so sass ich unter ihnen und redete mir noch zu:
„unschuldig ist alles Kleine an seiner Kleinheit!“

Sonderlich Die, welche sich „die Guten“  heissen, fand ich als die
giftigsten Fliegen: sie stechen in aller Unschuld, sie lügen in aller
Unschuld; wie _vermöchten_ sie, gegen mich—gerecht zu sein!

Wer unter den Guten lebt, den lehrt Mitleid lügen. Mitleid macht dumpfe
Luft allen freien Seelen. Die Dummheit der Guten nämlich ist
unergründlich.

Mich selber verbergen und meinen Reichthum—_das_ lernte ich da unten:
denn jeden fand ich noch arm am Geiste. Das war der Lug meines
Mitleidens, dass ich bei jedem wusste,

—dass ich jedem es ansah und anroch, was ihm Geistes _genug_ und was
ihm schon Geistes _zuviel_ war!

Ihre steifen Weisen: ich hiess sie weise, nicht steif,—so lernte ich
Worte verschlucken. Ihre Todtengräber: ich hiess sie Forscher und
Prüfer,—so lernte ich Worte vertauschen.

Die Todtengräber graben sich Krankheiten an. Unter altem Schutte ruhn
schlimme Dünste. Man soll den Morast nicht aufrühren. Man soll auf
Bergen leben.

Mit seligen Nüstern athme ich wieder Berges-Freiheit! Erlöst ist
endlich meine Nase vom Geruch alles Menschenwesens!

Von scharfen Lüften gekitzelt, wie von schäumenden Weinen, _niest_
meine Seele,—niest und jubelt sich zu: Gesundheit!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von den drei Bösen

1.

Im Traum, im letzten Morgentraume stand ich heut auf einem
Vorgebirge,—jenseits der Welt, hielt eine Wage und _wog_ die Welt.

Oh dass zu früh mir die Morgenröthe kam: die glühte mich wach, die
Eifersüchtige! Eifersüchtig ist sie immer auf meine
Morgentraum-Gluthen.

Messbar für Den, der Zeit hat, wägbar für einen guten Wäger, erfliegbar
für starke Fittige, errathbar für göttliche Nüsseknacker: also fand
mein Traum die Welt:—

Mein Traum, ein kühner Segler, halb Schiff, halb Windsbraut, gleich
Schmetterlingen schweigsam, ungeduldig gleich Edelfalken: wie hatte er
doch zum Welt-Wägen heute Geduld und Weile!

Sprach ihm heimlich wohl meine Weisheit zu, meine lachende wache
Tags-Weisheit, welche über alle „unendliche Welten“  spottet? Denn sie
spricht: „wo Kraft ist, wird auch die _Zahl_ Meisterin: die hat mehr
Kraft.“

Wie sicher schaute mein Traum auf diese endliche Welt, nicht neugierig,
nicht altgierig, nicht fürchtend, nicht bittend:—

—als ob ein voller Apfel sich meiner Hand böte, ein reifer Goldapfel,
mit kühl-sanfter sammtener Haut:—so bot sich mir die Welt:—

—als ob ein Baum mir winke, ein breitästiger, starkwilliger, gekrümmt
zur Lehne und noch zum Fussbrett für den Wegmüden: so stand die Welt
auf meinem Vorgebirge:—

—als ob zierliche Hände mir einen Schrein entgegentrügen,—einen Schrein
offen für das Entzücken schamhafter verehrender Augen: also bot sich
mir heute die Welt entgegen:—

—nicht Räthsel genug, um Menschen-Liebe davon zu scheuchen, nicht
Lösung genug, um Menschen-Weisheit einzuschläfern:—ein menschlich gutes
Ding war mir heut die Welt, der man so Böses nachredet!

Wie danke ich es meinem Morgentraum, dass ich also in der Frühe heut
die Welt wog! Als ein menschlich gutes Ding kam er zu mir, dieser Traum
und Herzenströster!

Und dass ich’s ihm gleich thue am Tage und sein Bestes ihm nach- und
ablerne: will ich jetzt die drei bösesten Dinge auf die Wage thun und
menschlich gut abwägen.—

Wer da segnen lehrte, der lehrte auch fluchen: welches sind in der Welt
die drei bestverfluchten Dinge? Diese will ich auf die Wage thun.

Wollust, Herrschsucht, Selbstsucht: diese Drei wurden bisher am besten
verflucht und am schlimmsten beleu- und belügenmundet,—diese Drei will
ich menschlich gut abwägen.

Wohlauf! Hier ist mein Vorgebirg und da das Meer: _das_ wälzt sich zu
mir heran, zottelig, schmeichlerisch, das getreue alte hundertköpfige
Hunds-Ungethüm, das ich liebe.

Wohlauf! Hier will ich die Wage halten über gewälztem Meere: und auch
einen Zeugen wähle ich, dass er zusehe,—dich, du Einsiedler-Baum, dich
starkduftigen, breitgewölbten, den ich liebe!—

Auf welcher Brücke geht zum Dereinst das Jetzt? Nach welchem Zwange
zwingt das Hohe sich zum Niederen? Und was heisst auch das Höchste
noch—hinaufwachsen?—

Nun steht die Wage gleich und still: drei schwere Fragen warf ich
hinein, drei schwere Antworten trägt die andre Wagschale.

2.

Wollust: allen busshemdigen Leib-Verächtern ihr Stachel und Pfahl, und
als „Welt“ verflucht bei allen Hinterweltlern: denn sie höhnt und narrt
alle Wirr- und Irr-Lehrer.

Wollust: dem Gesindel das langsame Feuer, auf dem es verbrannt wird;
allem wurmichten Holze, allen stinkenden Lumpen der bereite Brunst- und
Brodel-Ofen.

Wollust: für die freien Herzen unschuldig und frei, das Garten-Glück
der Erde, aller Zukunft Dankes-Überschwang an das Jetzt.

Wollust: nur dem Welken ein süsslich Gift, für die Löwen-Willigen aber
die grosse Herzstärkung, und der ehrfürchtig geschonte Wein der Weine.

Wollust: das grosse Gleichniss-Glück für höheres Glück und höchste
Hoffnung. Vielem nämlich ist Ehe verheissen und mehr als Ehe,—

—Vielem, das fremder sich ist, als Mann und Weib:—und wer begriff es
ganz, _wie fremd_ sich Mann und Weib sind!

Wollust:—doch ich will Zäune um meine Gedanken haben und auch noch um
meine Worte: dass mir nicht in meine Gärten die Schweine und Schwärmer
brechen!—

Herrschsucht: die Glüh-Geissel der härtesten Herzensharten; die grause
Marter, die sich dem Grausamsten selber aufspart; die düstre Flamme
lebendiger Scheiterhaufen.

Herrschsucht: die boshafte Bremse, die den eitelsten Völkern aufgesetzt
wird; die Verhöhnerin aller ungewissen Tugend; die auf jedem Rosse und
jedem Stolze reitet.

Herrschsucht: das Erdbeben, das alles Morsche und Höhlichte bricht und
aufbricht; die rollende grollende strafende Zerbrecherin übertünchter
Gräber; das blitzende Fragezeichen neben vorzeitigen Antworten.

Herrschsucht: vor deren Blick der Mensch kriecht und duckt und fröhnt
und niedriger wird als Schlange und Schwein:—bis endlich die grosse
Verachtung aus ihm aufschreie—,

Herrschsucht: die furchtbare Lehrerin der grossen Verachtung, welche
Städten und Reichen in’s Antlitz predigt „hinweg mit dir!“—bis es aus
ihnen selber aufschreie „hinweg mit _mir_!“

Herrschsucht: die aber lockend auch zu Reinen und Einsamen und hinauf
zu selbstgenugsamen Höhen steigt, glühend gleich einer Liebe, welche
purpurne Seligkeiten lockend an Erdenhimmel malt.

Herrschsucht: doch wer hiesse es _Sucht_, wenn das Hohe hinab nach
Macht gelüstet! Wahrlich, nichts Sieches und Süchtiges ist an solchem
Gelüsten und Niedersteigen!

Dass die einsame Höhe sich nicht ewig vereinsame und selbst begnüge;
dass der Berg zu Thale komme und die Winde der Höhe zu den
Niederungen:—

Oh wer fände den rechten Tauf- und Tugendnamen für solche Sehnsucht!
„Schenkende Tugend“—so nannte das Unnennbare einst Zarathustra.

Und damals geschah es auch,—und wahrlich, es geschah zum ersten
Male!—dass sein Wort die _Selbstsucht_ selig pries, die heile, gesunde
Selbstsucht, die aus mächtiger Seele quillt:—

—aus mächtiger Seele, zu welcher der hohe Leib gehört, der schöne,
sieghafte, erquickliche, um den herum jedwedes Ding Spiegel wird:

—der geschmeidige überredende Leib, der Tänzer, dessen Gleichniss und
Auszug die selbst-lustige Seele ist. Solcher Leiber und Seelen
Selbst-Lust heisst sich selber: „Tugend.“

Mit ihren Worten von Gut und Schlecht schirmt sich solche Selbst-Lust
wie mit heiligen Hainen; mit den Namen ihres Glücks bannt sie von sich
alles Verächtliche.

Von sich weg bannt sie alles Feige; sie spricht: Schlecht—das ist
feige! Verächtlich dünkt ihr der immer Sorgende, Seufzende, Klägliche
und wer auch die kleinsten Vortheile aufliest.

Sie verachtet auch alle wehselige Weisheit: denn, wahrlich, es giebt
auch Weisheit, die im Dunklen blüht, eine Nachtschatten-Weisheit: als
welche immer seufzt: „Alles ist eitel!“

Das scheue Misstrauen gilt ihr gering, und Jeder, wer Schwüre statt
Blicke und Hände will: auch alle allzu misstrauische Weisheit,—denn
solche ist feiger Seelen Art.

Geringer noch gilt ihr der Schnell-Gefällige, der Hündische, der gleich
auf dem Rücken liegt, der Demüthige; und auch Weisheit giebt es, die
demüthig und hündisch und fromm und schnellgefällig ist.

Verhasst ist ihr gar und ein Ekel, wer nie sich wehren will, wer
giftigen Speichel und böse Blicke hinunterschluckt, der
All-zu-Geduldige, Alles-Dulder, Allgenügsame: das nämlich ist die
knechtische Art.

Ob Einer vor Göttern und göttlichen Fusstritten knechtisch ist, ob vor
Menschen und blöden Menschen-Meinungen: _alle_ Knechts-Art speit sie
an, diese selige Selbstsucht!

Schlecht: so beisst sie Alles, was geknickt und knickerisch-knechtisch
ist, unfreie Zwinker-Augen, gedruckte Herzen, und jene falsche
nachgebende Art, welche mit breiten feigen Lippen küsst.

Und After-Weisheit: so heisst sie Alles, was Knechte und Greise und
Müde witzeln; und sonderlich die ganze schlimme aberwitzige,
überwitzige Priester-Narrheit!

Die After-Weisen aber, alle die Priester, Weltmüden und wessen Seele
von Weibs- und Knechtsart ist,—oh wie hat ihr Spiel von jeher der
Selbstsucht übel mitgespielt!

Und Das gerade sollte Tugend sein und Tugend heissen, _dass_ man der
Selbstsucht übel mitspiele! Und „selbstlos“—so wünschten sich selber
mit gutem Grunde alle diese weltmüden Feiglinge und Kreuzspinnen!

Aber denen Allen kommt nun der Tag, die Wandlung, das Richtschwert,
_der grosse Mittag_: da soll Vieles offenbar werden!

Und wer das Ich heil und heilig spricht und die Selbstsucht selig,
wahrlich, der spricht auch, was er weiss, ein Weissager: „Siehe, er
kommt, er ist nahe, der grosse Mittag!“

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Vom Geist der Schwere

1.

Mein Mundwerk—ist des Volks: zu grob und herzlich rede ich für die
Seidenhasen. Und noch fremder klingt mein Wort allen Tinten-Fischen und
Feder-Füchsen.

Meine Hand—ist eine Narrenhand: wehe allen Tischen und Wänden, und was
noch Platz hat für Narren-Zierath, Narren-Schmierath!

Mein Fuss—ist ein Pferdefuss; damit trapple und trabe ich über Stock
und Stein, kreuz- und querfeld-ein und bin des Teufels vor Lust bei
allem schnellen Laufen.

Mein Magen—ist wohl eines Adlers Magen? Denn er liebt am liebsten
Lammfleisch. Gewisslich aber ist er eines Vogels Magen.

Von unschuldigen Dingen genährt und von Wenigem, bereit und ungeduldig
zu fliegen, davonzufliegen—das ist nun meine Art: wie sollte nicht
Etwas daran von Vogel-Art sein!

Und zumal, dass ich dem Geist der Schwere feind bin, das ist Vogel-Art:
und wahrlich, todfeind, erzfeind, urfeind! Oh wohin flog und verflog
sich nicht schon meine Feindschaft!

Davon könnte ich schon ein Lied singen—- und _will_ es singen: ob ich
gleich allein in leerem Hause bin und es meinen eignen Ohren singen
muss.

Andre Sänger giebt es freilich, denen macht das volle Haus erst ihre
Kehle weide, ihre Hand gesprächig, ihr Auge ausdrücklich, ihr Herz
wach:—Denen gleiche ich nicht.—

2.

Wer die Menschen einst fliegen lehrt, der hat alle Grenzsteine
verrückt; alle Grenzsteine selber werden ihm in die Luft fliegen, die
Erde wird er neu taufen —als „die Leichte.“

Der Vogel Strauss läuft schneller als das schnellste Pferd, aber auch
er steckt noch den Kopf schwer in schwere Erde: also der Mensch, der
noch nicht fliegen kann.

Schwer heisst ihm Erde und Leben; und so _will_ es der Geist der
Schwere! Wer aber leicht werden will und ein Vogel, der muss sich
selber lieben:—also lehre _ich_.

Nicht freilich mit der Liebe der Siechen und Süchtigen: denn bei denen
stinkt auch die Eigenliebe!

Man muss sich selber lieben lernen—also lehre ich—mit einer heilen und
gesunden Liebe: dass man es bei sich selber aushalte und nicht
umherschweife.

Solches Umherschweifen tauft sich „Nächstenliebe“ : mit diesem Worte
ist bisher am besten gelogen und geheuchelt worden, und sonderlich von
Solchen, die aller Welt schwer fielen.

Und wahrlich, das ist kein Gebot für Heute und Morgen, sich lieben
_lernen_. Vielmehr ist von allen Künsten diese die feinste, listigste,
letzte und geduldsamste.

Für seinen Eigener ist nämlich alles Eigene gut versteckt; und von
allen Schatzgruben wird die eigne am spätesten ausgegraben,—also
schafft es der Geist der Schwere.

Fast in der Wiege giebt man uns schon schwere Worte und Werthe mit:
„gut“ und „böse“ —so heisst sich diese Mitgift. Um derentwillen
vergiebt man uns, dass wir leben.

Und dazu lässt man die Kindlein zu sich kommen, dass man ihnen bei
Zeiten wehre, sich selber zu lieben: also schafft es der Geist der
Schwere.

Und wir—wir schleppen treulich, was man uns mitgiebt, auf harten
Schultern und über rauhe Berge! Und schwitzen wir, so sagt man uns:
„Ja, das Leben ist schwer zu tragen!“

Aber der Mensch nur ist sich schwer zu tragen! Das macht, er schleppt
zu vieles Fremde auf seinen Schultern. Dem Kameele gleich kniet er
nieder und lässt sich gut aufladen.

Sonderlich der starke, tragsame Mensch, dem Ehrfurcht innewohnt: zu
viele _fremde_ schwere Worte und Werthe lädt er auf sich,—nun dünkt das
Leben ihm eine Wüste!

Und wahrlich! Auch manches _Eigene_ ist schwer zu tragen! Und viel
Inwendiges am Menschen ist der Auster gleich, nämlich ekel und
schlüpfrig und schwer erfasslich—,

—also dass eine edle Schale mit edler Zierath fürbitten muss. Aber auch
diese Kunst muss man lernen: Schale _haben_ und schönen Schein und
kluge Blindheit!

Abermals trügt über Manches am Menschen, dass manche Schale gering und
traurig und zu sehr Schale ist. Viel verborgene Güte und Kraft wird nie
errathen; die köstlichsten Leckerbissen finden keine Schmecker!

Die Frauen wissen das, die köstlichsten: ein Wenig fetter, ein Wenig
magerer—oh wie viel Schicksal liegt in so Wenigem!

Der Mensch ist schwer zu entdecken und sich selber noch am schwersten;
oft lügt der Geist über die Seele. Also schafft es der Geist der
Schwere.

Der aber hat sich selber entdeckt, welcher spricht: Das ist _mein_
Gutes und Böses: damit hat er den Maulwurf und Zwerg stumm gemacht,
welcher spricht „Allen gut, Allen bös.“

Wahrlich, ich mag auch Solche nicht, denen jegliches Ding gut und diese
Welt gar die beste heisst. Solche nenne ich die Allgenügsamen.

Allgenügsamkeit, die Alles zu schmecken weiss: das ist nicht der beste
Geschmack! Ich ehre die widerspänstigen wählerischen Zungen und Mägen,
welche „Ich“ und „Ja“ und „Nein“  sagen lernten.

Alles aber kauen und verdauen—das ist eine rechte Schweine-Art! Immer
I-a sagen—das lernte allein der Esel, und wer seines Geistes ist!—

Das tiefe Gelb und das heisse Roth: so will es _mein_ Geschmack,—der
mischt Blut zu allen Farben. Wer aber sein Haus weiss tüncht, der
verräth mir eine weissgetünchte Seele.

In Mumien verliebt die Einen, die Andern in Gespenster; und Beide
gleich feind allem Fleisch und Blute—oh wie gehen Beide mir wider den
Geschmack! Denn ich liebe Blut.

Und dort will ich nicht wohnen und weilen, wo Jedermann spuckt und
speit: das ist nun _mein_ Geschmack,—lieber noch lebte ich unter Dieben
und Meineidigen. Niemand trägt Gold im Munde.

Widriger aber sind mir noch alle Speichellecker; und das widrigste
Thier von Mensch, das ich fand, das taufte ich Schmarotzer: das wollte
nicht lieben und doch von Liebe leben.

Unselig heisse ich Alle, die nur Eine Wahl haben: böse Thiere zu werden
oder böse Thierbändiger: bei Solchen würde ich mir keine Hütten bauen.

Unselig heisse ich auch Die, welche immer _warten_ müssen,—die gehen
mir wider den Geschmack: alle die Zöllner und Krämer und Könige und
andren Länder- und Ladenhüter.

Wahrlich, ich lernte das Warten auch und von Grund aus,

—aber nur das Warten auf _mich_. Und über Allem lernte ich stehn und
gehn und laufen und springen und klettern und tanzen.

Das ist aber meine Lehre: wer einst fliegen lernen will, der muss erst
stehn und gehn und laufen und klettern und tanzen lernen:—man erfliegt
das Fliegen nicht!

Mit Strickleitern lernte ich manches Fenster erklettern, mit hurtigen
Beinen klomm ich auf hohe Masten: auf hohen Masten der Erkenntniss
sitzen dünkte mich keine geringe Seligkeit,—

—gleich kleinen Flammen flackern auf hohen Masten: ein kleines Licht
zwar, aber doch ein grosser Trost für verschlagene Schiffer und
Schiffbrüchige!—

Auf vielerlei Weg und Weise kam ich zu meiner Wahrheit; nicht auf Einer
Leiter stieg ich zur Höhe, wo mein Auge in meine Ferne schweift.

Und ungern nur fragte ich stets nach Wegen,—das gieng mir immer wider
den Geschmack! Lieber fragte und versuchte ich die Wege selber.

Ein Versuchen und Fragen war all mein Gehen:—und wahrlich, auch
antworten muss man _lernen_ auf solches Fragen! Das aber—ist mein
Geschmack:

—kein guter, kein schlechter, aber _mein_ Geschmack, dessen ich weder
Scham noch Hehl mehr habe.

„Das—ist nun _mein_ Weg,—wo ist der eure?“ so antwortete ich Denen,
welche mich „nach dem Wege“  fragten. _Den_ Weg nämlich—den giebt es
nicht!

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Von alten und neuen Tafeln

1.

Hier sitze ich und warte, alte zerbrochene Tafeln um mich und auch neue
halb beschriebene Tafeln. Wann kommt meine Stunde?

—die Stunde meines Niederganges, Unterganges: denn noch Ein Mal will
ich zu den Menschen gehn.

Dess warte ich nun: denn erst müssen mir die Zeichen kommen, dass es
_meine_ Stunde sei,—nämlich der lachende Löwe mit dem Taubenschwarme.

Inzwischen rede ich als Einer, der Zeit hat, zu mir selber. Niemand
erzählt mir Neues: so erzähle ich mir mich selber.—

2.

Als ich zu den Menschen kam, da fand ich sie sitzen auf einem alten
Dünkel: Alle dünkten sich lange schon zu wissen, was dem Menschen gut
und böse sei.

Eine alte müde Sache dünkte ihnen alles Reden von Tugend; und wer gut
schlafen wollte, der sprach vor Schlafengehen noch von „Gut“ und „Böse“
.

Diese Schläferei störte ich auf, als ich lehrte: was gut und böse ist,
_das weiss noch Niemand_:—es sei denn der Schaffende!

—Das aber ist Der, welcher des Menschen Ziel schafft und der Erde ihren
Sinn giebt und ihre Zukunft: Dieser erst _schafft_ es, _dass_ Etwas gut
und böse ist.

Und ich hiess sie ihre alten Lehr-Stühle umwerfen, und wo nur jener
alte Dünkel gesessen hatte; ich hiess sie lachen über ihre grossen
Tugend-Meister und Heiligen und Dichter und Welt-Erlöser.

Über ihre düsteren Weisen hiess ich sie lachen, und wer je als schwarze
Vogelscheuche warnend auf dem Baume des Lebens gesessen hatte.

An ihre grosse Gräberstrasse setzte ich mich und selber zu Aas und
Geiern—und ich lachte über all ihr Einst und seine mürbe verfallende
Herrlichkeit.

Wahrlich, gleich Busspredigern und Narrn schrie ich Zorn und Zeter über
all ihr Grosses und Kleines—, dass ihr Bestes so gar klein ist! Dass
ihr Bösestes so gar klein ist!—also lachte ich.

Meine weise Sehnsucht schrie und lachte also aus mir, die auf Bergen
geboren ist, eine wilde Weisheit wahrlich!—meine grosse flügelbrausende
Sehnsucht.

Und oft riss sie mich fort und hinauf und hinweg und mitten im Lachen:
da flog ich wohl schaudernd, ein Pfeil, durch sonnentrunkenes
Entzücken:

—hinaus in ferne Zukünfte, die kein Traum noch sah, in heissere Süden,
als je sich Bildner träumten: dorthin, wo Götter tanzend sich aller
Kleider schämen:—

—dass ich nämlich in Gleichnissen rede und gleich Dichtern hinke und
stammle: und wahrlich, ich schäme mich, dass ich noch Dichter sein
muss!—

Wo alles Werden mich Götter-Tanz und Götter-Muthwillen dünkte, und die
Welt los- und ausgelassen und zu sich selber zurückfliehend:—

—als ein ewiges Sich-fliehn und -Wiedersuchen vieler Götter, als das
selige Sich-Widersprechen, Sich-Wieder-hören, Sich-Wieder-Zugehören
vieler Götter:—

Wo alle Zeit mich ein seliger Hohn auf Augenblicke dünkte, wo die
Nothwendigkeit die Freiheit selber war, die selig mit dem Stachel der
Freiheit spielte:—

Wo ich auch meinen alten Teufel und Erzfeind wiederfand, den Geist der
Schwere und Alles, was er schuf: Zwang, Satzung, Noth und Folge und
Zweck und Wille und Gut und Böse:—

Denn muss nicht dasein, _über_ das getanzt, hinweggetanzt werde? Müssen
nicht um der Leichten, Leichtesten willen—Maulwürfe und schwere Zwerge
dasein?—

3.

Dort war’s auch, wo ich das Wort „Übermensch“ vom Wege auflas, und dass
der Mensch Etwas sei, das überwunden werden müsse,

—dass der Mensch eine Brücke sei und kein Zweck: sich selig preisend ob
seines Mittags und Abends, als Weg zu neuen Morgenröthen:

—das Zarathustra-Wort vom grossen Mittage, und was sonst ich über den
Menschen aufhängte, gleich purpurnen zweiten Abendröthen.

Wahrlich, auch neue Sterne liess ich sie sehn sammt neuen Nächten; und
über Wolken und Tag und Nacht spannte ich noch das Lachen aus wie ein
buntes Gezelt.

Ich lehrte sie all _mein_ Dichten und Trachten: in Eins zu dichten und
zusammen zu tragen, was Bruchstück ist am Menschen und Räthsel und
grauser Zufall,—

—als Dichter, Räthselrather und Erlöser des Zufalls lehrte ich sie an
der Zukunft schaffen, und Alles, das _war_—, schaffend zu erlösen.

Das Vergangne am Menschen zu erlösen und alles „Es war“ umzuschauen,
bis der Wille spricht: „Aber so wollte ich es! So werde ich’s wollen—“

—Diess hiess ich ihnen Erlösung, Diess allein lehrte ich sie Erlösung
heissen. -—

Nun warte ich _meiner_ Erlösung—, dass ich zum letzten Male zu ihnen
gehe.

Denn noch Ein Mal will ich zu den Menschen: _unter_ ihnen will ich
untergehen, sterbend will ich ihnen meine reichste Gabe geben!

Der Sonne lernte ich Das ab, wenn sie hinabgeht, die Überreiche: Gold
schüttet sie da in’s Meer aus unerschöpflichem Reichthume,—

—also, dass der ärmste Fischer noch mit _goldenem_ Ruder rudert! Diess
nämlich sah ich einst und wurde der Thränen nicht satt im Zuschauen.—

Der Sonne gleich will auch Zarathustra untergehn: nun sitzt er hier und
wartet, alte zerbrochne Tafeln um sich und auch neue
Tafeln,—halbbeschriebene.

4.

Siehe, hier ist eine neue Tafel: aber wo sind meine Brüder, die sie mit
mir zu Thale und in fleischerne Herzen tragen?—

Also heischt es meine grosse Liebe zu den Fernsten: schone deinen
Nächsten nicht! Der Mensch ist Etwas, das überwunden werden muss.

Es giebt vielerlei Weg und Weise der Überwindung.- da siehe _du_ zu!
Aber nur ein Possenreisser denkt: „der Mensch kann auch _übersprungen_
werden.“

Überwinde dich selber noch in deinem Nächsten: und ein Recht, das du
dir rauben kannst, sollst du dir nicht geben lassen!

Was du thust, das kann dir Keiner wieder thun. Siehe, es giebt keine
Vergeltung.

Wer sich nicht befehlen kann, der soll gehorchen. Und Mancher _kann_
sich befehlen, aber da fehlt noch Viel, dass er sich auch gehorche!

5.

Also will es die Art edler Seelen: sie wollen Nichts _umsonst_ haben,
am wenigsten das Leben.

Wer vom Pöbel ist, der will umsonst leben; wir Anderen aber, denen das
Leben sich gab,—wir sinnen immer darüber, _was_ wir am besten _dagegen_
geben!

Und wahrlich, diess ist eine vornehme Rede, welche spricht: „was _uns_
das Leben verspricht, das wollen _wir_—dem Leben halten!“

Man soll nicht geniessen wollen, wo man nicht zu geniessen giebt.
Und—man soll nicht geniessen _wollen_!

Genuss und Unschuld nämlich sind die schamhaftesten Dinge: Beide wollen
nicht gesucht sein. Man soll sie _haben_—, aber man soll eher noch nach
Schuld und Schmerzen _suchen_!—

6.

Oh meine Brüder, wer ein Erstling ist, der wird immer geopfert. Nun
aber sind wir Erstlinge.

Wir bluten Alle an geheimen Opfertischen, wir brennen und braten Alle
zu Ehren alter Götzenbilder.

Unser Bestes ist noch jung: das reizt alte Gaumen. Unser Fleisch ist
zart, unser Fell ist nur ein Lamm-Fell:—wie sollten wir nicht alte
Götzenpriester reizen!

_In uns selber_ wohnt er noch, der alte Götzenpriester, der unser
Bestes sich zum Schmause brät. Ach, meine Brüder, wie sollten Erstlinge
nicht Opfer sein!

Aber so will es unsre Art; und ich liebe Die, welche sich nicht
bewahren wollen. Die Untergehenden liebe ich mit meiner ganzen Liebe:
denn sie gehn hinüber.—

7.

Wahr sein—das _können_ Wenige! Und wer es kann, der will es noch nicht!
Am wenigsten aber können es die Guten.

Oh diese Guten!—Gute Menschen reden nie die Wahrheit; für den Geist ist
solchermaassen gut sein eine Krankheit.

Sie geben nach, diese Guten, sie ergeben sich, ihr Herz spricht nach,
ihr Grund gehorcht; wer aber gehorcht, der hört sich selber nicht!

Alles, was den Guten böse heisst, muss zusammen kommen, dass Eine
Wahrheit geboren werde: oh meine Brüder, seid ihr auch böse genug zu
_dieser_ Wahrheit?

Das verwegene Wagen, das lange Misstrauen, das grausame Nein, der
Überdruss, das Schneiden in’s Lebendige—wie selten kommt _das_
zusammen! Aus solchem Samen aber wird Wahrheit gezeugt!

_Neben_ dem bösen Gewissen wuchs bisher alles _Wissen_! Zerbrecht,
zerbrecht mir, ihr Erkennenden, die alten Tafeln!

8.

Wenn das Wasser Balken hat, wenn Stege und Geländer über den Fluss
springen: wahrlich, da findet Keiner Glauben, der da spricht: „Alles
ist im Fluss.“

Sondern selber die Tölpel widersprechen ihm. „Wie? sagen die Tölpel,
Alles wäre im Flusse? Balken und Geländer sind doch _über_ dem Flusse!“

„_Über_ dem Flusse ist Alles fest, alle die Werthe der Dinge, die
Brücken, Begriffe, alles „Gut“ und „Böse“: das ist Alles fest!“—

Kommt gar der harte Winter, der Fluss-Thierbändiger: dann lernen auch
die Witzigsten Misstrauen; und, wahrlich, nicht nur die Tölpel sprechen
dann: „Sollte nicht Alles—_stille stehn_?“

„Im Grunde steht Alles stille“ —, das ist eine rechte Winter-Lehre, ein
gut Ding für unfruchtbare Zeit, ein guter Trost für Winterschläfer und
Ofenhocker.

„Im Grund steht Alles still“—: _dagegen_ aber predigt der Thauwind!

Der Thauwind, ein Stier, der kein pflügender Stier ist,—ein wüthender
Stier, ein Zerstörer, der mit zornigen Hörnern Eis bricht! Eis aber—
_bricht Stege_!

Oh meine Brüder, ist _jetzt_ nicht Alles _im Flusse_? Sind nicht alle
Geländer und Stege in’s Wasser gefallen? Wer _hielte_ sich noch an
„Gut“ und „Böse“ ?

„Wehe uns! Heil uns! Der Thauwind weht!“—Also predigt mir, oh meine
Brüder, durch alle Gassen!

8.

Es giebt einen alten Wahn, der heisst Gut und Böse. Um Wahrsager und
Sterndeuter drehte sich bisher das Rad dieses Wahns.

Einst glaubte man an Wahrsager und Sterndeuter: und darum glaubte man
„Alles ist Schicksal: du sollst, denn du musst!“

Dann wieder misstraute man allen Wahrsagern und Sterndeutern: und
_darum_ glaubte man „Alles ist Freiheit: du kannst, denn du willst!“

Oh meine Brüder, über Sterne und Zukunft ist bisher nur gewähnt, nicht
gewusst worden: und _darum_ ist über Gut und Böse bisher nur gewähnt,
nicht gewusst worden!

10.

„Du sollst nicht rauben! Du sollst nicht todtschlagen!“—solche Worte
hiess man einst heilig; vor ihnen beugte man Knie und Köpfe und zog die
Schuhe aus.

Aber ich frage euch: wo gab es je bessere Räuber und Todtschläger in
der Welt, als es solche heilige Worte waren?

Ist in allem Leben selber nicht—Rauben und Todtschlagen? Und dass
solche Worte heilig hiessen, wurde damit die _Wahrheit_ selber
nicht—todtgeschlagen?

Oder war es eine Predigt des Todes, dass heilig hiess, was allem Leben
widersprach und widerrieth?—Oh meine Brüder, zerbrecht, zerbrecht mir
die alten tafeln!

11.

Diess ist mein Mitleid mit allem Vergangenen, dass ich sehe: es ist
preisgegeben,—

—der Gnade, dem Geiste, dem Wahnsinne jedes Geschlechtes preisgegeben,
das kommt und Alles, was war, zu seiner Brücke umdeutet!

Ein grosser Gewalt-Herr könnte kommen, ein gewitzter Unhold, der mit
seiner Gnade und Ungnade alles Vergangene zwänge und zwängte: bis es
ihm Brücke würde und Vorzeichen und Herold und Hahnenschrei.

Diess aber ist die andre Gefahr und mein andres Mitleiden:—wer vom
Pöbel ist, dessen Gedenken geht zurück bis zum Grossvater,—mit dem
Grossvater aber hört die Zeit auf.

Also ist alles Vergangene preisgegeben: denn es könnte einmal kommen,
dass der Pöbel Herr würde und in seichten Gewässern alle Zeit ertränke.

Darum, oh meine Brüder, bedarf es eines _neuen Adels_, der allem Pöbel
und allem Gewalt-Herrischen Widersacher ist und auf neue Tafeln neu das
Wort schreibt „edel“.

Vieler Edlen nämlich bedarf es und vielerlei Edlen, dass es Adel gebe!
Oder, wie ich einst im Gleichniss sprach: „Das eben ist Göttlichkeit,
dass es Götter, aber keinen Gott giebt!“

12.

Oh meine Brüder, ich weihe und weise euch zu einem neuen Adel: ihr
sollt mir Zeuger und Züchter werden und Säemänner der Zukunft,—

—wahrlich, nicht zu einem Adel, den ihr kaufen könntet gleich den
Krämern und mit Krämer-Golde: denn wenig Werth hat Alles, was seinen
Preis hat.

Nicht, woher ihr kommt, mache euch fürderhin eure Ehre, sondern wohin
ihr geht! Euer Wille und euer Fuss, der über euch selber hinaus
will,—das mache eure neue Ehre!

Wahrlich nicht, dass ihr einem Fürsten gedient habt—was liegt noch an
Fürsten!—oder dem, was steht, zum Bollwerk wurdet, dass es fester
stünde!

Nicht, dass euer Geschlecht an Höfen höfisch wurde, und ihr lerntet,
bunt, einem Flamingo ähnlich, lange Stunden in flachen Teichen stehn.

—Denn Stehen-_können_ ist ein Verdienst bei Höflingen; und alle
Höflinge glauben, zur Seligkeit nach dem Tode gehöre—Sitzen-_dürfen_!—

Nicht auch, dass ein Geist, den sie heilig nennen, eure Vorfahren in
gelobte Länder führte, die _ich_ nicht lobe: denn wo der schlimmste
aller Bäume wuchs, das Kreuz,—an dem Lande ist Nichts zu loben!—

—und wahrlich, wohin dieser „heilige Geist“ auch seine Ritter führte,
immer liefen bei solchen Zügen—Ziegen und Gänse und Kreuz- und
Querköpfe _voran_!—

Oh meine Brüder, nicht zurück soll euer Adel schauen, sondern _hinaus_!
Vertriebene sollt ihr sein aus allen Vater- und Urväterländern!

Eurer Kinder Land sollt ihr lieben: diese Liebe sei euer neuer
Adel,—das unentdeckte, im feinsten Meere! Nach ihm heisse ich eure
Segel suchen und suchen!

An euren Kindern sollt ihr _gutmachen_, dass ihr eurer Väter Kinder
seid: alles Vergangene sollt ihr _so_ erlösen! Diese neue Tafel stelle
ich über euch!

13.

„Wozu leben? Alles ist eitel! Leben—das ist Stroh dreschen; Leben—das
ist sich verbrennen und doch nicht warm werden.“—

Solch alterthümliches Geschwätz gilt immer noch als „Weisheit“; dass es
aber alt ist und dumpfig riecht, _darum_ wird es besser geehrt. Auch
der Moder adelt.—

Kinder durften so reden: die _scheuen_ das Feuer, weil es sie brannte!
Es ist viel Kinderei in den alten Büchern der Weisheit.

Und wer immer „Stroh drischt“, wie sollte der auf das Dreschen lästern
dürfen! Solchem Narren müsste man doch das Maul verbinden!

Solche setzen sich zu Tisch und bringen Nichts mit, selbst den guten
Hunger nicht:—und nun lästern sie „Alles ist eitel!“

Aber gut essen und trinken, oh meine Brüder, ist wahrlich keine eitle
Kunst! Zerbrecht, zerbrecht mir die Tafeln der Nimmer-Frohen!

14.

„Dem Reinen ist Alles rein“ —so spricht das Volk. Ich aber sage euch:
den Schweinen wird Alles Schwein!

Darum predigen die Schwärmer und Kopfhänger, denen auch das Herz
niederhängt: „die Welt selber ist ein kothiges Ungeheuer.“

Denn diese Alle sind unsäuberlichen Geistes; sonderlich aber Jene,
welche nicht Ruhe, noch Rast haben, es sei denn, sie sehen die Welt
_von hinten_,—die Hinterweltler!

_Denen_ sage ich in’s Gesicht, ob es gleich nicht lieblich klingt: die
Welt gleicht darin dem Menschen, dass sie einen Hintern hat,—_so Viel_
ist wahr!

Es giebt in der Welt viel Koth: _so Viel_ ist wahr! Aber darum ist die
Welt selber noch kein kothiges Ungeheuer!

Es ist Weisheit darin, dass Vieles in der Welt übel riecht: der Ekel
selber schafft Flügel und quellenahnende Kräfte!

An dem Besten ist noch Etwas zum Ekeln; und der Beste ist noch Etwas,
das überwunden werden muss!—

Oh meine Brüder, es ist viel Weisheit darin, dass viel Koth in der Welt
ist!—

15.

Solche Sprüche hörte ich fromme Hinterweltler zu ihrem Gewissen reden;
und wahrlich, ohne Arg und Falsch,—ob es Schon nichts Falscheres in der
Welt giebt, noch Ärgeres.

„Lass doch die Welt der Welt sein! Hebe dawider auch nicht Einen Finger
auf!“

„Lass, wer da wolle, die Leute würgen und stechen und schneiden und
schaben: hebe dawider auch nicht Einen Finger auf! Darob lernen sie
noch der Welt absagen.“

„Und deine eigne Vernunft—die sollst du selber görgeln und würgen; denn
es ist eine Vernunft von dieser Welt,—darob lernst du selber der Welt
absagen.“ -

—Zerbrecht, zerbrecht mir, oh meine Brüder, diese alten Tafeln der
Frommen! Zersprecht mir die Sprüche der Welt-Verleumder!

16.

„Wer viel lernt, der verlernt alles heftige Begehren“ —das flüstert man
heute sich zu auf allen dunklen Gassen.

„Weisheit macht müde, es lohnt sich—Nichts; du sollst nicht
begehren!“—diese neue Tafel fand ich hängen selbst auf offnen Märkten.

Zerbrecht mir, oh meine Brüder, zerbrecht mir auch diese _neue_ Tafel!
Die Welt-Müden hängten sie hin und die Prediger des Todes, und auch die
Stockmeister: denn seht, es ist auch eine Predigt zur Knechtschaft!—

Dass sie schlecht lernten und das Beste nicht, und Alles zu früh und
Alles zu geschwind: dass sie schlecht _assen_, daher kam ihnen jener
verdorbene Magen,—

—ein verdorbener Magen ist nämlich ihr Geist: _der_ räth zum Tode! Denn
wahrlich, meine Brüder, der Geist _ist_ ein Magen!

Das Leben ist ein Born der Lust: aber aus wem der verdorbene Magen
redet, der Vater der Trübsal, dem sind alle Quellen vergiftet.

Erkennen: das ist _Lust_ dem Löwen-willigen! Aber wer müde wurde, der
wird selber nur „gewollt“, mit dem spielen alle Wellen.

Und so ist es immer schwacher Menschen Art: sie verlieren sich auf
ihren Wegen. Und zuletzt fragt noch ihre Müdigkeit: „wozu giengen wir
jemals Wege! Es ist Alles gleich!“

_Denen_ klingt es lieblich zu Ohren, dass gepredigt wird: „Es verlohnt
sich Nichts! Ihr sollt nicht wollen!“ Diess aber ist eine Predigt zur
Knechtschaft.

Oh meine Brüder, ein frischer Brause-Wind kommt Zarathustra allen
Weg-Müden; viele Nasen wird er noch niesen machen!

Auch durch Mauern bläst mein freier Athem, und hinein in Gefängnisse
und eingefangne Geister!

Wollen befreit: denn Wollen ist Schaffen: so lehre ich. Und _nur_ zum
Schaffen sollt ihr lernen!

Und auch das Lernen sollt ihr erst von mir _lernen_, das
Gut-Lernen!—Wer Ohren hat, der höre!

17.

Da steht der Nachen,—dort hinüber geht es vielleicht in’s grosse
Nichts.—Aber wer will in diess „Vielleicht“ einsteigen?

Niemand von euch will in den Todes-Nachen einsteigen! Wieso wollt ihr
dann _Welt-Müde_ sein!

Weltmüde! Und noch nicht einmal Erd-Entrückte wurdet ihr! Lüstern fand
ich euch immer noch nach Erde, verliebt noch in die eigne
Erd-Müdigkeit!

Nicht umsonst hängt euch die Lippe herab:—ein kleiner Erden-Wunsch
sitzt noch darauf! Und im Auge—schwimmt da nicht ein Wölkchen
unvergessner Erden-Lust?

Es giebt auf Erden viel gute Erfindungen, die einen nützlich, die
andern angenehm: derentwegen ist die Erde zu lieben.

Und mancherlei so gut Erfundenes giebt es da, dass es ist wie des
Weibes Busen: nützlich zugleich und angenehm.

Ihr Welt-Müden aber! Ihr Erden-Faulen! Euch soll man mit Ruthen
streichen! Mit Ruthenstreichen soll man euch wieder muntre Beine
machen.

Denn: seid ihr nicht Kranke und verlebte Wichte, deren die Erde müde
ist, so seid ihr schlaue Faulthiere oder naschhafte verkrochene
Lust-Katzen. Und wollt ihr nicht wieder lustig _laufen_, so sollt
ihr—dahinfahren!

An Unheilbaren soll man nicht Arzt sein wollen: also lehrt es
Zarathustra:—so sollt ihr dahinfahren!

Aber es gehört mehr _Muth_ dazu, ein Ende zu machen, als einen neuen
Vers: das wissen alle Ärzte und Dichter.—

18.

Oh meine Brüder, es giebt Tafeln, welche die Ermüdung, und Tafeln,
welche die Faulheit schuf, die faulige: ob sie schon gleich reden, so
wollen sie doch ungleich gehört sein.—

Seht hier diesen Verschmachtenden! Nur eine Spanne weit ist er noch von
seinem Ziele, aber vor Müdigkeit hat er sich trotzig hier in den Staub
gelegt: dieser Tapfere!

Vor Müdigkeit gähnt er Weg und Erde und Ziel und sich selber an: keinen
Schritt will er noch weiter thun,—dieser Tapfere!

Nun glüht die Sonne auf ihn, und die Hunde lecken nach seinem
Schweisse: aber er liegt da in seinem Trotze und will lieber
verschmachten:—

—eine Spanne weit von seinem Ziele verschmachten! Wahrlich, ihr werdet
ihn noch an den Haaren in seinen Himmel ziehen müssen,—diesen Helden!

Besser noch, ihr lasst ihn liegen, wohin er sich gelegt hat, dass der
Schlaf ihm komme, der Tröster, mit kühlendem Rausche-Regen:

Lasst ihn liegen, bis er von selber wach wird, bis er von selber alle
Müdigkeit widerruft und was Müdigkeit aus ihm lehrte!

Nur, meine Brüder, dass ihr die Hunde von ihm scheucht, die faulen
Schleicher, und all das schwärmende Geschmeiss:—

—all das schwärmende Geschmeiss der „Gebildeten“ , das sich am
Schweisse jedes Helden—gütlich thut!—

19.

Ich schliesse Kreise um mich und heilige Grenzen; immer Wenigere
steigen mit mir auf immer höhere Berge,—ich baue ein Gebirge aus immer
heiligeren Bergen. -

Wohin ihr aber auch mit mir steigen mögt, oh meine Brüder: seht zu,
dass nicht ein _Schmarotzer_ mit euch steige!

Schmarotzer: das ist ein Gewürm, ein kriechendes, geschmiegtes, das
fett werden will an euren kranken wunden Winkeln.

Und _das_ ist seine Kunst, dass er steigende Seelen erräth, wo sie müde
sind: in euren Gram und Unmuth, in eure zarte Scham baut er sein ekles
Nest.

Wo der Starke schwach, der Edle allzumild ist,—dahinein baut er sein
ekles Nest: der Schmarotzer wohnt, wo der Grosse kleine wunde Winkel
hat.

Was ist die höchste Art alles Seienden und was die geringste? Der
Schmarotzer ist die geringste Art; wer aber höchster Art ist, der
ernährt die meisten Schmarotzer.

Die Seele nämlich, welche die längste Leiter hat und am tiefsten
hinunter kann: wie sollten nicht an der die meisten Schmarotzer
sitzen?—

—die umfänglichste Seele, welche am weitesten in sich laufen und irren
und schweifen kann; die nothwendigste, welche sich aus Lust in den
Zufall stürzt:—

—die seiende Seele, welche in’s Werden taucht; die habende, welche in’s
Wollen und Verlangen _will_:—

—die sich selber fliehende, die sich selber im weitesten Kreise
einholt; die weiseste Seele, welcher die Narrheit am süssesten
zuredet:—

—die sich selber liebendste, in der alle Dinge ihr Strömen und
Wiederströmen und Ebbe und Fluth haben:—oh wie sollte _die höchste
Seele_ nicht die schlimmsten Schmarotzer haben?

20.

Oh meine Brüder, bin ich denn grausam? Aber ich sage: was fällt, das
soll man auch noch stossen!

Das Alles von Heute—das fällt, das verfällt: wer wollte es halten! Aber
ich—ich _will_ es noch stossen!

Kennt ihr die Wollust, die Steine in steile Tiefen rollt?—Diese
Menschen von heute: seht sie doch, wie sie in meine Tiefen rollen!

Ein Vorspiel bin ich besserer Spieler, oh meine Brüder! Ein Beispiel!
_Thut_ nach meinem Beispiele!

Und wen ihr nicht fliegen lehrt, den lehrt mir—schneller fallen!—

21.

Ich liebe die Tapferen: aber es ist nicht genug, Hau-Degen sein,—man
muss auch wissen Hau-schau-_Wen_!

Und oft ist mehr Tapferkeit darin, dass Einer an sich hält und
vorübergeht: _damit_ er sich dem würdigeren Feinde aufspare!

Ich sollt nur Feinde haben, die zu hassen sind, aber nicht Feinde zum
Verachten: ihr müsst stolz auf euren Feind sein: also lehrte ich schon
Ein Mal.

Dem würdigeren Feinde, oh meine Freunde, sollt ihr euch aufsparen:
darum müsst ihr an Vielem vorübergehn,—

—sonderlich an vielem Gesindel, das euch in die Ohren lärmt von Volk
und Völkern.

Haltet euer Auge rein von ihrem Für und Wider! Da giebt es viel Recht,
viel Unrecht: wer da zusieht, wird zornig.

Dreinschaun, dreinhaun—das ist da Eins: darum geht weg in die Wälder
und legt euer Schwert schlafen!

Geht _eure_ Wege! Und lasst Volk und Völker die ihren gehn!—dunkle Wege
wahrlich, auf denen auch nicht Eine Hoffnung mehr wetterleuchtet!

Mag da der Krämer herrschen, wo Alles, was noch glänzt—Krämer-Gold ist!
Es ist die Zeit der Könige nicht mehr: was sich heute Volk heisst,
verdient keine Könige.

Seht doch, wie diese Völker jetzt selber den Krämern gleich thun: sie
lesen sich die kleinsten Vortheile noch aus jedem Kehricht!

Sie lauern einander auf, sie lauern einander Etwas ab,—das heissen sie
„gute Nachbarschaft.“ Oh selige ferne Zeit, wo ein Volk sich sagte:
„ich will über Völker—_Herr_ sein!“

Denn, meine Brüder: das Beste soll herrschen, das Beste will auch
herrschen! Und wo die Lehre anders lautet, da—_fehlt_ es am Besten.

22.

Wenn _Die_—Brod umsonst hätten, wehe! Wonach würden _Die_ schrein! Ihr
Unterhalt—das ist ihre rechte Unterhaltung; und sie sollen es schwer
haben!

Raubthiere sind es.- in ihrem „Arbeiten“ —da ist auch noch Rauben, in
ihrem „Verdienen“ —da ist auch noch Überlisten! Darum sollen sie es
schwer haben!

Bessere Raubthiere sollen sie also werden, feinere, klügere,
_menschen-ähnlichere_: der Mensch nämlich ist das beste Raubthier.

Allen Thieren hat der Mensch schon ihre Tugenden abgeraubt: das macht,
von allen Thieren hat es der Mensch am schwersten gehabt.

Nur noch die Vögel sind über ihm. Und wenn der Mensch noch fliegen
lernte, wehe! _wohinauf_—würde seine Raublust fliegen!

23.

So will ich Mann und Weib: kriegstüchtig den Einen, gebärtüchtig das
Andre, beide aber tanztüchtig mit Kopf und Beinen.

Und verloren sei uns der Tag, wo nicht Ein Mal getanzt wurde! Und
falsch heisse uns jede Wahrheit, bei der es nicht Ein Gelächter gab!

24.

Euer Eheschliessen: seht zu, dass es nicht ein schlechtes _Schliessen_
sei! Ihr schlosset zu schnell: so _folgt_ daraus—Ehebrechen!

Und besser noch Ehebrechen als Ehe-biegen, Ehelügen!—So sprach mir ein
Weib: „wohl brach ich die Ehe, aber zuerst brach die Ehe—mich!“

Schlimm-Gepaarte fand ich immer als die schlimmsten Rachsüchtigen: sie
lassen es aller Welt entgelten, dass sie nicht mehr einzeln laufen.

Desswillen will ich, dass Redliche zu einander reden: „wir lieben uns:
lasst uns _zusehn_, dass wir uns lieb behalten! Oder soll unser
Versprechen ein Versehen sein?“

—„Gebt uns eine Frist und kleine Ehe, dass wir zusehn, ob wir zur
grossen Ehe taugen! Es ist ein grosses Ding, immer zu Zwein sein!“

Also rathe ich allen Redlichen; und was wäre denn meine Liebe zum
Übermenschen und zu Allem, was kommen soll, wenn ich anders riethe und
redete!

Nicht nur fort euch zu pflanzen, sondern _hinauf_—dazu, oh meine
Brüder, helfe euch der Garten der Ehe!

25.

Wer über alte Ursprünge weise wurde, siehe, der wird zuletzt nach
Quellen der Zukunft suchen und nach neuen Ursprüngen.—

Oh meine Brüder, es ist nicht über lange, da werden _neue Völker_
entspringen und neue Quellen hinab in neue Tiefen rauschen.

Das Erdbeben nämlich—das verschüttet viel Brunnen, das schafft viel
Verschmachten: das hebt auch innre Kräfte und Heimlichkeiten an’s
Licht.

Das Erdbeben macht neue Quellen offenbar. Im Erdbeben alter Völker
brechen neue Quellen aus.

Und wer da ruft: „Siehe hier ein Brunnen für viele Durstige, Ein Herz
für viele Sehnsüchtige, Ein Wille für viele Werkzeuge“ :—um den sammelt
sich ein _Volk_, das ist: viel Versuchende.

Wer befehlen kann, wer gehorchen muss—Das wird da versucht! Ach, mit
welch langem Suchen und Rathen und Missrathen und Lernen und
Neu-Versuchen!

Die Menschen-Gesellschaft: die ist ein Versuch, so lehre ich’s,—ein
langes Suchen: sie sucht aber den Befehlenden!—

—ein Versuch, oh meine Brüder! Und _kein_ „Vertrag“! Zerbrecht,
zerbrecht mir solch Wort der Weich-Herzen und Halb- und Halben!

26.

Oh meine Brüder! Bei Welchen liegt doch die grösste Gefahr aller
Menschen-Zukunft? Ist es nicht bei den Guten und Gerechten?—

—als bei Denen, die sprechen und im Herzen fühlen: „wir wissen schon,
was gut ist und gerecht, wir haben es auch; wehe Denen, die hier noch
suchen!“—

Und was für Schaden auch die Bösen thun mögen: der Schaden der Guten
ist der schädlichste Schaden!

Und was für Schaden auch die Welt-Verleumder thun mögen: der Schaden
der Guten ist der schädlichste Schaden.

Oh meine Brüder, den Guten und Gerechten sah Einer einmal in’s Herz,
der da sprach: „es sind die Pharisäer.“ Aber man verstand ihn nicht.

Die Guten und Gerechten selber durften ihn nicht verstehen: ihr Geist
ist eingefangen in ihr gutes Gewissen. Die Dummheit der Guten ist
unergründlich klug.

Das aber ist die Wahrheit: die Guten _müssen_ Pharisäer sein,—sie haben
keine Wahl!

Die Guten _müssen_ Den kreuzigen, der sich seine eigne Tugend erfindet!
Das _ist_ die Wahrheit!

Der Zweite aber, der ihr Land entdeckte, Land, Herz und Erdreich der
Guten und Gerechten: das war, der da fragte: „wen hassen sie am
meisten?“

Den _Schaffenden_ hassen sie am meisten: den, der Tafeln bricht und
alte Werthe, den Brecher—den heissen sie Verbrecher.

Die Guten nämlich—die _können_ nicht schaffen: die sind immer der
Anfang vom Ende:-

—sie kreuzigen Den, der neue Werthe auf neue Tafeln schreibt, sie
opfern _sich_ die Zukunft,—sie kreuzigen alle Menschen-Zukunft!

Die Guten—die waren immer der Anfang vom Ende.—

27.

Oh meine Brüder, verstandet ihr auch diess Wort? Und was ich einst
sagte vom „letzten Menschen“ ?—

Bei Welchen liegt die grösste Gefahr aller Menschen-Zukunft? Ist es
nicht bei den Guten und Gerechten?

Zerbrecht, zerbrecht mir die Guten und Gerechten!—Oh meine Brüder,
verstandet ihr auch diess Wort?

28.

Ihr flieht von mir? Ihr seid erschreckt? Ihr zittert vor diesem Worte?

Oh meine Brüder, als ich euch die Guten zerbrechen hiess und die Tafeln
der Guten: da erst schiffte ich den Menschen ein auf seine hohe See.

Und nun erst kommt ihm der grosse Schrecken, das grosse Um-sich-sehn,
die grosse Krankheit, der grosse Ekel, die grosse See-Krankheit.

Falsche Küsten und falsche Sicherheiten lehrten euch die Guten; in
Lügen der Guten wart ihr geboren und geborgen. Alles ist in den Grund
hinein verlogen und verbogen durch die Guten.

Aber wer das Land „Mensch“ entdeckte, entdeckte auch das Land
„Menschen-Zukunft“. Nun sollt ihr mir Seefahrer sein, wackere,
geduldsame!

Aufrecht geht mir bei Zeiten, oh meine Brüder, lernt aufrecht gehn! Das
Meer stürmt: Viele wollen an euch sich wieder aufrichten.

Das Meer stürmt: Alles ist im Meere. Wohlan! Wohlauf! Ihr alten
Seemanns-Herzen!

Was Vaterland! _Dorthin_ will unser Steuer, wo unser _Kinder-Land_ ist!
Dorthinaus, stürmischer als das Meer, stürmt unsre grosse Sehnsucht!—

29.

„Warum so hart!—sprach zum Diamanten einst die Küchen-Kohle; sind wir
denn nicht Nah-Verwandte?“—

Warum so weich? Oh meine Brüder, also frage _ich_ euch: seid ihr denn
nicht—meine Brüder?

Warum so weich, so weichend und nachgebend? Warum ist so viel Leugnung,
Verleugnung in eurem Herzen? So wenig Schicksal in eurem Blicke?

Und wollt ihr nicht Schicksale sein und Unerbittliche: wie könntet ihr
mit mir —siegen?

Und wenn eure Härte nicht blitzen und scheiden und zerschneiden will:
wie könntet ihr einst mit mir—schaffen?

Die Schaffenden nämlich sind hart. Und Seligkeit muss es euch dünken,
eure Hand auf Jahrtausende zu drücken wie auf Wachs,—

—Seligkeit, auf dem Willen von Jahrtausenden zu schreiben wie auf
Erz,—härter als Erz, edler als Erz. Ganz hart ist allein das Edelste.

Diese neue Tafel, oh meine Brüder, stelle ich über euch: werdet hart!—

30.

Oh du mein Wille! Du Wende aller Noth du _meine_ Nothwendigkeit!
Bewahre mich vor allen kleinen Siegen!

Du Schickung meiner Seele, die ich Schicksal heisse! Du-In-mir!
Über-mir! Bewahre und spare mich auf zu Einem grossen Schicksale!

Und deine letzte Grösse, mein Wille, spare dir für dein Letztes
auf,—dass du unerbittlich bist _in_ deinem Siege! Ach, wer unterlag
nicht seinem Siege!

Ach, wessen Auge dunkelte nicht in dieser trunkenen Dämmerung! Ach,
wessen Fuss taumelte nicht und verlernte im Siege—stehen!—

—Dass ich einst bereit und reif sei im grossen Mittage: bereit und reif
gleich glühendem Erze, blitzschwangrer Wolke und schwellendem
Milch-Euter:—

—bereit zu mir selber und zu meinem verborgensten Willen: ein Bogen
brünstig nach seinem Pfeile, ein Pfeil brünstig nach seinem Sterne:—

—ein Stern bereit und reif in seinem Mittage, glühend, durchbohrt,
selig vor vernichtenden Sonnen-Pfeilen:—

—eine Sonne selber und ein unerbittlicher Sonnen-Wille, zum Vernichten
bereit im Siegen!

Oh Wille, Wende aller Noth, du _meine_ Nothwendigkeit! Spare mich auf
zu Einem grossen Siege!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Der Genesende

1.

Eines Morgens, nicht lange nach seiner Rückkehr zur Höhle, sprang
Zarathustra von seinem Lager auf wie ein Toller, schrie mit furchtbarer
Stimme und gebärdete sich, als ob noch Einer auf dem Lager läge, der
nicht davon aufstehn wolle; und also tönte Zarathustra’s Stimme, dass
seine Thiere erschreckt hinzukamen, und dass aus allen Höhlen und
Schlupfwinkeln, die Zarathustra’s Höhle benachbart waren, alles Gethier
davon huschte,—fliegend, flatternd, kriechend, springend, wie ihm nur
die Art von Fuss und Flügel gegeben war. Zarathustra aber redete diese
Worte:

Herauf, abgründlicher Gedanke, aus meiner Tiefe! Ich bin dein Hahn und
Morgen-Grauen, verschlafener Wurm: auf! auf! Meine Stimme soll dich
schon wach krähen!

Knüpfe die Fessel deiner Ohren los: horche! Denn ich will dich hören!
Auf! Auf! Hier ist Donners genug, dass auch Gräber horchen lernen!

Und wische den Schlaf und alles Blöde, Blinde aus deinen Augen! Höre
mich auch mit deinen Augen: meine Stimme ist ein Heilmittel noch für
Blindgeborne.

Und bist du erst wach, sollst du mir ewig wach bleiben. Nicht ist das
_meine_ Art, Urgrossmütter aus dem Schlafe wecken, dass ich sie
heisse—weiterschlafen!

Du regst dich, dehnst dich, röchelst? Auf! Auf! Nicht röcheln—reden
sollst du mir! Zarathustra ruft dich, der Gottlose!

Ich, Zarathustra, der Fürsprecher des Lebens, der Fürsprecher des
Leidens, der Fürsprecher des Kreises—dich rufe ich, meinen
abgründlichsten Gedanken!

Heil mir! Du kommst—ich höre dich! Mein Abgrund _redet_, meine letzte
Tiefe habe ich an’s Licht gestülpt!

Heil mir! Heran! Gieb die Hand—ha! lass! Haha!—Ekel, Ekel, Ekel—wehe
mir!

2.

Kaum aber hatte Zarathustra diese Worte gesprochen, da stürzte er
nieder gleich einem Todten und blieb lange wie ein Todter. Als er aber
wieder zu sich kam, da war er bleich und zitterte und blieb liegen und
wollte lange nicht essen noch trinken. Solches Wesen dauerte an ihm
sieben Tage; seine Thiere verliessen ihn aber nicht bei Tag und Nacht,
es sei denn, dass der Adler ausflog, Speise zu holen. Und was er holte
und zusammenraubte, das legte er auf Zarathustra’s Lager: also dass
Zarathustra endlich unter gelben und rothen Beeren, Trauben,
Rosenäpfeln, wohlriechendem Krautwerke und Pinien-Zapfen lag. Zu seinen
Füssen aber waren zwei Lämmer gebreitet, welche der Adler mit Mühe
ihren Hirten abgeraubt hatte.

Endlich, nach sieben Tagen, richtete sich Zarathustra auf seinem Lager
auf, nahm einen Rosenapfel in die Hand, roch daran und fand seinen
Geruch lieblich. Da glaubten seine Thiere, die Zeit sei gekommen, mit
ihm zu reden.

„Oh Zarathustra, sagten sie, nun liegst du schon sieben Tage so, mit
schweren Augen: willst du dich nicht endlich wieder auf deine Füsse
stellen?

Tritt hinaus aus deiner Höhle: die Welt wartet dein wie ein Garten. Der
Wind spielt mit schweren Wohlgerüchen, die zu dir wollen; und alle
Bäche möchten dir nachlaufen.

Alle Dinge sehnen sich nach dir, dieweil du sieben Tage allein
bliebst,—tritt hinaus aus deiner Höhle! Alle Dinge wollen deine Ärzte
sein!

Kam wohl eine neue Erkenntniss zu dir, eine saure, schwere? Gleich
angesäuertem Teige lagst du, deine Seele gieng auf und schwoll über
alle ihre Ränder.—„

—Oh meine Thiere, antwortete Zarathustra, schwätzt also weiter und
lasst mich zuhören! Es erquickt mich so, dass ihr schwätzt: wo
geschwätzt wird, da liegt mir schon die Welt wie ein Garten.

Wie lieblich ist es, dass Worte und Töne da sind: sind nicht Worte und
Töne Regenbogen und Schein-Brücken zwischen Ewig-Geschiedenem?

Zu jeder Seele gehört eine andre Welt; für jede Seele ist jede andre
Seele eine Hinterwelt.

Zwischen dem Ähnlichsten gerade lügt der Schein am schönsten; denn die
kleinste Kluft ist am schwersten zu überbrücken.

Für mich—wie gäbe es ein Ausser-mir? Es giebt kein Aussen! Aber das
vergessen wir bei allen Tönen; wie lieblich ist es, dass wir vergessen!

Sind nicht den Dingen Namen und Töne geschenkt, dass der Mensch sich an
den Dingen erquicke? Es ist eine schöne Narrethei, das Sprechen: damit
tanzt der Mensch über alle Dinge.

Wie lieblich ist alles Reden und alle Lüge der Töne! Mit Tönen tanzt
unsre Liebe auf bunten Regenbögen.—

—„Oh Zarathustra, sagten darauf die Thiere, Solchen, die denken wie
wir, tanzen alle Dinge selber: das kommt und reicht sich die Hand und
lacht und flieht—und kommt zurück.

Alles geht, Alles kommt zurück; ewig rollt das Rad des Seins. Alles
stirbt, Alles blüht wieder auf, ewig läuft das Jahr des Seins.

Alles bricht, Alles wird neu gefügt; ewig baut sich das gleiche Haus
des Seins. Alles scheidet, Alles grüsst sich wieder; ewig bleibt sich
treu der Ring des Seins.

In jedem Nu beginnt das Sein; um jedes Hier rollt sich die Kugel Dort.
Die Mitte ist überall. Krumm ist der Pfad der Ewigkeit.“—

—Oh ihr Schalks-Narren und Drehorgeln! antwortete Zarathustra und
lächelte wieder, wie gut wisst ihr, was sich in sieben Tagen erfüllen
musste:—

—und wie jenes Unthier mir in den Schlund kroch und mich würgte! Aber
ich biss ihm den Kopf ab und spie ihn weg von mir.

Und ihr,—ihr machtet schon ein Leier-Lied daraus? Nun aber liege ich
da, müde noch von diesem Beissen und Wegspein, krank noch von der
eigenen Erlösung.

Und ihr schautet dem Allen zu? Oh meine Thiere, seid auch ihr grausam?
Habt ihr meinem grossen Schmerze zuschaun wollen, wie Menschen thun?
Der Mensch nämlich ist das grausamste Thier.

Bei Trauerspielen, Stierkämpfen und Kreuzigungen ist es ihm bisher am
wohlsten geworden auf Erden; und als er sich die Hölle erfand, siehe,
da war das sein Himmel auf Erden.

Wenn der grosse Mensch schreit—: flugs läuft der kleine hinzu; und die
Zunge hängt ihm aus dem Halse vor Lüsternheit. Er aber heisst es sein
„Mitleiden.“

Der kleine Mensch, sonderlich der Dichter—wie eifrig klagt er das Leben
in Worten an! Hört hin, aber überhört mir die Lust nicht, die in allem
Anklagen ist!

Solche Ankläger des Lebens: die überwindet das Leben mit einem
Augenblinzeln. „Du liebst mich? sagt die Freche; warte noch ein Wenig,
noch habe ich für dich nicht Zeit.“

Der Mensch ist gegen sich selber das grausamste Thier; und bei Allem,
was sich „Sünder“ und „Kreuzträger“ und „Büsser“ heisst, überhört mir
die Wollust nicht, die in diesem Klagen und Anklagen ist!

Und ich selber—will ich damit des Menschen Ankläger sein? Ach, meine
Thiere, Das allein lernte ich bisher, dass dem Menschen sein Bösestes
nöthig ist zu seinem Besten,—

—dass alles Böseste seine beste _Kraft_ ist und der härteste Stein dem
höchsten Schaffenden; und dass der Mensch besser _und_ böser werden
muss: -

Nicht an _diess_ Marterholz war ich geheftet, dass ich weiss: der
Mensch ist böse,—sondern ich schrie, wie noch Niemand geschrien hat:

„Ach dass sein Bösestes so gar klein ist! Ach dass sein Bestes so gar
klein ist!“

Der grosse Überdruss am Menschen—_der_ würgte mich und war mir in den
Schlund gekrochen: und was der Wahrsager wahrsagte: „Alles ist gleich,
es lohnt sich Nichts, Wissen würgt.“

Eine lange Dämmerung hinkte vor mir her, eine todesmüde, todestrunkene
Traurigkeit, welche mit gähnendem Munde redete.

„Ewig kehrt er wieder, der Mensch, dess du müde bist, der kleine
Mensch“—so gähnte meine Traurigkeit und schleppte den Fuss und konnte
nicht einschlafen.

Zur Höhle wandelte sich mir die Menschen-Erde, ihre Brust sank hinein,
alles Lebendige ward mir Menschen-Moder und Knochen und morsche
Vergangenheit.

Mein Seufzen sass auf allen Menschen-Gräbern und konnte nicht mehr
aufstehn; mein Seufzen und Fragen unkte und würgte und nagte und klagte
bei Tag und Nacht:

—„ach, der Mensch kehrt ewig wieder! Der kleine Mensch kehrt ewig
wieder!“—

Nackt hatte ich einst Beide gesehn, den grössten Menschen und den
kleinsten Menschen: allzuähnlich einander,—allzumenschlich auch den
Grössten noch!

Allzuklein der Grösste!—Das war mein Überdruss am Menschen! Und ewige
Wiederkunft auch des Kleinsten!—Das war mein Überdruss an allem Dasein!

Ach, Ekel! Ekel! Ekel!—- Also sprach Zarathustra und seufzte und
schauderte; denn er erinnerte sich seiner Krankheit. Da liessen ihn
aber seine Thiere nicht weiter reden.

„Sprich nicht weiter, du Genesender!—so antworteten ihm seine Thiere,
sondern geh hinaus, wo die Welt auf dich wartet gleich einem Garten.

Geh hinaus zu den Rosen und Bienen und Taubenschwärmen! Sonderlich aber
zu den Singe-Vögeln: dass du ihnen das _Singen_ ablernst!

Singen nämlich ist für Genesende; der Gesunde mag reden. Und wenn auch
der Gesunde Lieder will, will er andre Lieder doch als der Genesende.“

—„Oh ihr Schalks-Narren und Drehorgeln, so schweigt doch!—antwortete
Zarathustra und lächelte über seine Thiere. Wie gut ihr wisst, welchen
Trost ich mir selber in sieben Tagen erfand!

Dass ich wieder singen müsse,—_den_ Trost erfand ich mir und _diese_
Genesung: wollt ihr auch daraus gleich wieder ein Leier-Lied machen?“

—„Sprich nicht weiter, antworteten ihm abermals seine Thiere; lieber
noch, du Genesender, mache dir erst eine Leier zurecht, eine neue
Leier!

Denn siehe doch, oh Zarathustra! Zu deinen neuen Liedern bedarf es
neuer Leiern.

Singe und brause über, oh Zarathustra, heile mit neuen Liedern deine
Seele: dass du dein grosses Schicksal tragest, das noch keines Menschen
Schicksal war!

Denn deine Thiere wissen es wohl, oh Zarathustra, wer du bist und
werden musst: siehe, du bist der Lehrer der ewigen Wiederkunft—, das
ist nun _dein_ Schicksal!

Dass du als der Erste diese Lehre lehren musst,—wie sollte diess grosse
Schicksal nicht auch deine grösste Gefahr und Krankheit sein!

Siehe, wir wissen, was du lehrst: dass alle Dinge ewig wiederkehren und
wir selber mit, und dass wir schon ewige Male dagewesen sind, und alle
Dinge mit uns.

Du lehrst, dass es ein grosses Jahr des Werdens giebt, ein Ungeheuer
von grossem Jahre: das muss sich, einer Sanduhr gleich, immer wieder
von Neuem umdrehn, damit es von Neuem ablaufe und auslaufe:—

—so dass alle diese Jahre sich selber gleich sind, im Grössten und auch
im Kleinsten,—so dass wir selber in jedem grossen Jahre uns selber
gleich sind, im Grössten und auch im Kleinsten.

Und wenn du jetzt sterben wolltest, oh Zarathustra: siehe, wir wissen
auch, wie du da zu dir sprechen würdest:—aber deine Thiere bitten dich,
dass du noch nicht sterbest!

Du würdest sprechen und ohne Zittern, vielmehr aufathmend vor
Seligkeit: denn eine grosse Schwere und Schwüle wäre von dir genommen,
du Geduldigster!—

„Nun sterbe und schwinde ich, würdest du sprechen, und im Nu bin ich
ein Nichts. Die Seelen sind so sterblich wie die Leiber.

Aber der Knoten von Ursachen kehrt wieder, in den ich verschlungen
bin,—der wird mich wieder schaffen! Ich selber gehöre zu den Ursachen
der ewigen Wiederkunft.

Ich komme wieder, mit dieser Sonne, mit dieser Erde, mit diesem Adler,
mit dieser Schlange—_nicht_ zu einem neuen Leben oder besseren Leben
oder ähnlichen Leben:

—ich komme ewig wieder zu diesem gleichen und selbigen Leben, im
Grössten und auch im Kleinsten, dass ich wieder aller Dinge ewige
Wiederkunft lehre,—

—dass ich wieder das Wort spreche vom grossen Erden- und
Menschen-Mittage, dass ich wieder den Menschen den Übermenschen künde.

Ich sprach mein Wort, ich zerbreche an meinem Wort: so will es mein
ewiges Loos -, als Verkündiger gehe ich zu Grunde!

Die Stunde kam nun, dass der Untergehende sich selber segnet. Also
_endet_ Zarathustra’s Untergang.““—

Als die Thiere diese Worte gesprochen hatten, schwiegen sie und
warteten, dass Zarathustra Etwas zu ihnen sagen werde: aber Zarathustra
hörte nicht, dass sie schwiegen. Vielmehr lag er still, mit
geschlossenen Augen, einem Schlafenden ähnlich, ob er schon nicht
schlief: denn er unterredete sich eben mit seiner Seele. Die Schlange
aber und der Adler, als sie ihn solchermaassen schweigsam fanden,
ehrten die grosse Stille um ihn und machten sich behutsam davon.


Von der grossen Sehnsucht

Oh meine Seele, ich lehrte dich „Heute“  sagen wie „Einst“ und
„Ehemals“ und über alles Hier und Da und Dort deinen Reigen hinweg
tanzen.

Oh meine Seele, ich erlöste dich von allen Winkeln, ich kehrte Staub,
Spinnen und Zwielicht von dir ab.

Oh meine Seele, ich wusch die kleine Scham und die Winkel-Tugend von
dir ab und überredete dich, nackt vor den Augen der Sonne zu stehn.

Mit dem Sturme, welcher „Geist“ heisst, blies ich über deine wogende
See; alle Wolken blies ich davon, ich erwürgte selbst die Würgerin, die
„Sünde“  heisst.

Oh meine Seele, ich gab dir das Recht, Nein zu sagen wie der Sturm und
Ja zu sagen wie offner Himmel Ja sagt: still wie Licht stehst du und
gehst du nun durch verneinende Stürme.

Oh meine Seele, ich gab dir die Freiheit zurück über Erschaffnes und
Unerschaffnes: und wer kennt, wie du sie kennst, die Wollust des
Zukünftigen?

Oh meine Seele, ich lehrte dich das Verachten, das nicht wie ein
Wurmfrass kommt, das grosse, das liebende Verachten, welches am meisten
liebt, wo es am meisten verachtet.

Oh meine Seele, ich lehrte dich so überreden, dass du zu dir die Gründe
selber überredest: der Sonne gleich, die das Meer noch zu seiner Höhe
überredet.

Oh meine Seele, ich nahm von dir alles Gehorchen Kniebeugen und
Herr-Sagen; ich gab dir selber den Namen „Wende der Noth“ und
„Schicksal“.

Oh meine Seele, ich gab dir neue Namen und bunte Spielwerke, ich hiess
dich „Schicksal“ und „Umfang der Umfänge“  und „Nabelschnur der Zeit“
und „azurne Glocke“ .

Oh meine Seele, deinem Erdreich gab ich alle Weisheit zu trinken, alle
neuen Weine und auch alle unvordenklich alten starken Weine der
Weisheit.

Oh meine Seele, jede Sonne goss ich auf dich und jede Nacht und jedes
Schweigen und jede Sehnsucht:—da wuchsest du mir auf wie ein Weinstock.

Oh meine Seele, überreich und schwer stehst du nun da, ein Weinstock
mit schwellenden Eutern und gedrängten braunen Gold-Weintrauben:—

—gedrängt und gedrückt von deinem Glücke, wartend vor Überflusse und
schamhaft noch ob deines Wartens.

Oh meine Seele, es giebt nun nirgends eine Seele, die liebender wäre
und umfangender und umfänglicher! Wo wäre Zukunft und Vergangnes näher
beisammen als bei dir?

Oh meine Seele, ich gab dir Alles, und alle meine Hände sind an dich
leer geworden:—und nun! Nun sagst du mir lächelnd und voll Schwermuth:
„Wer von uns hat zu danken?—

—hat der Geber nicht zu danken, dass der Nehmende nahm? Ist Schenken
nicht eine Nothdurft? Ist Nehmen nicht—Erbarmen?“—

Oh meine Seele, ich verstehe das Lächeln deiner Schwermuth: dein
Über-Reichthum selber streckt nun sehnende Hände aus!

Deine Fülle blickt über brausende Meere hin und sucht und wartet; die
Sehnsucht der Über-Fülle blickt aus deinem lächelnden Augen-Himmel!

Und wahrlich, oh meine Seele! Wer sähe dein Lächeln und schmelze nicht
vor Thränen? Die Engel selber schmelzen vor Thränen ob der Über-Güte
deines Lächelns.

Deine Güte und Über-Güte ist es, die nicht klagen und weinen will: und
doch sehnt sich, oh meine Seele, dein Lächeln nach Thränen und dein
zitternder Mund nach Schluchzen.

„Ist alles Weinen nicht ein Klagen? Und alles Klagen nicht ein
Anklagen?“ Also redest du zu dir selber, und darum willst du, oh meine
Seele, lieber lächeln, als dein Leid ausschütten.

—in stürzende Thränen ausschütten all dein Leid über deine Fülle und
über all die Drängniss des Weinstocks nach Winzer und Winzermesser!

Aber willst du nicht weinen, nicht ausweinen deine purpurne Schwermuth,
so wirst du _singen_ müssen, oh meine Seele!—Siehe, ich lächle selber,
der ich dir solches vorhersage:

—singen, mit brausendem Gesange, bis alle Meere still werden, dass sie
deiner Sehnsucht zuhorchen,—

—bis über stille sehnsüchtige Meere der Nachen schwebt, das güldene
Wunder, um dessen Gold alle guten schlimmen wunderlichen Dinge hüpfen:—

—auch vieles grosse und kleine Gethier und Alles, was leichte
wunderliche Füsse hat, dass es auf veilchenblauen Pfaden laufen kann,—

—hin zu dem güldenen Wunder, dem freiwilligen Nachen und zu seinem
Herrn: das aber ist der Winzer, der mit diamantenem Winzermesser
wartet,—

—dein grosser Löser, oh meine Seele, der Namenlose—- dem zukünftige
Gesänge erst Namen finden! Und wahrlich, schon duftet dein Athem nach
zukünftigen Gesängen,—

—schon glühst du und träumst, schon trinkst du durstig an allen tiefen
klingenden Trost-Brunnen, schon ruht deine Schwermuth in der Seligkeit
zukünftiger Gesänge!—

Oh meine Seele, nun gab ich dir Alles und auch mein Letztes, und alle
meine Hände sind an dich leer geworden:—_dass ich dich singen hiess_,
siehe, das war mein Letztes!

Dass ich dich singen hiess, sprich nun, sprich: _wer_ von uns hat
jetzt—zu danken?—Besser aber noch: singe mir, singe, oh meine Seele!
Und mich lass danken!—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Das andere Tanzlied

1.

„In dein Auge schaute ich jüngst, oh Leben: Gold sah ich in deinem
Nacht-Auge blinken,—mein Herz stand still vor dieser Wollust:

—einen goldenen Kahn sah ich blinken auf mächtigen Gewässern, einen
sinkenden, trinkenden, wieder winkenden goldenen Schaukel-Kahn!

Nach meinem Fusse, dem tanzwüthigen, warfst du einen Blick, einen
lachenden fragenden schmelzenden Schaukel-Blick:

Zwei Mal nur regtest du deine Klapper mit kleinen Händen—da schaukelte
schon mein Fuss vor Tanz-Wuth.—

Meine Fersen bäumten sich, meine Zehen horchten, dich zu verstehen:
trägt doch der Tänzer sein Ohr—in seinen Zehen!

Zu dir hin sprang ich: da flohst du zurück vor meinem Sprunge; und
gegen mich züngelte deines fliehenden fliegenden Haars Zunge!

Von dir weg sprang ich und von deinen Schlangen: da standst du schon,
halbgewandt, das Auge voll Verlangen.

Mit krummen Blicken—lehrst du mich krumme Bahnen; auf krummen Bahnen
lernt mein Fuss—Tücken!

Ich fürchte dich Nahe, ich liebe dich Ferne; deine Flucht lockt mich,
dein Suchen stockt mich:—ich leide, aber was litt ich um dich nicht
gerne!

Deren Kälte zündet, deren Hass verführt, deren Flucht bindet, deren
Spott—rührt:

—wer hasste dich nicht, dich grosse Binderin, Umwinderin, Versucherin,
Sucherin, Finderin! Wer liebte dich nicht, dich unschuldige,
ungeduldige, windseilige, kindsäugige Sünderin!

Wohin ziehst du mich jetzt, du Ausbund und Unband? Und jetzt fliehst du
mich wieder, du süsser Wildfang und Undank!

Ich tanze dir nach, ich folge dir auch auf geringer Spur. Wo bist du?
Gieb mir die Hand! Oder einen Finger nur!

Hier sind Höhlen und Dickichte: wir werden uns verirren!—Halt! Steh
still! Siehst du nicht Eulen und Fledermäuse schwirren?

Du Eule! Du Fledermaus! Du willst mich äffen? Wo sind wir? Von den
Hunden lerntest du diess Heulen und Kläffen.

Du fletschest mich lieblich an mit weissen Zähnlein, deine bösen Augen
springen gegen mich aus lockichtem Mähnlein!

Das ist ein Tanz über Stock und Stein: ich bin der Jäger,—willst du
mein Hund oder meine Gemse sein?

Jetzt neben mir! Und geschwind, du boshafte Springerin! Jetzt hinauf!
Und hinüber!—Wehe! Da fiel ich selber im Springen hin!

Oh sieh mich liegen, du Übermuth, und um Gnade flehn! Gerne möchte ich
mit dir —lieblichere Pfade gehn!

—der Liebe Pfade durch stille bunte Büsche! Oder dort den See entlang:
da schwimmen und tanzen Goldfische!

Du bist jetzt müde? Da drüben sind Schafe und Abendröthen: ist es nicht
schön, zu schlafen, wenn Schäfer flöten?

Du bist so arg müde? Ich trage dich hin, lass nur die Arme sinken! Und
hast du Durst,—ich hätte wohl Etwas, aber dein Mund will es nicht
trinken!—

—Oh diese verfluchte flinke gelenke Schlange und Schlupf-Hexe! Wo bist
du hin? Aber im Gesicht fühle ich von deiner Hand zwei Tupfen und rothe
Klexe!

Ich bin es wahrlich müde, immer dein schafichter Schäfer zu sein! Du
Hexe, habe ich dir bisher gesungen, nun sollst _du_ mir—schrein!

Nach dem Takt meiner Peitsche sollst du mir tanzen und schrein! Ich
vergass doch die Peitsche nicht?—Nein!“—

2.

Da antwortete mir das Leben also und hielt sich dabei die zierlichen
Ohren zu:

„Oh Zarathustra! Klatsche doch nicht so fürchterlich mit deiner
Peitsche! Du weisst es ja: Lärm mordet Gedanken,—und eben kommen mir so
zärtliche Gedanken.

Wir sind Beide zwei rechte Thunichtgute und Thunichtböse. Jenseits von
Gut und Böse fanden wir unser Eiland und unsre grüne Wiese—wir Zwei
allein! Darum müssen wir schon einander gut sein!

Und lieben wir uns auch nicht von Grund aus—, muss man sich denn gram
sein, wenn man sich nicht von Grund aus liebt?

Und dass ich dir gut bin und oft zu gut, Das weisst du: und der Grund
ist, dass ich auf deine Weisheit eifersüchtig bin. Ah, diese tolle alte
Närrin von Weisheit!

Wenn dir deine Weisheit einmal davonliefe, ach! da liefe dir schnell
auch meine Liebe noch davon.“—

Darauf blickte das Leben nachdenklich hinter sich und um sich und sagte
leise: „Oh Zarathustra, du bist mir nicht treu genug!

Du liebst mich lange nicht so sehr wie du redest; ich weiss, du denkst
daran, dass du mich bald verlassen willst.

Es giebt eine alte schwere schwere Brumm-Glocke: die brummt Nachts bis
zu deiner Höhle hinauf:—

—hörst du diese Glocke Mitternachts die Stunde schlagen, so denkst du
zwischen Eins und Zwölf daran—

—du denkst daran, oh Zarathustra, ich weiss es, dass du mich bald
verlassen willst!“—

„Ja, antwortete ich zögernd, aber du weisst es auch—“ Und ich sagte ihr
Etwas in’s Ohr, mitten hinein zwischen ihre verwirrten gelben
thörichten Haar-Zotteln.

Du _weisst_ Das, oh Zarathustra? Das weiss Niemand.—

Und wir sahen uns an und blickten auf die grüne Wiese, über welche eben
der kühle Abend lief, und weinten mit einander.—Damals aber war mir das
Leben lieber, als je alle meine Weisheit.—

Also sprach Zarathustra.

3.

        Eins!
    Oh Mensch! Gieb Acht!
        Zwei!
    Was spricht die tiefe Mitternacht?
        Drei!
    „Ich schlief, ich schlief—,“
        Vier!
    „Auf tiefen Traum bin ich erwacht:—“
        Fünf!
    „Die Welt ist tief,“
        Sechs!
    „Und tiefer als der Tag gedacht.“
        Sieben!
    „Tief ist ihr Weh—,“
        Acht!
    „Lust—tiefer noch als Herzeleid:“
        Neun!
    „Weh spricht: Vergeh!“
        Zehn!
    „Doch alle Lust will Ewigkeit—,“
        Elf!
    „—will tiefe, tiefe Ewigkeit!“
        Zwölf!


Die sieben Siegel
(Oder: das Ja- und Amen-Lied)

1.

Wenn ich ein Wahrsager bin und voll jenes wahrsagerischen Geistes, der
auf hohem Joche zwischen zwei Meeren wandelt,—

zwischen Vergangenem und Zukünftigem als schwere Wolke
wandelt,—schwülen Niederungen feind und Allem, was müde ist und nicht
sterben, noch leben kann.-

zum Blitze bereit im dunklen Busen und zum erlösenden Lichtstrahle,
schwanger von Blitzen, die Ja! sagen, Ja! lachen, zu wahrsagerischen
Blitzstrahlen:—

—selig aber ist der also Schwangere! Und wahrlich, lange muss als
schweres Wetter am Berge hängen, wer einst das Licht der Zukunft zünden
soll!—

Oh wie sollte ich nicht nach der Ewigkeit brünstig sein und nach dem
hochzeitlichen Ring der Ringe,—dem Ring de Wiederkunft!

Nie noch fand ich das Weib, von dem ich Kinder mochte, sei denn dieses
Weib, das ich lieb: denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

Denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

2.

Wenn mein Zorn je Gräber brach, Grenzsteine rückte und alte Tafeln
zerbrochen in steile Tiefen rollte:

Wenn mein Hohn je vermoderte Worte zerblies, und ich wie ein Besen kam
den Kreuzspinnen und als Fegewind alten verdumpften Grabkammern:

Wenn ich je frohlockend sass, wo alte Götter begraben liegen,
weltsegnend, weltliebend neben den Denkmalen alter Welt-Verleumder:—

—denn selbst Kirchen und Gottes-Gräber liebe ich, wenn der Himmel erst
reinen Auges durch ihre zerbrochenen Decken blickt; gern sitze ich
gleich Gras und rothem Mohne auf zerbrochnen Kirchen—

Oh wie sollte ich nicht nach der Ewigkeit brünstig sein und nach dem
hochzeitlichen Ring der Ringe,—dem Ring de Wiederkunft!

Nie noch fand ich das Weib, von dem ich Kinder mochte, sei denn dieses
Weib, das ich lieb: denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

Denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

3.

Wenn je ein Hauch zu mir kam vom schöpferischen Hauche und von jener
himmlischen Noth, die noch Zufälle zwingt, Sternen-Reigen zu tanzen:

Wenn ich je mit dem Lachen des schöpferischen Blitzes lachte, dem der
lange Donner der That grollend, aber gehorsam nachfolgt:

Wenn ich je am Göttertisch der Erde mit Göttern Würfel spielte, dass
die Erde bebte und brach und Feuerflüsse heraufschnob:—

—denn ein Göttertisch ist die Erde, und zitternd von schöpferischen
neuen Worten und Götter-Würfen:—

Oh wie sollte ich nicht nach der Ewigkeit brünstig sein und nach dem
hochzeitlichen Ring der Ringe,—dem Ring de Wiederkunft!

Nie noch fand ich das Weib, von dem ich Kinder mochte, sei denn dieses
Weib, das ich lieb: denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

Denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

4.

Wenn ich je vollen Zuges trank aus jenem schäumenden Würz- und
Mischkruge, in dem alle Dinge gut gemischt sind:

Wenn meine Hand je Fernstes zum Nächsten goss und Feuer zu Geist und
Lust zu Leid und Schlimmstes zum Gütigsten:

Wenn ich selber ein Korn bin von jenem erlösenden Salze, welches macht,
dass alle Dinge im Mischkruge gut sich mischen:—

—denn es giebt ein Salz, das Gutes mit Bösem bindet; und auch das
Böseste ist zum Würzen würdig und zum letzten Überschäumen:—

Oh wie sollte ich nicht nach der Ewigkeit brünstig sein und nach dem
hochzeitlichen Ring der Ringe,—dem Ring de Wiederkunft!

Nie noch fand ich das Weib, von dem ich Kinder mochte, sei denn dieses
Weib, das ich lieb: denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

Denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

5.

Wenn ich dem Meere hold bin und Allem, was Meeres-Art ist, und am
holdesten noch, wenn es mir zornig widerspricht:

Wenn jene suchende Lust in mir ist, die nach Unentdecktem die Segel
treibt, wenn eine Seefahrer-Lust in meiner Lust ist:

Wenn je mein Frohlocken rief: „die Küste schwand,—nun fiel mir die
letzte Kette ab—

—das Grenzenlose braust um mich, weit hinaus glänzt mir Raum und Zeit,
wohlan! wohlauf! altes Herz!“—

Oh wie sollte ich nicht nach der Ewigkeit brünstig sein und nach dem
hochzeitlichen Ring der Ringe,—dem Ring de Wiederkunft!

Nie noch fand ich das Weib, von dem ich Kinder mochte, sei denn dieses
Weib, das ich lieb: denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

Denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

6.

Wenn meine Tugend eines Tänzers Tugend ist, und ich oft mit beiden
Füssen in gold-smaragdenes Entzücken sprang:

Wenn meine Bosheit eine lachende Bosheit ist, heimisch unter
Rosenhängen und Lilien-Hecken:

—im Lachen nämlich ist alles Böse bei einander, aber heilig- und
losgesprochen durch seine eigne Seligkeit:—

Und wenn Das mein A und O ist, dass alles Schwere leicht, aller Leib
Tänzer, aller Geist Vogel werde: und wahrlich, Das ist mein A und O!—

Oh wie sollte ich nicht nach der Ewigkeit brünstig sein und nach dem
hochzeitlichen Ring der Ringe,—dem Ring de Wiederkunft!

Nie noch fand ich das Weib, von dem ich Kinder mochte, sei denn dieses
Weib, das ich lieb: denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

Denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

7.

Wenn ich je stille Himmel über mir ausspannte und mit eignen Flügeln in
eigne Himmel flog:

Wenn ich spielend in tiefen Licht-Fernen schwamm, und meiner Freiheit
Vogel-Weisheit kam:—

—so aber spricht Vogel-Weisheit: „Siehe, es giebt kein Oben, kein
Unten! Wirf dich umher, hinaus, zurück, du Leichter! Singe! sprich
nicht mehr!

—sind alle Worte nicht für die Schweren gemacht? Lügen dem Leichten
nicht alle Worte! Singe! sprich nicht mehr!“—

Oh wie sollte ich nicht nach der Ewigkeit brünstig sein und nach dem
hochzeitlichen Ring der Ringe,—dem Ring de Wiederkunft!

Nie noch fand ich das Weib, von dem ich Kinder mochte, sei denn dieses
Weib, das ich lieb: denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!

Denn ich liebe dich, oh Ewigkeit!


Vierter und letzter Theil

Ach, wo in der Welt geschahen grössere Thorheiten, als bei den
Mitleidigen? Und was in der Weit stiftete mehr Leid, als die Thorheiten
der Mitleidigen?
    Wehe allen Liebenden, die nicht noch eine Höhe haben, welche über
    ihrem Mitleiden ist!
    Also sprach der Teufel einst zu mir: „auch Gott hat seine Hölle:
    das ist seine Liebe zu den Menschen.“
    Und jüngst hörte ich ihn diess Wort sagen: „Gott ist todt; an
    seinem Mitleiden mit den Menschen ist Gott gestorben.“

Zarathustra, Von den Mitleidigen


Das Honig-Opfer

—Und wieder liefen Monde und Jahre über Zarathustra’s Seele, und er
achtete dessen nicht; sein Haar aber wurde weiss. Eines Tages, als er
auf einem Steine vor seiner Höhle sass und still hinausschaute,—man
schaut aber dort auf das Meer hinaus, und hinweg über gewundene
Abgründe—da giengen seine Thiere nachdenklich um ihn herum und stellten
sich endlich vor ihn hin.

„Oh Zarathustra, sagten sie, schaust du wohl aus nach deinem
Glücke?“—„Was liegt am Glücke! antwortete er, ich trachte lange nicht
mehr nach Glücke, ich trachte nach meinem Werke.“—„Oh Zarathustra,
redeten die Thiere abermals, Das sagst du als Einer, der des Guten
übergenug hat. Liegst du nicht in einem himmelblauen See von
Glück?“—„Ihr Schalks-Narren, antwortete Zarathustra und lächelte, wie
gut wähltet ihr das Gleichniss! Aber ihr wisst auch, dass mein Glück
schwer ist und nicht wie eine flüssige Wasserwelle: es drängt mich und
will nicht von mir und thut gleich geschmolzenem Peche.“—

Da giengen die Thiere wieder nachdenklich um ihn herum und stellten
sich dann abermals vor ihn hin. „Oh Zarathustra, sagten sie, _daher_
also kommt es, dass du selber immer gelber und dunkler wirst, obschon
dein Haar weiss und flächsern aussehen will? Siehe doch, du sitzest in
deinem Peche!“—„Was sagt ihr da, meine Thiere, sagte Zarathustra und
lachte dazu, wahrlich, ich lästerte als ich von Peche sprach. Wie mir
geschieht, so geht es allen Früchten, die reif werden. Es ist der
_Honig_ in meinen Adern, der mein Blut dicker und auch meine Seele
stiller macht.“—„So wird es sein, oh Zarathustra, antworteten die
Thiere und drängten sich an ihn; willst du aber nicht heute auf einen
hohen Berg steigen? Die Luft ist rein, und man sieht heute mehr von der
Welt als jemals.“—„Ja, meine Thiere, antwortete er, ihr rathet
trefflich und mir nach dem Herzen: ich will heute auf einen hohen Berg
steigen! Aber sorgt, dass dort Honig mir zur Hand sei, gelber, weisser,
guter, eisfrischer Waben-Goldhonig. Denn wisset, ich will droben das
Honig-Opfer bringen.“—

Als Zarathustra aber oben auf der Höhe war, sandte er die Thiere heim,
die ihn geleitet hatten, und fand, dass er nunmehr allein sei:—da
lachte er aus ganzem Herzen, sah sich um und sprach also:

Dass ich von Opfern sprach und Honig-Opfern, eine List war’s nur meiner
Rede und, wahrlich, eine nützliche Thorheit! Hier oben darf ich schon
freier reden, als vor Einsiedler-Höhlen und Einsiedler-Hausthieren.

Was opfern! Ich verschwende, was mir geschenkt wird, ich Verschwender
mit tausend Händen: wie dürfte ich Das noch—Opfern heissen!

Und als ich nach Honig begehrte, begehrte ich nur nach Köder und süssem
Seime und Schleime, nach dem auch Brummbären und wunderliche mürrische
böse Vögel die Zunge lecken:

—nach dem besten Köder, wie er Jägern und Fischfängern noththut. Denn
wenn die Welt wie ein dunkler Thierwald ist und aller wilden Jäger
Lustgarten, so dünkt sie mich noch mehr und lieber ein abgründliches
reiches Meer,

—ein Meer voll bunter Fische und Krebse, nach dem es auch Götter
gelüsten möchte, dass sie an ihm zu Fischern würden und zu
Netz-Auswerfern: so reich ist die Welt an Wunderlichem, grossem und
kleinem!

Sonderlich die Menschen-Welt, das Menschen-Meer:—nach _dem_ werfe ich
nun meine goldene Angelruthe aus und spreche: thue dich auf, du
Menschen-Abgrund!

Thue dich auf und wirf mir deine Fische und Glitzer-Krebse zu! Mit
meinem besten Köder ködere ich mir heute die wunderlichsten
Menschen-Fische!

—mein Glück selber werfe ich hinaus in alle Weiten und Fernen, zwischen
Aufgang, Mittag und Niedergang, ob nicht an meinem Glücke viele
Menschen-Fische zerrn und zappeln lernen.

Bis sie, anbeissend an meine spitzen verborgenen Haken, hinauf müssen
in _meine_ Höhe, die buntesten Abgrund-Gründlinge zu dem boshaftigsten
aller Menschen- Fischfänger.

_Der_ nämlich bin ich von Grund und Anbeginn, ziehend, heranziehend,
hinaufziehend, aufziehend, ein Zieher, Züchter und Zuchtmeister, der
sich nicht umsonst einstmals zusprach: „Werde, der du bist!“

Also mögen nunmehr die Menschen zu mir _hinauf_ kommen: denn noch warte
ich der Zeichen, dass es Zeit sei zu meinem Niedergange, noch gehe ich
selber nicht unter, wie ich muss, unter Menschen.

Dazu warte ich hier, listig und spöttisch auf hohen Bergen, kein
Ungeduldiger, kein Geduldiger, vielmehr Einer, der auch die Geduld
verlernt hat,—weil er nicht mehr „duldet.“

Mein Schicksal nämlich lässt mir Zeit: es vergass mich wohl? Oder sitzt
es hinter einem grossen Steine im Schatten und fängt Fliegen?

Und wahrlich, ich bin ihm gut darob, meinem ewigen Schicksale, dass es
mich nicht hetzt und drängt und mir Zeit zu Possen lässt und Bosheiten:
also dass ich heute zu einem Fischfange auf diesen hohen Berg stieg.

Fieng wohl je ein Mensch auf hohen Bergen Fische? Und wenn es auch eine
Thorheit ist, was ich hier oben will und treibe: besser noch Diess, als
dass ich da unten feierlich würde vor Warten und grün und gelb—

—ein gespreitzter Zornschnauber vor Warten, ein heiliger Heule-Sturm
aus Bergen, ein Ungeduldiger, der in die Thäler hinabruft: „Hört, oder
ich peitsche euch mit der Geissel Gottes!“

Nicht dass ich solchen Zürnern darob gram würde: zum Lachen sind sie
mir gut genung! Ungeduldig müssen sie schon sein, diese grossen
Lärmtrommeln, welche heute oder niemals zu Worte kommen!

Ich aber und mein Schicksal—wir reden nicht zum Heute, wir reden auch
nicht zum Niemals: wir haben zum Reden schon Geduld und Zeit und
Überzeit. Denn einst muss er doch kommen und darf nicht vorübergehn.

Wer muss einst kommen und darf nicht vorübergehn? Unser grosser Hazar,
das ist unser grosses fernes Menschen-Reich, das Zarathustra-Reich von
tausend Jahren—

Wie ferne mag solches „Ferne“  sein? was geht’s mich an! Aber darum
steht es mir doch nicht minder fest—, mit beiden Füssen stehe ich
sicher auf diesem Grunde,

—auf einem ewigen Grunde, auf hartem Urgesteine, auf diesem höchsten
härtesten Urgebirge, zu dem alle Winde kommen als zur Wetterscheide,
fragend nach Wo? und Woher? und Wohinaus?

Hier lache, lache meine helle heile Bosheit! Von hohen Bergen wirf
hinab dein glitzerndes Spott-Gelächter! Ködere mit deinem Glitzern mir
die schönsten Menschen-Fische!

Und was in allen Meeren _mir_ zugehört, mein An-und-für-mich in allen
Dingen—_Das_ fische mir heraus, _Das_ führe zu mir herauf: dess warte
ich, der boshaftigste aller Fischfänger.

Hinaus, hinaus, meine Angel! Hinein, hinab, Köder meines Glücks!
Träufle deinen süssesten Thau, mein Herzens-Honig! Beisse, meine Angel,
in den Bauch aller schwarzen Trübsal!

Hinaus, hinaus, mein Auge! Oh welche vielen Meere rings um mich, welch
dämmernde Menschen-Zukünfte! Und über mir—welch rosenrothe Stille!
Welch entwölktes Schweigen!


Der Nothschrei

Des nächsten Tages sass Zarathustra wieder auf seinem Steine vor der
Höhle, während die Thiere draussen in der Welt herumschweiften, dass
sie neue Nahrung heimbrächten,—auch neuen Honig: denn Zarathustra hatte
den alten Honig bis auf das letzte Korn verthan und verschwendet. Als
er aber dermaassen dasass, mit einem Stecken in der Hand, und den
Schatten seiner Gestalt auf der Erde abzeichnete, nachdenkend und,
wahrlich! nicht über sich und seinen Schatten—da erschrak er mit Einem
Male und fuhr zusammen: denn er sahe neben seinem Schatten noch einen
andern Schatten. Und wie er schnell um sich blickte und aufstand,
siehe, da stand der Wahrsager neben ihm, der selbe, den er einstmals an
seinem Tische gespeist und getränkt hatte, der Verkündiger der grossen
Müdigkeit, welcher lehrte: „Alles ist gleich, es lohnt sich Nichts,
Welt ist ohne Sinn, Wissen würgt.“ Aber sein Antlitz hatte sich
inzwischen verwandelt; und als ihm Zarathustra in die Augen blickte,
wurde sein Herz abermals erschreckt: so viel schlimme Verkündigungen
und aschgraue Blitze liefen über diess Gesicht.

Der Wahrsager, der es wahrgenommen, was sich in Zarathustra’s Seele
zutrug, wischte mit der Hand über sein Antlitz hin, wie als ob er
dasselbe wegwischen wollte; desgleichen that auch Zarathustra. Und als
Beide dergestalt sich schweigend gefasst und gekräftigt hatten, gaben
sie sich die Hände, zum Zeichen, dass sie sich wiedererkennen wollten.

„Sei mir willkommen, sagte Zarathustra, du Wahrsager der grossen
Müdigkeit, du sollst nicht umsonst einstmals mein Tisch- und Gastfreund
gewesen sein. Iss und trink auch heute bei mir und vergieb es, dass ein
vergnügter alter Mann mit dir zu Tische sitzt!“—„Ein vergnügter alter
Mann? antwortete der Wahrsager, den Kopf schüttelnd: wer du aber auch
bist oder sein willst, oh Zarathustra, du bist es zum Längsten hier
Oben gewesen,—dein Nachen soll über Kurzem nicht mehr im Trocknen
sitzen!“—„Sitze ich denn im Trocknen?“ fragte Zarathustra lachend.—„Die
Wellen um deinen Berg, antwortete der Wahrsager, steigen und steigen,
die Wellen grosser Noth und Trübsal: die werden bald auch deinen Nachen
heben und dich davontragen.“—Zarathustra schwieg hierauf und wunderte
sich.—„Hörst du noch Nichts? fuhr der Wahrsager fort: rauscht und
braust es nicht herauf aus der Tiefe?“—Zarathustra schwieg abermals und
horchte: da hörte er einen langen, langen Schrei, welchen die Abgründe
sich zuwarfen und weitergaben, denn keiner wollte ihn behalten: so böse
klang er.

„Du schlimmer Verkündiger, sprach endlich Zarathustra, das ist ein
Nothschrei und der Schrei eines Menschen, der mag wohl aus einem
schwarzen Meere kommen. Aber was geht mich Menschen-Noth an! Meine
letzte Sünde, die mir aufgespart blieb,—weisst du wohl, wie sie
heisst?“

—„Mitleiden! antwortete der Wahrsager aus einem überströmenden Herzen
und hob beide Hände empor—oh Zarathustra, ich komme, dass ich dich zu
deiner letzten Sünde verführe!“—

Und kaum waren diese Worte gesprochen, da erscholl der Schrei abermals,
und länger und ängstlicher als vorher, auch schon viel näher. „Hörst
du? Hörst du, oh Zarathustra? rief der Wahrsager, dir gilt der Schrei,
dich ruft er: komm, komm, komm, es ist Zeit, es ist höchste Zeit!“—

Zarathustra schwieg hierauf, verwirrt und erschüttert; endlich fragte
er, wie Einer, der bei sich selber zögert: „Und wer ist das, der dort
mich ruft?“

„Aber du weisst es ja, antwortete der Wahrsager heftig, was verbirgst
du dich? _Der höhere Mensch_ ist es, der nach dir schreit!“

„Der höhere Mensch? schrie Zarathustra von Grausen erfasst: was will
_der_? Was will _der_? Der höhere Mensch! Was will der hier?“—und seine
Haut bedeckte sich mit Schweiss.

Der Wahrsager aber antwortete nicht auf die Angst Zarathustra’s,
sondern horchte und horchte nach der Tiefe zu. Als es jedoch lange Zeit
dort stille blieb, wandte er seinen Blick zurück und sahe Zarathustra
stehn und zittern.

„Oh Zarathustra, hob er mit trauriger Stimme an, du stehst nicht da wie
Einer, den sein Glück drehend macht: du wirst tanzen müssen, dass du
mir nicht umfällst!

Aber wenn du auch vor mir tanzen wolltest und alle deine Seitensprünge
springen: Niemand soll mir doch sagen dürfen: „Siehe, hier tanzt der
letzte frohe Mensch!“

Umsonst käme Einer auf diese Höhe, der den hier suchte: Höhlen fände er
wohl und Hinter-Höhlen, Verstecke für Versteckte, aber nicht
Glücks-Schachte und Schatzkammern und neue Glücks-Goldadern.

Glück—wie fände man wohl das Glück bei solchen Vergrabenen und
Einsiedlern! Muss ich das letzte Glück noch auf glückseligen Inseln
suchen und ferne zwischen vergessenen Meeren?

Aber Alles ist gleich, es lohnt sich Nichts, es hilft kein Suchen, es
giebt auch keine glückseligen Inseln mehr!“—

Also seufzte der Wahrsager; bei seinem letzten Seufzer aber wurde
Zarathustra wieder hell und sicher, gleich Einem, der aus einem tiefen
Schlunde an’s Licht kommt. „Nein! Nein! Drei Mal Nein! rief er mit
starker Stimme und strich sich den Bart—_Das_ weiss ich besser! Es
giebt noch glückselige Inseln! Stille _davon_, du seufzender
Trauersack!

Höre _davon_ auf zu plätschern, du Regenwolke am Vormittag! Stehe ich
denn nicht schon da, nass von deiner Trübsal und begossen wie ein Hund?

Nun schüttle ich mich und laufe dir davon, dass ich wieder trocken
werde: dess darfst du nicht Wunder haben! Dünke ich dir unhöflich? Aber
hier ist _mein_ Hof.

Was aber deinen höheren Menschen angeht: wohlan! ich suche ihn flugs in
jenen Wäldern: _daher_ kam sein Schrei. Vielleicht bedrängt ihn da ein
böses Thier.

Er ist in _meinem_ Bereiche: darin soll er mir nicht zu Schaden kommen!
Und wahrlich, es giebt viele böse Thiere bei mir.“—

Mit diesen Worten wandte sich Zarathustra zum Gehen. Da sprach der
Wahrsager: „Oh Zarathustra, du bist ein Schelm!

Ich weiss es schon: du willst mich los sein! Lieber noch läufst du in
die Wälder und stellst bösen Thieren nach!

Aber was hilft es dir? Des Abends wirst du doch mich wiederhaben, in
deiner eignen Höhle werde ich dasitzen, geduldig und schwer wie ein
Klotz—und auf dich warten!“

„So sei’s! rief Zarathustra zurück im Fortgehn: und was mein ist in
meiner Höhle, gehört auch dir, meinem Gastfreunde!

Solltest du aber drin noch Honig finden, wohlan! so lecke ihn nur auf,
du Brummbär, und versüsse deine Seele! Am Abende nämlich wollen wir
Beide guter Dinge sein,

—guter Dinge und froh darob, dass dieser Tag zu Ende gieng! Und du
selber sollst zu meinen Liedern als mein Tanzbär tanzen.

Du glaubst nicht daran? Du schüttelst den Kopf? Wohlan! Wohlauf! Alter
Bär! Aber auch ich—bin ein Wahrsager.“

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Gespräch mit den Königen

1.

Zarathustra war noch keine Stunde in seinen Bergen und Wäldern
unterwegs, da sahe er mit Einem Male einen seltsamen Aufzug. Gerade auf
dem Wege, den er hinabwollte, kamen zwei Könige gegangen, mit Kronen
und Purpurgürteln geschmückt und bunt wie Flamingo-Vögel: die trieben
einen beladenen Esel vor sich her. „Was wollen diese Könige in meinem
Reiche?“ sprach Zarathustra erstaunt zu seinem Herzen und versteckte
Sich geschwind hinter einem Busche. Als aber die Könige bis zu ihm
herankamen, sagte er, halblaut, wie Einer, der zu sich allein redet:
„Seltsam! Seltsam! Wie reimt sich Das zusammen? Zwei Könige sehe
ich—und nur Einen Esel!“

Da machten die beiden Könige Halt, lächelten, sahen nach der Stelle
hin, woher die Stimme kam, und sahen sich nachher selber in’s Gesicht.
„Solcherlei denkt man wohl auch unter uns, sagte der König zur Rechten,
aber man spricht es nicht aus.“

Der König zur Linken aber zuckte mit den Achseln und antwortete: „Das
mag wohl ein Ziegenhirt sein. Oder ein Einsiedler, der zu lange unter
Felsen und Bäumen lebte. Gar keine Gesellschaft nämlich verdirbt auch
die guten Sitten.“

„Die guten Sitten? entgegnete unwillig und bitter der andre König: wem
laufen wir denn aus dem Wege? Ist es nicht den „guten Sitten“? Unsrer
„guten Gesellschaft“?

Lieber, wahrlich, unter Einsiedlern und Ziegenhirten als mit unserm
vergoldeten falschen überschminkten Pöbel leben,—ob er sich schon „gute
Gesellschaft“ heisst,

—ob er sich schon „Adel“ heisst. Aber da ist Alles falsch und faul,
voran das Blut, Dank alten schlechten Krankheiten und schlechteren
Heil-Künstlern.

Der Beste und Liebste ist mir heute noch ein gesunder Bauer, grob,
listig, hartnäckig, langhaltig: das ist heute die vornehmste Art.

Der Bauer ist heute der Beste; und Bauern-Art sollte Herr sein! Aber es
ist das Reich des Pöbels,—ich lasse mir Nichts mehr vormachen. Pöbel
aber, das heisst: Mischmasch.

Pöbel-Mischmasch: darin ist Alles in Allem durcheinander, Heiliger und
Hallunke und Junker und Jude und jeglich Vieh aus der Arche Noäh.

Gute Sitten! Alles ist bei uns falsch und faul. Niemand weiss mehr zu
verehren: _dem_ gerade laufen wir davon. Es sind süssliche zudringliche
Hunde, sie vergolden Palmenblätter.

Dieser Ekel würgt mich, dass wir Könige selber falsch wurden, überhängt
und verkleidet durch alten vergilbten Grossväter-Prunk, Schaumünzen für
die Dümmsten und die Schlauesten, und wer heute Alles mit der Macht
Schacher treibt!

Wir _sind_ nicht die Ersten—und müssen es doch _bedeuten_: dieser
Betrügerei sind wir endlich satt und ekel geworden.

Dem Gesindel giengen wir aus dem Wege, allen diesen Schreihälsen und
Schreib-Schmeissfliegen, dem Krämer-Gestank, dem Ehrgeiz-Gezappel, dem
üblen Athem—: pfui, unter dem Gesindel leben,

—pfui, unter dem Gesindel die Ersten zu bedeuten! Ach, Ekel! Ekel!
Ekel! Was liegt noch an uns Königen!“—

„Deine alte Krankheit fällt dich an, sagte hier der König zur Linken,
der Ekel fällt dich an, mein armer Bruder. Aber du weisst es doch, es
hört uns Einer zu.“

Sofort erhob sich Zarathustra, der zu diesen Reden Ohren und Augen
aufgesperrt hatte, aus seinem Schlupfwinkel, trat auf die Könige zu und
begann:

„Der Euch zuhört, der Euch gerne zuhört, ihr Könige, der heisst
Zarathustra.

Ich bin Zarathustra, der einst sprach: „Was liegt noch an Königen!“
Vergebt mir, ich freute mich, als Ihr zu einander sagtet: „Was liegt an
uns Königen!“

Hier aber ist _mein_ Reich und meine Herrschaft: was mögt Ihr wohl in
meinem Reiche suchen? Vielleicht aber _fandet_ Ihr unterwegs, was _ich_
suche: nämlich den höheren Menschen.“

Als Diess die Könige hörten, schlugen sie sich an die Brust und
sprachen mit Einem Munde: „Wir sind erkannt!

Mit dem Schwerte dieses Wortes zerhaust du unsres Herzens dickste
Finsterniss. Du entdecktest unsre Noth, denn siehe! Wir sind unterwegs,
dass wir den höheren Menschen fänden—

—den Menschen, der höher ist als wir: ob wir gleich Könige sind. Ihm
führen wir diesen Esel zu. Der höchste Mensch nämlich soll auf Erden
auch der höchste Herr sein.

Es giebt kein härteres Unglück in allem Menschen-Schicksale, als wenn
die Mächtigen der Erde nicht auch die ersten Menschen sind. Da wird
Alles falsch und schief und ungeheuer.

Und wenn sie gar die letzten sind und mehr Vieh als Mensch: da steigt
und steigt der Pöbel im Preise, und endlich spricht gar die
Pöbel-Tugend: „siehe, ich allein bin Tugend!“—

Was hörte ich eben? antwortete Zarathustra; welche Weisheit bei
Königen! Ich bin entzückt, und, wahrlich, schon gelüstet’s mich, einen
Reim darauf zu machen:—

—mag es auch ein Reim werden, der nicht für Jedermanns Ohren taugt. Ich
verlernte seit langem schon die Rücksicht auf lange Ohren. Wohlan!
Wohlauf!

(Hier aber geschah es, dass auch der Esel zu Worte kam: er sagte aber
deutlich und mit bösem Willen I-A.)

Einstmals—ich glaub’, im Jahr des Heiles Eins—
Sprach die Sibylle, trunken sonder Weins:
„Weh, nun geht’s schief!
Verfall! Verfall! Nie sank die Welt so tief!
Rom sank zur Hure und zur Huren-Bude,
Rom’s Caesar sank zum Vieh, Gott selbst—ward Jude!“

2.

An diesen Reimen Zarathustra’s weideten sich die Könige; der König zur
Rechten aber sprach: „oh Zarathustra, wie gut thaten wir, dass wir
auszogen, dich zu sehn!

Deine Feinde nämlich zeigten uns dein Bild in ihrem Spiegel: da
blicktest du mit der Fratze eines Teufels und hohnlachend: also dass
wir uns vor dir fürchteten.

Aber was half’s! Immer wieder stachst du uns in Ohr und Herz mit deinen
Sprüchen. Da sprachen wir endlich: was liegt daran, wie er aussieht!

Wir müssen ihn _hören_, ihn, der lehrt „ihr sollt den Frieden lieben
als Mittel zu neuen Kriegen, und den kurzen Frieden mehr als den
langen!“

Niemand sprach je so kriegerische Worte: „Was ist gut? Tapfer sein ist
gut. Der gute Krieg ist’s, der jede Sache heiligt.“

Oh Zarathustra, unsrer Väter Blut rührte sich bei solchen Worten in
unserm Leibe: das war wie die Rede des Frühlings zu alten Weinfässern.

Wenn die Schwerter durcheinander liefen gleich rothgefleckten
Schlangen, da wurden unsre Väter dem Leben gut; alles Friedens Sonne
dünkte sie flau und lau, der lange Frieden aber machte Scham.

Wie sie seufzten, unsre Väter, wenn sie an der Wand blitzblanke
ausgedorrte Schwerter sahen! Denen gleich dürsteten sie nach Krieg. Ein
Schwert nämlich will Blut trinken und funkelt vor Begierde.“—

—Als die Könige dergestalt mit Eifer von dem Glück ihrer Väter redeten
und schwätzten, überkam Zarathustra keine kleine Lust, ihres Eifers zu
spotten: denn ersichtlich waren es sehr friedfertige Könige, welche er
vor sich sah, solche mit alten und feinen Gesichtern. Aber er bezwang
sich. „Wohlan! sprach er, dorthin führt der Weg, da liegt die Höhle
Zarathustra’s; und dieser Tag soll einen langen Abend haben! Jetzt aber
ruft mich eilig ein Nothschrei fort von Euch.

Es ehrt meine Höhle, wenn Könige in ihr sitzen und warten wollen: aber,
freilich, Ihr werdet lange warten müssen!

Je nun! Was thut’s! Wo lernt man heute besser warten als an Höfen? Und
der Könige ganze Tugend, die ihnen übrig blieb,—heisst sie heute nicht:
Warten-_können_?“

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Der Blutegel

Und Zarathustra gieng nachdenklich weiter und tiefer, durch Wälder und
vorbei an moorigen Gründen; wie es aber Jedem ergeht, der über schwere
Dinge nachdenkt, so trat er unversehens dabei auf einen Menschen. Und
siehe, da sprützten ihm mit Einem Male ein Weheschrei und zwei Flüche
und zwanzig schlimme Schimpfworte in’s Gesicht: also dass er in seinem
Schrecken den Stock erhob und auch auf den Getretenen noch zuschlug.
Gleich darauf aber kam ihm die Besinnung; und sein Herz lachte über die
Thorheit, die er eben gethan hatte.

„Vergieb, sagte er zu dem Getretenen, der sich grimmig erhoben und
gesetzt hatte, vergieb und vernimm vor Allem erst ein Gleichniss.

Wie ein Wanderer, der von fernen Dingen träumt, unversehens auf
einsamer Strasse einen schlafenden Hund anstösst, einen Hund, der in
der Sonne liegt:

—wie da Beide auffahren, sich anfahren, Todfeinden gleich, diese zwei
zu Tod Erschrockenen: also ergieng es uns.

Und doch! Und doch—wie wenig hat gefehlt, dass sie einander liebkosten,
dieser Hund und dieser Einsame! Sind sie doch Beide—Einsame!“

—„Wer du auch sein magst, sagte immer noch grimmig der Getretene, du
trittst mir auch mit deinem Gleichniss zu nahe, und nicht nur mit
deinem Fusse!

Siehe doch, bin ich denn ein Hund?“—und dabei erhob sich der Sitzende
und zog seinen nackten Arm aus dem Sumpfe. Zuerst nämlich hatte er
ausgestreckt am Boden gelegen, verborgen und unkenntlich gleich
Solchen, die einem Sumpf-Wilde auflauern.

„Aber was treibst du doch!“ rief Zarathustra erschreckt, denn er sahe,
dass über den nackten Arm weg viel Blut floss,—was ist dir zugestossen?
Biss dich, du Unseliger, ein schlimmes Thier?

Der Blutende lachte, immer noch erzürnt. „Was geht’s dich an! sagte er
und wollte weitergehn. Hier bin ich heim und in meinem Bereiche. Mag
mich fragen, wer da will: einem Tölpel aber werde ich schwerlich
antworten.“

„Du irrst, sagte Zarathustra mitleidig und hielt ihn fest, du irrst:
hier bist du nicht bei dir, sondern in meinem Reiche, und darin soll
mir Keiner zu Schaden kommen.

Nenne mich aber immerhin, wie du willst,—ich bin, der ich sein muss.
Ich selber heisse mich Zarathustra.

Wohlan! Dort hinauf geht der Weg zu Zarathustra’s Höhle: die ist nicht
fern,—willst du nicht bei mir deiner Wunden warten?

Es gieng dir schlimm, du Unseliger, in diesem Leben: erst biss dich das
Thier, und dann—trat dich der Mensch!“—

Als aber der Getretene den Namen Zarathustra’s hörte, verwandelte er
sich. „Was geschieht mir doch! rief er aus, _wer_ kümmert mich denn
noch in diesem Leben, als dieser Eine Mensch, nämlich Zarathustra, und
jenes Eine Thier, das vom Blute lebt, der Blutegel?

Des Blutegels halber lag ich hier an diesem Sumpfe wie ein Fischer, und
schon war mein ausgehängter Arm zehn Mal angebissen, da beisst noch ein
schönerer Igel nach meinem Blute, Zarathustra selber!

Oh Glück! Oh Wunder! Gelobt sei dieser Tag, der mich in diesen Sumpf
lockte! Gelobt sei der beste lebendigste Schröpfkopf, der heut lebt,
gelobt sei der grosse Gewissens-Blutegel Zarathustra!“—

Also sprach der Getretene; und Zarathustra freute sich über seine Worte
und ihre feine ehrfürchtige Art. „Wer bist du? fragte er und reichte
ihm die Hand, zwischen uns bleibt Viel aufzuklären und aufzuheitern:
aber schon, dünkt mich, wird es reiner heller Tag.“

„Ich bin _der Gewissenhafte des Geistes_, antwortete der Gefragte, und
in Dingen des Geistes nimmt es nicht leicht Einer strenger, enger und
härter als ich, ausgenommen der, von dem ich’s lernte, Zarathustra
selber.

Lieber Nichts wissen, als Vieles halb wissen! Lieber ein Narr sein auf
eigne Faust, als ein Weiser nach fremdem Gutdünken! Ich—gehe auf den
Grund:

—was liegt daran, ob er gross oder klein ist? Ob er Sumpf oder Himmel
heisst? Eine Hand breit Grund ist mir genung: wenn er nur wirklich
Grund und Boden ist!

—eine Hand breit Grund: darauf kann man stehn. In der rechten
Wissen-Gewissenschaft giebt es nichts Grosses und nichts Kleines.“

„So bist du vielleicht der Erkenner des Blutegels? fragte Zarathustra;
und du gehst dem Blutegel nach bis auf die letzten Gründe, du
Gewissenhafter?“

„Oh Zarathustra, antwortete der Getretene, das wäre ein Ungeheures, wie
dürfte ich mich dessen unterfangen!

Wess ich aber Meister und Kenner bin, das ist des Blutegels _Hirn_:—das
ist _meine_ Welt!

Und es ist auch eine Welt! Vergieb aber, dass hier mein Stolz zu Worte
kommt, denn ich habe hier nicht meines Gleichen. Darum sprach ich „hier
bin ich heim.“

Wie lange gehe ich schon diesem Einen nach, dem Hirn des Blutegels,
dass die schlüpfrige Wahrheit mir hier nicht mehr entschlüpfe! Hier ist
_mein_ Reich!

—darob warf ich alles Andere fort, darob wurde mir alles. Andre gleich;
und dicht neben meinem Wissen lagert mein schwarzes Unwissen.

Mein Gewissen des Geistes will es so von mir, dass ich Eins weiss und
sonst Alles nicht weiss: es ekelt mich aller Halben des Geistes, aller
Dunstigen, Schwebenden, Schwärmerischen.

Wo meine Redlichkeit aufhört, bin ich blind und will auch blind sein.
Wo ich aber wissen will, will ich auch redlich sein, nämlich hart,
streng, eng, grausam, unerbittlich.

Dass _du_ einst sprachst, oh Zarathustra: „Geist ist das Leben, das
selber in’s Leben schneidet,“ das führte und verführte mich zu deiner
Lehre. Und, wahrlich, mit eignem Blute mehrte ich mir das eigne
Wissen!“

—„Wie der Augenschein lehrt,“ fiel Zarathustra ein; denn immer noch
floss das Blut an dem nackten Arme des Gewissenhaften herab. Es hatten
nämlich zehn Blutegel sich in denselben eingebissen.

„Oh du wunderlicher Gesell, wie Viel lehrt mich dieser Augenschein da,
nämlich du selber! Und nicht Alles dürfte ich vielleicht in deine
strengen Ohren giessen!

Wohlan! So scheiden wir hier! Doch möchte ich gerne dich wiederfinden.
Dort hinauf führt der Weg zu meiner Höhle: heute Nacht sollst du dort
mein lieber Gast sein!

Gerne möchte ich’s auch an deinem Leibe wieder gut machen, dass
Zarathustra dich mit Füssen trat: darüber denke ich nach. Jetzt aber
ruft mich ein Nothschrei eilig fort von dir.“

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Der Zauberer

1.

Als aber Zarathustra um einen Felsen herumbog, da sahe er, nicht weit
unter sich, auf dem gleichen Wege, einen Menschen, der die Glieder warf
wie ein Tobsüchtiger und endlich bäuchlings zur Erde niederstürzte.
„Halt! sprach da Zarathustra zu seinem Herzen, Der dort muss wohl der
höhere Mensch sein, von ihm kam jener schlimme Nothschrei,—ich will
sehn, ob da zu helfen ist.“ Als er aber hinzulief, an die Stelle, wo
der Mensch auf dem Boden lag, fand er einen zitternden alten Mann mit
stieren Augen; und wie sehr sich Zarathustra mühte, dass er ihn
aufrichte und wieder auf seine Beine stelle, es war umsonst. Auch
schien der Unglückliche nicht zu merken, dass jemand um ihn sei;
vielmehr sah er sich immer mit rührenden Gebärden um, wie ein von aller
Welt Verlassener und Vereinsamter. Zuletzt aber, nach vielem Zittern,
Zucken und Sich-zusammen-Krümmen, begann er also zu jammern:

Wer wärmt mich, wer liebt mich noch?
Gebt heisse Hände!
Gebt Herzens-Kohlenbecken!
Hingestreckt, schaudernd,
Halbtodtem gleich, dem man die Füsse wärmt—
Geschüttelt, ach! von unbekannten Fiebern,
Zitternd vor spitzen eisigen Frost-Pfeilen,
Von dir gejagt, Gedanke!
Unnennbarer! Verhüllter! Entsetzlicher!
Du Jäger hinter Wolken!
Darniedergeblitzt von dir,
Du höhnisch Auge, das mich aus Dunklem anblickt:
—so liege ich,
Biege mich, winde mich, gequält
Von allen ewigen Martern,
Getroffen
Von Dir, grausamster Jäger,
Du unbekannter—Gott!

Triff tiefer,
Triff Ein Mal noch!
Zerstich, zerbrich diess Herz!
Was soll diess Martern
Mit zähnestumpfen Pfeilen?
Was blickst du wieder,
Der Menschen-Qual nicht müde,
Mit schadenfrohen Götter-Blitz-Augen?
Nicht tödten willst du,
Nur martern, martern?
Wozu—_mich_ martern,
Du schadenfroher unbekannter Gott?—

Haha! Du schleichst heran?
Bei solcher Mitternacht
Was willst du? Sprich!
Du drängst mich, drückst mich—
Ha! schon viel zu nahe!
Weg! Weg!
Du hörst mich athmen,
Du behorchst mein Herz,
Du Eifersüchtiger—
Worauf doch eifersüchtig?
Weg! Weg! Wozu die Leiter?
Willst _du hinein_,
In’s Herz,
Einsteigen, in meine heimlichsten
Gedanken einsteigen?
Schamloser! Unbekannter—Dieb!
Was willst du dir erstehlen,
Was willst du dir erhorchen,
Was willst du dir erfoltern,
Du Folterer!
Du—Henker-Gott!
Oder soll ich, dem Hunde gleich,
Vor dir mich wälzen?
Hingebend, begeistert-ausser-mir,
Dir—Liebe zuwedeln?

Umsonst!
Stich weiter,
Grausamster Stachel! Nein,
Kein Hund—dein Wild nur bin ich,
Grausamster Jäger!
Dein stolzester Gefangner,
Du Räuber hinter Wolken...
Sprich endlich,
Was willst du, Wegelagerer, von _mir_?
Du Blitz-Verhüllter! Unbekannter! Sprich,
Was _willst_ du, unbekannter Gott?—-

Wie?
Lösegeld?
Was willst du Lösegelds?
Verlange Viel—das räth mein Stolz!
Und rede kurz—das räth mein andrer Stolz!

Haha!
Mich—willst du? Mich?
Mich—ganz?

Haha!
Und marterst mich, Narr, der du bist,
Zermarterst meinen Stolz?
Gieb _Liebe_ mir—wer wärmt mich noch?
Wer liebt mich noch?—gieb heisse Hände,
Gieb Herzens-Kohlenbecken,
Gieb mir, dem Einsamsten,
Den Eis, ach! siebenfaches Eis
Nach Feinden selber,
Nach Feinden schmachten lehrt,
Gieb, ja ergieb,
Grausamster Feind,
Mir—_dich_!...

Davon!
Da floh er selber,
Mein letzter einziger Genoss,
Mein grosser Feind,
Mein Unbekannter,
Mein Henker-Gott!...

—Nein!
Komm zurück,
Mit allen deinen Martern!
Zum Letzten aller Einsamen
Oh komm zurück!
All meine Thränen-Bäche laufen
Zu dir den Lauf!

Und meine letzte Herzens-Flamme—
_Dir_ glüht sie auf!
Oh komm zurück,
Mein unbekannter Gott! Mein Schmerz!
Mein letztes Glück!

2.

—Hier aber konnte sich Zarathustra nicht länger halten, nahm seinen
Stock und schlug mit allen Kräften auf den jammernden los. „Halt ein!
schrie er ihm zu, mit ingrimmigem Lachen, halt ein, du Schauspieler! Du
Falschmünzer! Du Lügner aus dem Grunde! Ich erkenne dich wohl!

Ich will dir schon warme Beine machen, du schlimmer Zauberer, ich
verstehe mich gut darauf, Solchen wie du bist—einzuheizen!“

—„Lass ab, sagte der alte Mann und sprang vom Boden auf, schlage nicht
mehr, oh Zarathustra! Ich trieb’s also nur zum Spiele!

Solcherlei gehört zu meiner Kunst; dich selber wollte ich auf die Probe
stellen, als ich dir diese Probe gab! Und, wahrlich, du hast mich gut
durchschaut!

Aber auch du—gabst mir von dir keine kleine Probe: du bist _hart_, du
weiser Zarathustra! Hart schlägst du zu mit deinen „Wahrheiten“, dein
Knüttel erzwingt von mir—_diese_ Wahrheit!“

—„Schmeichle nicht, antwortete Zarathustra, immer noch erregt und
finsterblickend, du Schauspieler aus dem Grunde! Du bist falsch: was
redest du —von Wahrheit!

Du Pfau der Pfauen, du Meer der Eitelkeit, _was_ spieltest du vor mir,
du schlimmer Zauberer, an _wen_ sollte ich glauben, als du in solcher
Gestalt jammertest?“

„Den Büsser des Geistes, sagte der alte Mann, _den_—spielte ich: du
selber erfandest einst diess Wort—

—den Dichter und Zauberer, der gegen sich selber endlich seinen Geist
wendet, den Verwandelten, der an seinem bösen Wissen und Gewissen
erfriert.

Und gesteh es nur ein: es währte lange, oh Zarathustra, bis du hinter
meine Kunst und Lüge kamst! _Du glaubtest_ an meine Noth, als du mir
den Kopf mit beiden Händen hieltest,—

—ich hörte dich jammern „man hat ihn zu wenig geliebt, zu wenig
geliebt!“ Dass ich dich soweit betrog, darüber frohlockte inwendig
meine Bosheit.“

„Du magst Feinere betrogen haben als mich, sagte Zarathustra hart. Ich
bin nicht auf der Hut vor Betrügern, ich _muss_ ohne Vorsicht sein: so
will es mein Loos.

Du aber—_musst_ betrügen: so weit kenne ich dich! Du musst immer zwei-
drei- vier- und fünfdeutig sein! Auch was du jetzt bekanntest, war mir
lange nicht wahr und nicht falsch genung!

Du schlimmer Falschmünzer, wie könntest du anders! Deine Krankheit
würdest du noch schminken, wenn du dich deinem Arzte nackt zeigtest.

So schminktest du eben vor mir deine Lüge, als du sprachst: „ich
trieb’s also _nur_ zum Spiele!“ Es war auch _Ernst_ darin, du _bist_
Etwas von einem Büsser des Geistes!

Ich errathe dich wohl: du wurdest der Bezauberer Aller, aber gegen dich
hast du keine Lüge und List mehr übrig,—du selber bist dir entzaubert!

Du erntetest den Ekel ein, als deine Eine Wahrheit. Kein Wort ist mehr
an dir ächt, aber dein Mund: nämlich der Ekel, der an deinem Munde
klebt.“—

—„Wer bist du doch! schrie hier der alte Zauberer mit einer trotzigen
Stimme, wer darf also zu _mir_ reden, dem Grössten, der heute
lebt?“—und ein grüner Blitz schoss aus seinem Auge nach Zarathustra.
Aber gleich darauf verwandelte er sich und sagte traurig:

„Oh Zarathustra, ich bin’s müde, es ekelt mich meiner Künste, ich bin
nicht _gross_, was verstelle ich mich! Aber, du weisst es wohl—ich
suchte nach Grösse!

Einen grossen Menschen wollte ich vorstellen und überredete Viele: aber
diese Lüge gieng über meine Kraft. An ihr zerbreche ich.

Oh Zarathustra, Alles ist Lüge an mir; aber dass ich zerbreche—diess
mein Zerbrechen ist _ächt_!“—

„Es ehrt dich, sprach Zarathustra düster und zur Seite niederblickend,
es ehrt dich, dass du nach Grösse suchtest, aber es verräth dich auch.
Du bist nicht gross.

Du schlimmer alter Zauberer, _das_ ist dein Bestes und Redlichstes, was
ich an dir ehre, dass du deiner müde wurdest und es aussprachst: „ich
bin nicht gross.“

_Darin_ ehre ich dich als einen Büsser des Geistes: und wenn auch nur
für einen Hauch und Husch, diesen Einen Augenblick warst du—ächt.

Aber sprich, was suchst du hier in _meinen_ Wäldern und Felsen? Und
wenn du _mir_ dich in den Weg legtest, welche Probe wolltest du von
mir?—

—wess versuchtest du _mich_?“—

Also sprach Zarathustra, und seine Augen funkelten. Der alte Zauberer
schwieg eine Weile, dann sagte er: „Versuchte ich dich? Ich—suche nur.

Oh Zarathustra, ich suche einen Ächten, Rechten, Einfachen,
Eindeutigen, einen Menschen aller Redlichkeit, ein Gefäss der Weisheit,
einen Heiligen der Erkenntniss, einen grossen Menschen!

Weisst du es denn nicht, oh Zarathustra? Ich suche Zarathustra.“

—Und hier entstand ein langes Stillschweigen zwischen Beiden;
Zarathustra aber versank tief hinein in sich selber, also dass er die
Augen schloss. Dann aber, zu seinem Unterredner zurückkehrend, ergriff
er die Hand des Zauberers und sprach, voller Artigkeit und Arglist:

„Wohlan! Dort hinauf führt der Weg, da liegt die Höhle Zarathustra’s.
In ihr darfst du suchen, wen du finden möchtest.

Und frage meine Thiere um Rath, meinen Adler und meine Schlange: die
sollen dir suchen helfen. Meine Höhle aber ist gross.

Ich selber freilich—ich sah noch keinen grossen Menschen. Was gross
ist, dafür ist das Auge der Feinsten heute grob. Es ist das Reich des
Pöbels.

So Manchen fand ich schon, der streckte und blähte sich, und das Volk
schrie: „Seht da, einen grossen Menschen!“ Aber was helfen alle
Blasebälge! Zuletzt fährt der Wind heraus.

Zuletzt platzt ein Frosch, der sich zu lange aufblies: da fährt der
Wind heraus. Einem Geschwollnen in den Bauch stechen, das heisse ich
eine brave Kurzweil. Hört das, ihr Knaben!

Diess Heute ist des Pöbels: wer _weiss_ da noch, was gross, was klein
ist! Wer suchte da mit Glück nach Grösse! Ein Narr allein: den Narren
glückt’s.

Du suchst nach grossen Menschen, du wunderlicher Narr? Wer _lehrte’s_
dich? Ist heute dazu die Zeit? Oh du schlimmer Sucher, was—versuchst du
mich?“—

Also sprach Zarathustra, getrösteten Herzens, und gierig lachend seines
Wegs fürbass.


Ausser Dienst

Nicht lange aber, nachdem Zarathustra sich von dem Zauberer losgemacht
hatte, sahe er wiederum Jemanden am Wege sitzen, den er gierig, nämlich
einen schwarzen langen Mann mit einem hageren Bleichgesicht: _der_
verdross ihn gewaltig. „Wehe, sprach er zu seinem Herzen, da, sitzt
vermummte Trübsal, das dünkt mich von der Art der Priester: was wollen
_die_ in meinem Reiche?

Wie! Kaum bin ich jenem Zauberer entronnen: muss mir da wieder ein
anderer Schwarzkünstler über den Weg laufen,—

—irgend ein Hexenmeister mit Handauflegen, ein dunkler Wunderthäter von
Gottes Gnaden, ein gesalbter Welt-Verleumder, den der Teufel holen
möge!

Aber der Teufel ist nie am Platze, wo er am Platze wäre: immer kommt er
zu spät, dieser vermaledeite Zwerg und Klumpfuss!“—

Also fluchte Zarathustra ungeduldig in seinem Herzen und gedachte, wie
er abgewandten Blicks an dem schwarzen Manne vorüberschlüpfe: aber
siehe, es kam anders. Im gleichen Augenblicke nämlich hatte ihn schon
der Sitzende erblickt; und nicht unähnlich einem Solchen, dem ein
unvermuthetes Glück zustösst, sprang er auf und gieng auf Zarathustra
los.

„Wer du auch bist, du Wandersmann, sprach er, hilf einem Verirrten,
einem Suchenden, einem alten Manne, der hier leicht zu Schaden kommt!

Diese Welt hier ist mir fremd und fern, auch hörte ich wilde Thiere
heulen; und Der, welcher mir hätte Schutz bieten können, der ist selber
nicht mehr.

Ich suchte den letzten frommen Menschen, einen Heiligen und Einsiedler,
der allein in seinem Walde noch Nichts davon gehört hatte, was alle
Welt heute weiss.“

„_Was_ weiss heute alle Welt? fragte Zarathustra. Etwa diess, dass der
alte Gott nicht mehr lebt, an den alle Welt einst geglaubt hat?“

„Du sagst es, antwortete der alte Mann betrübt. Und ich diente diesem
alten Gotte bis zu seiner letzten Stunde.

Nun aber bin ich ausser Dienst, ohne Herrn, und doch nicht frei, auch
keine Stunde mehr lustig, es sei denn in Erinnerungen.

Dazu stieg ich in diese Berge, dass ich endlich wieder ein Fest mir
machte, wie es einem alten Papste und Kirchen-Vater zukommt: denn
wisse, ich bin der letzte Papst!—ein Fest frommer Erinnerungen und
Gottesdienste.

Nun aber ist er selber todt, der frömmste Mensch, jener Heilige im
Walde, der seinen Gott beständig mit Singen und Brummen lobte.

Ihn selber fand ich nicht mehr, als ich seine Hütte fand,—wohl aber
zwei Wölfe darin, welche um seinen Tod heulten—denn alle Thiere liebten
ihn. Da lief ich davon.

Kam ich also umsonst in diese Wälder und Berge? Da entschloss sich mein
Herz, dass ich einen Anderen suchte, den Frömmsten aller Derer, die
nicht an Gott glauben—, dass ich Zarathustra suchte!“

Also sprach der Greis und blickte scharfen Auges Den an, welcher vor
ihm stand; Zarathustra aber ergriff die Hand des alten Papstes und
betrachtete sie lange mit Bewunderung.

„Siehe da, du Ehrwürdiger, sagte er dann, welche schöne und lange Hand!
Das ist die Hand eines Solchen, der immer Segen ausgetheilt hat. Nun
aber hält sie Den fest, welchen du suchst, mich, Zarathustra.

Ich bin’s, der gottlose Zarathustra, der da spricht: wer ist gottloser
als ich, dass ich mich seiner Unterweisung freue?“—

Also sprach Zarathustra und durchbohrte mit seinen Blicken die Gedanken
und Hintergedanken des alten Papstes. Endlich begann dieser:

„Wer ihn am meisten liebte und besass, der hat ihn nun am meisten auch
verloren -:

—siehe, ich selber bin wohl von uns Beiden jetzt der Gottlosere? Aber
wer könnte daran sich freuen!“—

„Du dientest ihm bis zuletzt, fragte Zarathustra nachdenklich, nach
einem tiefen Schweigen, du weisst, _wie_ er starb? Ist es wahr, was man
spricht, dass ihn das Mitleiden erwürgte,

—dass er es sah, wie _der Mensch_ am Kreuze hieng, und es nicht ertrug,
dass die Liebe zum Menschen seine Hölle und zuletzt sein Tod wurde?“—

Der alte Papst aber antwortete nicht, sondern blickte scheu und mit
einem schmerzlichen und düsteren Ausdrucke zur Seite.

„Lass ihn fahren, sagte Zarathustra nach einem langen Nachdenken, indem
er immer noch dem alten Manne gerade in’s Auge blickte.

Lass ihn fahren, er ist dahin. Und ob es dich auch ehrt, dass du diesem
Todten nur Gutes nachredest, so weisst du so gut als ich, _wer_ er war;
und dass er wunderliche Wege gieng.“

„Unter drei Augen gesprochen, sagte erheitert der alte Papst (denn er
war auf Einem Auge blind), in Dingen Gottes bin ich aufgeklärter als
Zarathustra selber —und darf es sein.

Meine Liebe diente ihm lange Jahre, mein Wille gierig allem seinen
Willen nach. Ein guter Diener aber weiss Alles, und Mancherlei auch,
was sein Herr sich selbst verbirgt.

Es war ein verborgener Gott, voller Heimlichkeit. Wahrlich zu einem
Sohne sogar kam er nicht anders als auf Schleichwegen. An der Thür
seines Glaubens steht der Ehebruch.

Wer ihn als einen Gott der Liebe preist, denkt nicht hoch genug von der
Liebe selber. Wollte dieser Gott nicht auch Richter sein? Aber der
Liebende liebt jenseits von Lohn und Vergeltung.

Als er jung war, dieser Gott aus dem Morgenlande, da war er hart und
rachsüchtig und erbaute sich eine Hölle zum Ergötzen seiner Lieblinge.

Endlich aber wurde er alt und weich und mürbe und mitleidig, einem
Grossvater ähnlicher als einem Vater, am ähnlichsten aber einer
wackeligen alten Grossmutter.

Da sass er, welk, in seinem Ofenwinkel, härmte sich ob seiner schwachen
Beine, weltmüde, willensmüde, und erstickte eines Tags an seinem
allzugrossen Mitleiden.“—

„Du alter Papst, sagte hier Zarathustra dazwischen, hast du _Das_ mit
Augen angesehn? Es könnte wohl so abgegangen sein: so, _und_ auch
anders. Wenn Götter sterben, sterben sie immer viele Arten Todes.

Aber wohlan! So oder so, so und so—er ist dahin! Er gieng meinen Ohren
und Augen wider den Geschmack, Schlimmeres möchte ich ihm nicht
nachsagen.

Ich liebe Alles, was hell blickt und redlich redet. Aber er—du weisst
es ja, du alter Priester, es war Etwas von deiner Art an ihm, von
Priester-Art—er war vieldeutig.

Er war auch undeutlich. Was hat er uns darob gezürnt, dieser
Zornschnauber, dass wir ihn schlecht verstanden Aber warum sprach er
nicht reinlicher?

Und lag es an unsern Ohren, warum gab er uns Ohren, die ihn schlecht
hörten? War Schlamm in unsern Ohren, wohlan! wer legte ihn hinein?

Zu Vieles missrieth ihm, diesem Töpfer, der nicht ausgelernt hatte!
Dass er aber Rache an seinen Töpfen und Geschöpfen nahm, dafür dass sie
ihm schlecht geriethen,—das war eine Sünde wider den _guten Geschmack_.

Es giebt auch in der Frömmigkeit guten Geschmack: der sprach endlich
„Fort mit einem _solchen_ Gotte! Lieber keinen Gott, lieber auf eigne
Faust Schicksal machen, lieber Narr sein, lieber selber Gott sein!““

—„Was höre ich! sprach hier der alte Papst mit gespitzten Ohren; oh
Zarathustra, du bist frömmer als du glaubst, mit einem solchen
Unglauben! Irgend ein Gott in dir bekehrte dich zu deiner
Gottlosigkeit.

Ist es nicht deine Frömmigkeit selber, die dich nicht mehr an einen
Gott glauben lässt? Und deine übergrosse Redlichkeit wird dich auch
noch jenseits von Gut und Böse wegfuhren!

Siehe, doch, was blieb dir aufgespart? Du hast Augen und Hand und Mund,
die sind zum Segnen vorher bestimmt seit Ewigkeit. Man segnet nicht mit
der Hand allein.

In deiner Nähe, ob du schon der Gottloseste sein willst, wittere ich
einen heimlichen Weih- und Wohlgeruch von langen Segnungen: mir wird
wohl und wehe dabei.

Lass mich deinen Gast sein, oh Zarathustra, für eine einzige Nacht!
Nirgends auf Erden wird es mir jetzt wohler als bei dir!“—

„Amen! So soll es sein! sprach Zarathustra mit grosser Verwunderung,
dort hinauf führt der Weg, da liegt die Höhle Zarathustra’s.

Gerne, fürwahr, würde ich dich selber dahin geleiten, du Ehrwürdiger,
denn ich liebe alle frommen Menschen. Aber jetzt ruft mich eilig ein
Nothschrei weg von dir.

In meinem Bereiche soll mir Niemand zu Schaden kommen; meine Höhle ist
ein guter Hafen. Und am liebsten möchte ich jedweden Traurigen wieder
auf festes Land und feste Beine stellen.

Wer aber nähme dir _deine_ Schwermuth von der Schulter? Dazu bin ich zu
schwach. Lange, wahrlich, möchten wir warten, bis dir Einer deinen Gott
wieder aufweckt.

Dieser alte Gott nämlich lebt nicht mehr: der ist gründlich todt.“—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Der hässlichste Mensch

—Und wieder liefen Zarathustra’s Füsse durch Berge und Wälder, und
seine Augen suchten und suchten, aber nirgends war Der zu sehen,
welchen sie sehn wollten, der grosse Nothleidende und Nothschreiende.
Auf dem ganzen Wege aber frohlockte er in seinem Herzen und war
dankbar. „Welche guten Dinge, sprach er, schenkte mir doch dieser Tag,
zum Entgelt, dass er schlimm begann! Welche seltsamen Unterredner fand
ich!

An deren Worten will ich lange nun kauen gleich als an guten Körnern;
klein soll mein Zahn sie mahlen und malmen, bis sie mir wie Milch in
die Seele fliessen!“—

Als aber der Weg wieder um einen Felsen bog, veränderte sich mit Einem
Male die Landschaft, und Zarathustra trat in ein Reich des Todes. Hier
starrten schwarze und rothe Klippen empor: kein Gras, kein Baum, keine
Vogelstimme. Es war nämlich ein Thal, welches alle Thiere mieden, auch
die Raubthiere-, nur dass eine Art hässlicher, dicker, grüner
Schlangen, wenn sie alt wurden, hierher kamen, um zu sterben. Darum
nannten diess Thal die Hirten: Schlangen-Tod.

Zarathustra aber versank in eine schwarze Erinnerung, denn ihm war, als
habe er schon ein Mal in diesem Thal gestanden. Und vieles Schwere
legte sich ihm über den Sinn: also, dass er langsam gieng und immer
langsamer und endlich still stand. Da aber sahe er, als er die Augen
aufthat, Etwas, das am Wege sass, gestaltet wie ein Mensch und kaum wie
ein Mensch, etwas Unaussprechliches. Und mit Einem Schlage überfiel
Zarathustra die grosse Scham darob, dass er so Etwas mit den Augen
angesehn habe: erröthend bis hinauf an sein weisses Haar, wandte er den
Blick ab und hob den Fuss, dass er diese schlimme Stelle verlasse. Da
aber wurde die todte Öde laut: vom Boden auf nämlich quoll es gurgelnd
und röchelnd, wie Wasser Nachts durch verstopfte Wasser-Röhren gurgelt
und röchelt; und zuletzt wurde daraus eine Menschen-Stimme und
Menschen-Rede:—die lautete also.

„Zarathustra! Zarathustra! Rathe mein Räthsel! Sprich, sprich! Was ist
_die Rache am Zeugen_?

Ich locke dich zurück, hier ist glattes Eis! Sieh zu, sieh zu, ob dein
Stolz sich hier nicht die Beine bricht!

Du dünkst dich weise, du stolzer Zarathustra! So rathe doch das
Räthsel, du harter Nüsseknacker,—das Räthsel, das ich bin! So sprich
doch—wer bin _ich_!“

—Als aber Zarathustra diese Worte gehört hatte,—was glaubt ihr wohl,
dass sich da mit seiner Seele zutrug? Das Mitleiden fiel ihn an; und er
sank mit Einem Male nieder, wie ein Eichbaum, der lange vielen
Holzschlägern widerstanden hat,—schwer, plötzlich, zum Schrecken selber
für Die, welche ihn fällen wollten. Aber schon stand er wieder vom
Boden auf, und sein Antlitz wurde hart.

„Ich erkenne dich wohl, sprach er mit einer erzenen Stimme: du bist der
Mörder Gottes! Lass mich gehn.

Du _ertrugst_ Den nicht, der _dich_ sah,—der dich immer und durch und
durch sah, du hässlichster Mensch! Du nahmst Rache an diesem Zeugen!“

Also sprach Zarathustra und wollte davon; aber der Unaussprechliche
fasste nach einem Zipfel seines Gewandes und begann von Neuem zu
gurgeln und nach Worten zu suchen. „Bleib!“ sagte er endlich—

—„bleib! Geh nicht vorüber! Ich errieth, welche Axt dich zu Boden
schlug: Heil dir, oh Zarathustra, dass du wieder stehst!

Du erriethest, ich weiss es gut, wie Dem zu Muthe ist, der ihn
tödtete,—dem Mörder Gottes. Bleib! Setze dich her zu mir, es ist nicht
umsonst.

Zu wem wollte ich, wenn nicht zu dir? Bleib, setze dich! Blicke mich
aber nicht an! Ehre also—meine Hässlichkeit!

Sie verfolgen mich: nun bist _du_ meine letzte Zuflucht. _Nicht_ mit
ihrem Hasse, _nicht_ mit ihren Häschern:—oh solcher Verfolgung würde
ich spotten und stolz und froh sein!

War nicht aller Erfolg bisher bei den Gut-Verfolgten? Und wer gut
verfolgt, lernt leicht _folgen_:—ist er doch einmal—hinterher! Aber ihr
_Mitleid_ ist’s—

—ihr Mitleid ist’s, vor dem ich flüchte und dir zuflüchte. Oh
Zarathustra, schütze mich, du meine letzte Zuflucht, du Einziger, der
mich errieth:

—du erriethest, wie Dem zu Muthe ist, welcher _ihn_ tödtete. Bleib! Und
willst du gehn, du Ungeduldiger: geh nicht den Weg, den ich kam. _Der_
Weg ist schlecht.

Zürnst du mir, dass ich zu lange schon rede-rade-breche? Dass ich schon
dir rathe? Aber wisse, ich bin’s, der hässlichste Mensch,

—der auch die grössten schwersten Füsse hat. Wo _ich_ gieng, ist der
Weg schlecht. Ich trete alle Wege todt und zu Schanden.

Dass du aber an mir vorübergiengst, schweigend; dass du erröthetest,
ich sah es wohl: daran erkannte ich dich als Zarathustra.

Jedweder Andere hätte mir sein Almosen zugeworfen, sein Mitleiden, mit
Blick und Rede. Aber dazu—bin ich nicht Bettler genug, das erriethest
du—

—dazu bin ich zu _reich_, reich an Grossem, an Furchtbarem, am
Hässlichsten, am Unaussprechlichsten! Deine Scham, oh Zarathustra,
_ehrte_ mich!

Mit Noth kam ich heraus aus dem Gedräng der Mitleidigen,—dass ich den
Einzigen fände, der heute lehrt „Mitleiden ist zudringlich“—dich, oh
Zarathustra!

—sei es eines Gottes, sei es der Menschen Mitleiden: Mitleiden geht
gegen die Scham. Und nicht-helfen-wollen kann vornehmer sein als jene
Tugend, die zuspringt.

_Das_ aber heisst heute Tugend selber bei allen kleinen Leuten, das
Mitleiden:—die haben keine Ehrfurcht vor grossem Unglück, vor grosser
Hässlichkeit, vor grossem Missrathen.

Über diese Alle blicke ich hinweg, wie ein Hund über die Rücken
wimmelnder Schafheerden wegblickt. Es sind kleine wohlwollige
wohlwillige graue Leute.

Wie ein Reiher verachtend über flache Teiche wegblickt, mit
zurückgelegtem Kopfe: so blicke ich über das Gewimmel grauer kleiner
Wellen und Willen und Seelen weg.

Zu lange hat man ihnen Recht gegeben, diesen kleinen Leuten: _so_ gab
man ihnen endlich auch die Macht—nun lehren sie: „gut ist nur, was
kleine Leute gut heissen.“

Und „Wahrheit“ heisst heute, was der Prediger sprach, der selber aus
ihnen herkam, jener wunderliche Heilige und Fürsprecher der kleinen
Leute, welcher von sich zeugte „ich—bin die Wahrheit.“

Dieser Unbescheidne macht nun lange schon den kleinen Leuten den Kamm
hoch schwellen—er, der keinen kleinen Irrthum lehrte, als er lehrte
„ich—bin die Wahrheit.“

Ward einem Unbescheidnen jemals höflicher geantwortet?—Du aber, oh
Zarathustra, giengst an ihm vorüber und sprachst: „Nein! Nein! Drei Mal
Nein!“

Du warntest vor seinem Irrthum, du warntest als der Erste vor dem
Mitleiden—nicht Alle, nicht Keinen, sondern dich und deine Art.

Du schämst dich an der Scham des grossen Leidenden; und wahrlich, wenn
du sprichst „von dem Mitleiden her kommt eine grosse Wolke, habt Acht,
ihr Menschen!“

—wenn du lehrst „alle Schaffenden sind hart, alle grosse Liebe ist über
ihrem Mitleiden“: oh Zarathustra, wie gut dünkst du mich eingelernt auf
Wetter-Zeichen!

Du selber aber—warne dich selber auch vor _deinem_ Mitleiden! Denn
Viele sind zu dir unterwegs, viele Leidende, Zweifelnde, Verzweifelnde,
Ertrinkende, Frierende—

Ich warne dich auch vor mir. Du erriethest mein bestes, schlimmstes
Räthsel, mich selber und was ich that. Ich kenne die Axt, die dich
fällt.

Aber er—_musste_ sterben: er sah mit Augen, welche _Alles_ sahn,—er sah
des Menschen Tiefen und Gründe, alle seine verhehlte Schmach und
Hässlichkeit.

Sein Mitleiden kannte keine Scham: er kroch in meine schmutzigsten
Winkel. Dieser Neugierigste, Über-Zudringliche, Über-Mitleidige musste
sterben.

Er sah immer _mich_: an einem solchen Zeugen wollte ich Rache
haben—oder selber nicht leben.

Der Gott, der Alles sah, _auch den Menschen_ dieser Gott musste
sterben! Der Mensch _erträgt_ es nicht, dass solch ein Zeuge lebt.“

Also, sprach der hässlichste Mensch. Zarathustra aber erhob sich und
schickte sich an fortzugehn: denn ihn fröstelte bis in seine
Eingeweide.

„Du Unaussprechlicher, sagte er, du warntest mich vor deinem Wege. Zum
Danke dafür lobe ich dir den meinen. Siehe, dort hinauf liegt die Höhle
Zarathustra’s.

Meine Höhle ist gross und tief und hat viele Winkel; da findet der
Versteckteste sein Versteck. Und dicht bei ihr sind hundert Schlüpfe
und Schliche für kriechendes, flatterndes und springendes Gethier.

Du Ausgestossener, der du dich selber ausstiessest, du willst nicht
unter Menschen und Menschen-Mitleid wohnen? Wohlan, so thu’s mir
gleich! So lernst du auch von mir; nur der Thäter lernt.

Und rede zuerst und -nächst mit meinen Thieren! Das stolzeste Thier und
das klügste Thier—die möchten uns Beiden wohl die rechten Rathgeber
sein!“—

Also sprach Zarathustra und gieng seiner Wege, nachdenklicher und
langsamer noch als zuvor: denn er fragte sich Vieles und wusste sich
nicht leicht zu antworten.

„Wie arm ist doch der Mensch! dachte er in seinem Herzen, wie hässlich,
wie röchelnd, wie voll verborgener Scham!

Man sagt mir, dass der Mensch sich selber liebe: ach, wie gross muss
diese Selber-Liebe sein! Wie viel Verachtung hat sie wider sich!

Auch dieser da liebte sich, wie er sich verachtete,—ein grosser
Liebender ist er mir und ein grosser Verächter.

Keinen fand ich noch, der sich tiefer verachtet hätte: auch _Das_ ist
Höhe. Wehe, war _Der_ vielleicht der höhere Mensch, dessen Schrei ich
hörte?

Ich liebe die grossen Verachtenden. Der Mensch aber ist Etwas, das
überwunden werden muss.“—


Der freiwillige Bettler

Als Zarathustra den hässlichsten Menschen verlassen hatte, fror ihn,
und er fühlte sich einsam: es gieng ihm nämlich vieles Kalte und
Einsame durch die Sinne, also, dass darob auch seine Glieder kälter
wurden. Indem er aber weiter und weiter stieg, hinauf, hinab, bald an
grünen Weiden vorbei, aber auch über wilde steinichte Lager, wo ehedem
wohl ein ungeduldiger Bach sich zu Bett gelegt hatte.- da wurde ihm mit
Einem Male wieder wärmer und herzlicher zu Sinne.

„Was geschah mir doch? fragte er sich, etwas Warmes und Lebendiges
erquickt mich, das muss in meiner Nähe sein.

Schon bin ich weniger allein; unbewusste Gefährten und Brüder schweifen
um mich, ihr warmer Athem rührt an meine Seele.“

Als er aber um sich spähete und nach den Tröstern seiner Einsamkeit
suchte: siehe, da waren es Kühe, welche auf einer Anhöhe bei einander
standen; deren Nähe und Geruch hatten sein Herz erwärmt. Diese Kühe
aber schienen mit Eifer einem Redenden zuzuhören und gaben nicht auf
Den Acht, der herankam. Wie aber Zarathustra ganz in ihrer Nähe war,
hörte er deutlich, dass eine Menschen-Stimme aus der Mitte der Kühe
heraus redete; und ersichtlich hatten sie allesammt ihre Köpfe dem
Redenden zugedreht.

Da sprang Zarathustra mit Eifer hinauf und drängte die Thiere
auseinander, denn er fürchtete, dass hier jemandem ein Leids geschehn
sei, welchem schwerlich das Mitleid von Kühen abhelfen mochte. Aber
darin hatte er sich getäuscht; denn siehe, da sass ein Mensch auf der
Erde und schien den Thieren zuzureden, dass sie keine Scheu vor ihm
haben sollten, ein friedfertiger Mensch und Berg-Prediger, aus dessen
Augen die Güte selber predigte. „Was suchst du hier?“ rief Zarathustra
mit Befremden.

„Was ich hier suche? antwortete er: das Selbe, was du suchst, du
Störenfried! nämlich das Glück auf Erden.

Dazu aber möchte ich von diesen Kühen lernen. Denn, weisst du wohl,
einen halben Morgen schon rede ich ihnen zu, und eben wollten sie mir
Bescheid geben. Warum doch störst du sie?

So wir nicht umkehren und werden wie die Kühe, so kommen wir nicht in
das Himmelreich. Wir sollten ihnen nämlich Eins ablernen: das
Wiederkäuen.

Und wahrlich, wenn der Mensch auch die ganze Welt gewönne und lernte
das Eine nicht, das Wiederkäuen: was hülfe es! Er würde nicht seine
Trübsal los

—seine grosse Trübsal: die aber heisst heute _Ekel_. Wer hat heute von
Ekel nicht Herz, Mund und Augen voll? Auch du! Auch du! Aber siehe doch
diese Kühe an!“—

Also sprach der Berg-Prediger und wandte dann seinen eignen Blick
Zarathustra zu,—denn bisher hieng er mit Liebe an den Kühen—: da aber
verwandelte er sich. „Wer ist das, mit dem ich rede? rief er erschreckt
und sprang vom Boden empor.

Diess ist der Mensch ohne Ekel, diess ist Zarathustra selber, der
Überwinder des grossen Ekels, diess ist das Auge, diess ist der Mund,
diess ist das Herz Zarathustra’s selber.“

Und indem er also sprach, küsste er Dem, zu welchem er redete, die
Hände, mit überströmenden Augen, und gebärdete sich ganz als Einer, dem
ein kostbares Geschenk und Kleinod unversehens vom Himmel fällt. Die
Kühe aber schauten dem Allen zu und wunderten sich.

„Sprich nicht von mir, du Wunderlicher! Lieblicher! sagte Zarathustra
und wehrte seiner Zärtlichkeit, sprich mir erst von dir! Bist du nicht
der freiwillige Bettler, der einst einen grossen Reichthum von sich
warf,—

—der sich seines Reichthums schämte und der Reichen, und zu den Ärmsten
floh, dass er ihnen seine Fülle und sein Herz schenke? Aber sie nahmen
ihn nicht an.“

„Aber sie nahmen mich nicht an, sagte der freiwillige Bettler, du
weisst es ja. So gieng ich endlich zu den Thieren und zu diesen Kühen.“

„Da lerntest du, unterbrach Zarathustra den Redenden, wie es schwerer
ist, recht geben als recht nehmen, und dass gut schenken eine _Kunst_
ist und die letzte listigste Meister-Kunst der Güte.“

„Sonderlich heutzutage, antwortete der freiwillige Bettler: heute
nämlich, wo alles Niedrige aufständisch ward und scheu und auf seine
Art hoffährtig: nämlich auf Pöbel-Art.

Denn es kam die Stunde, du weisst es ja, für den grossen schlimmen
langen langsamen Pöbel- und Sklaven-Aufstand: der wächst und wächst!

Nun empört die Niedrigen alles Wohlthun und kleine Weggeben; und die
Überreichen mögen auf der Hut sein!

Wer heute gleich bauchichten Flaschen tröpfelt aus allzuschmalen
Hälsen:—solchen Flaschen bricht man heute gern den Hals.

Lüsterne Gier, gallichter Neid, vergrämte Rachsucht, Pöbel-Stolz: das
sprang mir Alles in’s Gesicht. Es ist nicht mehr wahr, dass die Armen
selig sind. Das Himmelreich aber ist bei den Kühen.“

Und warum ist es nicht bei den Reichen? fragte Zarathustra versuchend,
während er den Kühen wehrte, die den Friedfertigen zutraulich
anschnauften.

„Was versuchst du mich? antwortete dieser. Du weisst es selber besser
noch als ich. Was trieb mich doch zu den Ärmsten, oh Zarathustra? War
es nicht der Ekel vor unsern Reichsten?

—vor den Sträflingen des Reichthums, welche sich ihren Vortheil aus
jedem Kehricht auflesen, mit kalten Augen, geilen Gedanken, vor diesem
Gesindel, das gen Himmel stinkt,

—vor diesem vergüldeten verfälschten Pöbel, dessen Väter Langfinger
oder Aasvögel oder Lumpensammler waren, mit Weibern willfährig,
lüstern, vergesslich:—sie haben’s nämlich alle nicht weit zur Hure—

Pöbel oben, Pöbel unten! Was ist heute noch „Arm“ und „Reich“! Diesen
Unterschied verlernte ich,—da floh ich davon, weiter, immer weiter, bis
ich zu diesen Kühen kam.“

Also sprach der Friedfertige und schnaufte selber und schwitzte bei
seinen Worten: also dass die Kühe sich von Neuem wunderten. Zarathustra
aber sah ihm immer mit Lächeln in’s Gesicht, als er so hart redete, und
schüttelte dazu schweigend den Kopf.

„Du thust dir Gewalt an, du Berg-Prediger, wenn du solche harte Worte
brauchst. Für solche Härte wuchs dir nicht der Mund, nicht das Auge.

Auch, wie mich dünkt, dein Magen selber nicht: _dem_ widersteht all
solches Zürnen und Hassen und Überschäumen. Dein Magen will sanftere
Dinge: du bist kein Fleischer.

Vielmehr dünkst du mich ein Pflanzler und Wurzelmann. Vielleicht malmst
du Körner. Sicherlich aber bist du fleischlichen Freuden abhold und
liebst den Honig.“

„Du erriethst mich gut, antwortete der freiwillige Bettler, mit
erleichtertem Herzen. Ich liebe den Honig, ich malme auch Körner, denn
ich suchte, was lieblich mundet und reinen Athem macht:

—auch was lange Zeit braucht, ein Tag- und Maul-Werk für sanfte
Müssiggänger und Tagediebe.

Am weitesten freilich brachten es diese Kühe: die erfanden sich das
Wiederkäuen und In-der-Sonne-Liegen. Auch enthalten sie sich aller
schweren Gedanken, welche das Herz blähn.“

„- Wohlan! sagte Zarathustra: du solltest auch _meine_ Thiere sehn,
meinen Adler und meine Schlange,—ihres Gleichen giebt es heute nicht
auf Erden.

Siehe, dorthin führt der Weg zu meiner Höhle: sei diese Nacht ihr Gast.
Und rede mit meinen Thieren vom Glück der Thiere,—

—bis ich selber heimkomme. Denn jetzt ruft ein Nothschrei Mich eilig
weg von dir. Auch findest du neuen Honig bei mir, eisfrischen
Waben-Goldhonig: den iss!

Jetzt aber nimm flugs Abschied von deinen Kühen, du Wunderlicher!
Lieblicher! ob es dir schon schwer werden mag. Denn es sind deine
wärmsten Freunde und Lehrmeister!“—

„- Einen ausgenommen, den ich noch lieber habe, antwortete der
freiwillige Bettler. Du selber bist gut und besser noch als eine Kuh,
oh Zarathustra!“

„Fort, fort mit dir! du arger Schmeichler! schrie Zarathustra mit
Bosheit, was verdirbst du mich mit solchem Lob und Schmeichel-Honig?“

„Fort, fort von mir!“ schrie er noch Ein Mal und schwang seinen Stock
nach dem zärtlichen Bettler: der aber lief hurtig davon.


Der Schatten

Kaum aber war der freiwillige Bettler davongelaufen und Zarathustra
wieder mit sich allein, da hörte er hinter sich eine neue Stimme: die
rief „Halt! Zarathustra! So warte doch! Ich bin’s ja, oh Zarathustra,
ich, dein Schatten!“ Aber Zarathustra wartete nicht, denn ein
plötzlicher Verdruss überkam ihn ob des vielen Zudrangs und Gedrängs in
seinen Bergen. „Wo ist meine Einsamkeit hin? sprach er.

Es wird mir wahrlich zu viel; diess Gebirge wimmelt, mein Reich ist
nicht mehr von _dieser_ Welt, ich brauche neue Berge.

Mein Schatten ruft mich? Was liegt an meinem Schatten! Mag er mir
nachlaufen! ich—laufe ihm davon.“—

Also sprach Zarathustra zu seinem Herzen und lief davon. Aber Der,
welcher hinter ihm war, folgte ihm nach: so dass alsbald drei Laufende
hinter einander her waren, nämlich voran der freiwillige Bettler, dann
Zarathustra und zudritt und -hinterst sein Schatten. Nicht lange liefen
sie so, da kam Zarathustra zur Besinnung über seine Thorheit und
schüttelte mit Einem Rucke allen Verdruss und Überdruss von sich.

„Wie! sprach er, geschahen nicht von je die lächerlichsten Dinge bei
uns alten Einsiedlern und Heiligen?

Wahrlich, meine Thorheit wuchs hoch in den Bergen! Nun höre ich sechs
alte Narren-Beine hinter einander her klappern!

Darf aber Zarathustra sich wohl vor einem Schatten fürchten? Auch dünkt
mich zu guterletzt, dass er längere Beine hat als ich.“

Also sprach Zarathustra, lachend mit Augen und Eingeweiden, blieb
stehen und drehte sich schnell herum—und siehe, fast warf er dabei
seinen Nachfolger und Schatten zu Boden: so dicht schon folgte ihm
derselbe auf den Fersen, und so schwach war er auch. Als er ihn nämlich
mit Augen prüfte, erschrak er wie vor einem plötzlichen Gespenste: so
dünn, schwärzlich, hohl und überlebt sah dieser Nachfolger aus.

„Wer bist du? fragte Zarathustra heftig, was treibst du hier? Und
wesshalb heissest du dich meinen Schatten? Du gefällst mir nicht.“

„Vergieb mir, antwortete der Schatten, dass ich’s bin; und wenn ich dir
nicht gefalle, wohlan, oh Zarathustra! darin lobe ich dich und deinen
guten Geschmack.

Ein Wanderer bin ich, der viel schon hinter deinen Fersen her gieng:
immer unterwegs, aber ohne Ziel, auch ohne Heim: also dass mir wahrlich
wenig zum ewigen Juden fehlt, es sei denn, dass ich nicht ewig, und
auch nicht Jude bin.

Wie? Muss ich immerdar unterwegs sein? Von jedem Winde gewirbelt,
unstät, fortgetrieben? Oh Erde, du wardst mir zu rund!

Auf jeder Oberfläche sass ich schon, gleich müdem Staube schlief ich
ein auf Spiegeln und Fensterscheiben: Alles nimmt von mir, Nichts
giebt, ich werde dünn,—fast gleiche ich einem Schatten.

Dir aber, oh Zarathustra, flog und zog ich am längsten nach, und,
verbarg ich mich schon vor dir, so war ich doch dein bester Schatten:
wo du nur gesessen hast, sass ich auch.

Mit dir bin ich in fernsten, kältesten Welten umgegangen, einem
Gespenste gleich, das freiwillig über Winterdächer und Schnee läuft.

Mit dir strebte ich in jedes Verbotene, Schlimmste, Fernste: und wenn
irgend Etwas an mir Tugend ist, so ist es, dass ich vor keinem Verbote
Furcht hatte.

Mit dir zerbrach ich, was je mein Herz verehrte, alle Grenzsteine und
Bilder warf ich um, den gefährlichsten Wünschen lief ich
nach,—wahrlich, über jedwedes Verbrechen lief ich einmal hinweg.

Mit dir verlernte ich den Glauben an Worte und Werthe und grosse Namen.
Wenn der Teufel sich häutet, fällt da nicht auch sein Name ab? der ist
nämlich auch Haut. Der Teufel selber ist vielleicht—Haut.

„Nichts ist wahr, Alles ist erlaubt“: so sprach ich mir zu. In die
kältesten Wasser stürzte ich mich, mit Kopf und Herzen. Ach, wie oft
stand ich darob nackt als rother Krebs da!

Ach, wohin kam mir alles Gute und alle Scham und aller Glaube an die
Guten! Ach, wohin ist jene verlogne Unschuld, die ich einst besass, die
Unschuld der Guten und ihrer edlen Lügen!

Zu oft, wahrlich, folgte ich der Wahrheit dicht auf dem Fusse: da trat
sie mir vor den Kopf. Manchmal meinte ich zu lügen, und siehe! da erst
traf ich—die Wahrheit.

Zu Viel klärte sich mir auf: nun geht es mich Nichts mehr an. Nichts
lebt mehr, das ich liebe,—wie sollte ich noch mich selber lieben?

„Leben, wie ich Lust habe, oder gar nicht leben“: so will ich’s, so
will’s auch der Heiligste. Aber, wehe! wie habe _ich_ noch—Lust?

Habe _ich_—noch ein Ziel? Einen Hafen, nach dem _mein_ Segel läuft?

Einen guten Wind? Ach, nur wer weiss, _wohin_ er fährt, weiss auch,
welcher Wind gut und sein Fahrwind ist.

Was blieb mir noch zurück? Ein Herz müde und frech; ein unstäter Wille;
Flatter-Flügel; ein zerbrochnes Rückgrat.

Diess Suchen nach _meinem_ Heim: oh Zarathustra, weisst du wohl, diess
Suchen war _meine_ Heimsuchung, es frisst mich auf.

„Wo ist—_mein_ Heim?“ Darnach frage und suche und suchte ich, das fand
ich nicht. Oh ewiges Überall, oh ewiges Nirgendwo, oh ewiges—Umsonst!“

Also sprach der Schatten, und Zarathustra’s Gesicht verlängerte sich
bei seinen Worten. „Du bist mein Schatten! sagte er endlich, mit
Traurigkeit.

Deine Gefahr ist keine kleine, du freier Geist und Wanderer! Du hast
einen schlimmen Tag gehabt: sieh zu, dass dir nicht noch ein
schlimmerer Abend kommt!

Solchen Unstäten, wie du, dünkt zuletzt auch ein Gefängniss selig.
Sahst du je, wie eingefangne Verbrecher schlafen? Sie schlafen ruhig,
sie gemessen ihre neue Sicherheit.

Hüte dich, dass dich nicht am Ende noch ein enger Glaube einfängt, ein
harter, strenger Wahn! Dich nämlich verführt und versucht nunmehr
Jegliches, das eng und fest ist.

Du hast das Ziel verloren: wehe, wie wirst du diesen Verlust
verscherzen und verschmerzen? Damit—hast du auch den Weg verloren!

Du armer Schweifender, Schwärmender, du müder Schmetterling! willst du
diesen Abend eine Rast und Heimstätte haben? So gehe hinauf zu meiner
Höhle!

Dorthin führt der Weg zu meiner Höhle. Und jetzo will ich Schnell
wieder von dir davonlaufen. Schon liegt es wie ein Schatten auf mir.

Ich will allein laufen, dass es wieder hell um mich werde. Dazu muss
ich noch lange lustig auf den Beinen sein. Des Abends aber wird bei
mir—getanzt!“—

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Mittags

—Und Zarathustra lief und lief und fand Niemanden mehr und war allein
und fand immer wieder sich und genoss und schlürfte seine Einsamkeit
und dachte an gute Dinge,—stundenlang. Um die Stunde des Mittags aber,
als die Sonne gerade über Zarathustra’s Haupte stand, kam er an einem
alten krummen und knorrichten Baume vorbei, der von der reichen Liebe
eines Weinstocks rings umarmt und vor sich selber verborgen war: von
dem hiengen gelbe Trauben in Fülle dem Wandernden entgegen. Da
gelüstete ihn, einen kleinen Durst zu löschen und sich eine Traube
abzubrechen; als er aber schon den Arm dazu ausstreckte, da gelüstete
ihn etwas Anderes noch mehr: nämlich sich neben den Baum niederzulegen,
um die Stunde des vollkommnen Mittags, und zu schlafen.

Diess that Zarathustra; und sobald er auf dem Boden lag, in der Stille
und Heimlichkeit des bunten Grases, hatte er auch schon seinen kleinen
Durst vergessen und schlief ein. Denn, wie das Sprichwort Zarathustra’s
sagt: Eins ist nothwendiger als das Andre. Nur dass seine Augen offen
blieben:—sie wurden nämlich nicht satt, den Baum und die Liebe des
Weinstocks zu sehn und zu preisen. Im Einschlafen aber sprach
Zarathustra also zu seinem Herzen:

Still! Still! Ward die Welt nicht eben vollkommen? Was geschieht mir
doch?

Wie ein zierlicher Wind, ungesehn, auf getäfeltem Meere tanzt, leicht,
federleicht: so—tanzt der Schlaf auf mir,

Kein Auge drückt er mir zu, die Seele lässt er mir wach. Leicht ist er,
wahrlich! federleicht.

Er überredet mich, ich weiss nicht wie?, er betupft mich innewendig mit
schmeichelnder Hand, er zwingt mich. Ja, er zwingt mich, dass meine
Seele sich ausstreckt:—

—wie sie mir lang und müde wird, meine wunderliche Seele! Kam ihr eines
siebenten Tages Abend gerade am Mittage? Wandelte sie zu lange schon
selig zwischen guten und reifen Dingen?

Sie streckt sich lang aus, lang,—länger! sie liegt stille, meine
wunderliche Seele. Zu viel Gutes hat sie schon geschmeckt, diese.
goldene Traurigkeit drückt sie, sie verzieht den Mund.

—Wie ein Schiff, das in seine stillste Bucht einlief:—nun lehnt es sich
an die Erde, der langen Reisen müde und der ungewissen Meere. Ist die
Erde nicht treuer?

Wie solch ein Schiff sich dem Lande anlegt, anschmiegt:—da genügt’s,
dass eine Spinne vom Lande her zu ihm ihren Faden spinnt. Keiner
stärkeren Taue bedarf es da.

Wie solch ein müdes Schiff in der stillsten Bucht: so ruhe auch ich nun
der Erde nahe, treu, zutrauend, wartend, mit den leisesten Fäden ihr
angebunden.

Oh Glück! Oh Glück! Willst du wohl singen, oh meine Seele? Du liegst im
Grase. Aber das ist die heimliche feierliche Stunde, wo kein Hirt seine
Flöte bläst.

Scheue dich! Heisser Mittag schläft auf den Fluren. Singe. nicht!
Still! Die Welt ist vollkommen.

Singe nicht, du Gras-Geflügel, oh meine Seele! Flüstere nicht einmal!
Sieh doch —still! der alte Mittag schläft, er bewegt den Mund: trinkt
er nicht eben einen Tropfen Glücks—

—einen alten braunen Tropfen goldenen Glücks, goldenen Weins? Es huscht
über ihn hin, sein Glück lacht. So—lacht ein Gott. Still!—

—„Zum Glück, wie wenig genügt schon zum Glücke!“ So sprach ich einst,
und dünkte mich klug. Aber es war eine Lästerung: _das_ lernte ich nun.
Kluge Narrn reden besser.

Das Wenigste gerade, das Leiseste, Leichteste, einer Eidechse Rascheln,
ein Hauch, ein Husch, ein Augen-Blidk—_Wenig_ macht die Art des
_besten_ Glücks. Still!

—Was geschah mir: Horch! Flog die Zeit wohl davon? Falle ich nicht?
Fiel ich nicht—horch! in den Brunnen der Ewigkeit?

—Was geschieht mir? Still! Es sticht mich—wehe—in’s Herz? In’s Herz! Oh
zerbrich, zerbrich, Herz, nach solchem Glücke, nach solchem Stiche!

—Wie? Ward die Welt nicht eben vollkommen? Rund und reif? Oh des
goldenen runden Reifs—wohin fliegt er wohl? Laufe ich ihm nach! Husch!

Still—- (und hier dehnte sich Zarathustra und fühlte, dass er
schlafe.)—

Auf! sprach er zu sich selber, du Schläfer! Du Mittagsschläfer! Wohlan,
wohlauf, ihr alten Beine! Zeit ist’s und Überzeit, manch gut Stück Wegs
blieb euch noch zurück—

Nun schlieft ihr euch aus, wie lange doch? Eine halbe Ewigkeit! Wohlan,
wohlauf nun, mein altes Herz! Wie lange erst darfst du nach solchem
Schlaf—dich auswachen?

(Aber da schlief er schon von Neuem ein, und seine Seele sprach gegen
ihn und wehrte sich und legte sich wieder hin)—„Lass mich doch! Still!
Ward nicht die Welt eben vollkommen? Oh des goldnen runden Balls!“—

„Steh auf, sprach Zarathustra, du kleine Diebin, du Tagediebin! Wie?
Immer noch sich strecken, gähnen, seufzen, hinunterfallen in tiefe
Brunnen?

Wer bist du doch! Oh meine Seele!“ (und hier erschrak er, denn ein
Sonnenstrahl fiel vom Himmel herunter auf sein Gesicht)

„Oh Himmel über mir, sprach er seufzend und setzte sich aufrecht, du
schaust mir zu? Du horchst meiner wunderlichen Seele zu?

Wann trinkst du diesen Tropfen Thau’s, der auf alle Erden-Dinge
niederfiel,—wann trinkst du diese wunderliche Seele—

—wann, Brunnen der Ewigkeit! du heiterer schauerlicher Mittags-Abgrund!
wann trinkst du meine Seele in dich zurück?“

Also sprach Zarathustra und erhob sich von seinem Lager am Baume wie
aus einer fremden Trunkenheit: und siehe, da stand die Sonne immer noch
gerade über seinem Haupte. Es möchte aber Einer daraus mit Recht
abnehmen, dass Zarathustra damals nicht lange geschlafen habe.


Die Begrüssung

Am späten Nachmittage war es erst, dass Zarathustra, nach langem
umsonstigen Suchen und Umherstreifen, wieder zu seiner Höhle heimkam.
Als er aber derselben gegenüberstand, nicht zwanzig Schritt mehr von
ihr ferne, da geschah das, was er jetzt am wenigsten erwartete: von
Neuem hörte er den grossen _Nothschrei_. Und, erstaunlich! diess Mal
kam derselbige aus seiner eignen Höhle. Es war aber ein langer
vielfältiger seltsamer Schrei, und Zarathustra unterschied deutlich,
dass er sich aus vielen Stimmen zusammensetze: mochte er schon, aus der
Ferne gehört, gleich dem Schrei aus einem einzigen Munde klingen.

Da sprang Zarathustra auf seine Höhle zu, und siehe! welches Schauspiel
erwartete ihn erst nach diesem Hörspiele! Denn da sassen sie allesammt
bei einander, an denen er des Tags vorübergegangen war: der König zur
Rechten und der König zur Linken, der alte Zauberer, der Papst, der
freiwillige Bettler, der Schatten, der Gewissenhafte des Geistes, der
traurige Wahrsager und der Esel; der hässlichste Mensch aber hatte sich
eine Krone aufgesetzt und zwei Purpurgürtel umgeschlungen,—denn er
liebte es, gleich allen Hässlichen, sich zu verkleiden und schön zu
thun. Inmitten aber dieser betrübten Gesellschaft stand der Adler
Zarathustra’s, gesträubt und unruhig, denn er sollte auf zu Vieles
antworten, wofür sein Stolz keine Antwort hatte; die kluge Schlange
aber hieng um seinen Hals.

Diess Alles schaute Zarathustra mit grosser Verwunderung; dann prüfte
er jeden Einzelnen seiner Gäste mit leutseliger Neugierde, las ihre
Seelen ab und wunderte sich von Neuem. Inzwischen hatten sich die
Versammelten von ihren Sitzen erhoben und warteten mit Ehrfurcht, dass
Zarathustra reden werde. Zarathustra aber sprach also:

„Ihr Verzweifelnden! Ihr Wunderlichen! Ich hörte also _euren_
Nothschrei? Und nun weiss ich auch, wo Der zu suchen ist, den ich
umsonst heute suchte: der höhere Mensch—:

—in meiner eignen Höhle sitzt er, der höhere Mensch! Aber was wundere
ich mich! Habe ich ihn nicht selber zu mir gelockt durch Honig-Opfer
und listige Lockrufe meines Glücks?

Doch dünkt mir, ihr taugt euch schlecht zur Gesellschaft, ihr macht
einander das Herz unwirsch, ihr Nothschreienden, wenn ihr hier
beisammen sitzt? Es muss erst Einer kommen,

—Einer, der euch wieder lachen macht, ein guter fröhlicher Hanswurst,
ein Tänzer und Wind und Wildfang, irgend ein alter Narr:—was dünket
euch?

Vergebt mir doch, ihr Verzweifelnden, dass ich vor euch mit solch
kleinen Worten rede, unwürdig, wahrlich!, solcher Gäste! Aber ihr
errathet nicht, _was_ mein Herz muthwillig macht:—

—ihr selber thut es und euer Anblick, vergebt es mir! Jeder nämlich
wird muthig, der einem Verzweifelnden zuschaut. Einem Verzweifelnden
zuzusprechen—dazu dünkt sich jeder stark genug.

Mir selber gabt ihr diese Kraft,—eine gute Gabe, meine hohen Gäste! Ein
rechtschaffnes Gastgeschenk! Wohlan, so zürnt nun nicht, dass ich euch
auch vom Meinigen anbiete.

Diess hier ist mein Reich und meine Herrschaft: was aber mein ist, für
diesen Abend und diese Nacht soll es euer sein. Meine Thiere sollen
euch dienen: meine Höhle sei eure Ruhestatt!

Bei mir zu Heim-und-Hause soll Keiner verzweifeln, in meinem Reviere
schütze ich jeden vor seinen wilden Thieren. Und das ist das Erste, was
ich euch anbiete: Sicherheit!

Das Zweite aber ist: mein kleiner Finger. Und habt ihr _den_ erst, so
nehmt nur noch die ganze Hand, wohlan! und das Herz dazu! Willkommen
hier, willkommen, meine Gastfreunde!“

Also sprach Zarathustra und lachte vor Liebe und Bosheit. Nach dieser
Begrüssung verneigten sich seine Gäste abermals und schwiegen
ehrfürchtig; der König zur Rechten aber antwortete ihm in ihrem Namen.

„Daran, oh Zarathustra, wie du uns Hand und Gruss botest, erkennen wir
dich als Zarathustra. Du erniedrigtest dich vor uns; fast thatest du
unserer Ehrfurcht wehe—:

—wer aber vermochte gleich dir sich mit solchem Stolze zu erniedrigen?
_Das_ richtet uns selber auf, ein Labsal ist es unsern Augen und
Herzen.

Diess allein nur zu schaun, stiegen gern wir auf höhere Berge, als
dieser Berg ist. Als Schaulustige nämlich kamen wir, wir wollten sehn,
was trübe Augen hell macht.

Und siehe, schon ist es vorbei mit allem unsern Nothschrein. Schon
steht Sinn und Herz uns offen und ist entzückt. Wenig fehlt: und unser
Muth wird muthwillig.

Nichts, oh Zarathustra, wächst Erfreulicheres auf Erden, als ein hoher
starker Wille: der ist ihr schönstes Gewächs. Eine ganze Landschaft
erquickt sich an Einem solchen Baume.

Der Pinie vergleiche ich, wer gleich dir, oh Zarathustra, aufwächst:
lang, schweigend, hart, allein, besten biegsamsten Holzes, herrlich,—

—zuletzt aber hinausgreifend mit starken grünen Ästen nach _seiner_
Herrschaft, starke Fragen fragend vor Winden und Wettern und was immer
auf Höhen heimisch ist,

—stärker antwortend, ein Befehlender, ein Siegreicher: oh wer sollte
nicht, solche Gewächse zu schaun, auf hohe Berge steigen?

Deines Baumes hier, oh Zarathustra, erlabt sich auch der Düstere, der
Missrathene, an deinem Anblicke wird auch der Unstäte sicher und heilt
sein Herz.

Und wahrlich, zu deinem Berge und Baume richten sich heute viele Augen;
eine grosse Sehnsucht hat sich aufgemacht, und Manche lernten fragen:
wer ist Zarathustra?

Und wem du jemals dein Lied und deinen Honig in’s Ohr geträufelt: alle
die Versteckten, die Einsiedler, die Zweisiedler sprachen mit Einem
Male zu ihrem Herzen:

„Lebt Zarathustra noch? Es lohnt sich nicht mehr zu leben, Alles ist
gleich, Alles ist umsonst: oder—wir müssen mit Zarathustra leben!“

„Warum kommt er nicht, der sich so lange ankündigte? also fragen Viele;
verschlang ihn die Einsamkeit? Oder sollen wir wohl zu ihm kommen?“

Nun geschieht’s, dass die Einsamkeit selber mürbe wird und zerbricht,
einem Grabe gleich, das zerbricht und seine Todten nicht mehr halten
kann. Überall sieht man Auferstandene.

Nun steigen und steigen die Wellen um deinen Berg, oh Zarathustra. Und
wie hoch auch deine Höhe ist, Viele müssen zu dir hinauf; dein Nachen
soll nicht lange mehr im Trocknen sitzen.

Und dass wir Verzweifelnde jetzt in deine Höhle kamen und schon nicht
mehr verzweifeln: ein Wahr- und Vorzeichen ist es nur, davon, dass
Bessere zu dir unterwegs sind,—

—denn er selber ist zu dir unterwegs, der letzte Rest Gottes unter
Menschen, das ist: alle die Menschen der grossen Sehnsucht, des grossen
Ekels, des grossen Überdrusses,

—Alle, die nicht leben wollen, oder sie lernen wieder _hoffen_—oder sie
lernen von dir, oh Zarathustra, die _grosse_ Hoffnung!“

Also sprach der König zur Rechten und ergriff die Hand Zarathustra’s,
um sie zu küssen; aber Zarathustra wehrte seiner Verehrung und trat
erschreckt zurück, schweigend und plötzlich wie in weite Fernen
entfliehend. Nach einer kleinen Weile aber war er schon wieder bei
seinen Gästen, blickte sie mit hellen, prüfenden Augen an und sprach:

Meine Gäste, ihr höheren Menschen, ich will deutsch und deutlich mit
euch reden. Nicht auf _euch_ wartete ich hier in diesen Bergen.

(„Deutsch und deutlich? Dass Gott erbarm! sagte hier der König zur
Linken, bei Seite; man merkt, er kennt die lieben Deutschen nicht,
dieser Weise aus dem Morgenlande!

Aber er meint „deutsch und derb“—wohlan! Das ist heutzutage noch nicht
der schlimmste Geschmack!“)

„Ihr mögt wahrlich insgesammt höhere Menschen sein, fuhr Zarathustra
fort: aber für mich—seid ihr nicht hoch und stark genug.

Für mich, das heisst: für das Unerbittliche, das in mir schweigt, aber
nicht immer schweigen wird. Und gehört ihr zu mir, so doch nicht als
mein rechter Arm.

Wer nämlich selber auf kranken und zarten Beinen steht, gleich euch,
der will vor Allem, ob er’s weiss oder sich verbirgt: dass er
_geschont_ werde.

Meine Arme und meine Beine aber schone ich nicht, ich schone meine
Krieger nicht: wieso könntet ihr zu _meinem_ Kriege taugen?

Mit euch verdürbe ich mir jeden Sieg noch. Und Mancher von euch fiele
schon um, wenn er nur den lauten Schall meiner Trommeln hörte.

Auch seid ihr mir nicht schön genug und wohlgeboren. Ich brauche reine
glatte Spiegel für meine Lehren; auf eurer Oberfläche verzerrt sich
noch mein eignes Bildniss.

Eure Schultern drückt manche Last, manche Erinnerung; manch schlimmer
Zwerg hockt in euren Winkeln. Es giebt verborgenen Pöbel auch in euch.

Und seid ihr auch hoch und höherer Art: Vieles an euch ist krumm und
missgestalt. Da ist kein Schmied in der Welt, der euch mir zurecht und
gerade schlüge.

Ihr seid nur Brücken: mögen Höhere auf euch hinüber schreiten! Ihr
bedeutet Stufen: so zürnt Dem nicht, der über euch hinweg in _seine_
Höhe steigt!

Aus eurem Samen mag auch mir einst ein ächter Sohn und vollkommener
Erbe wachsen: aber das ist ferne. Ihr selber seid Die nicht, welchen
mein Erbgut und Name zugehört.

Nicht auf euch warte ich hier in diesen Bergen, nicht mit euch darf ich
zum letzten Male niedersteigen. Als Vorzeichen kamt ihr mir nur, dass
schon Höhere zu mir unterwegs sind,—

—_nicht_ die Menschen der grossen Sehnsucht, des grossen Ekels, des
grossen Überdrusses und Das, was ihr den Überrest Gottes nanntet.

—Nein! Nein! Drei Mal Nein! Auf _Andere_ warte ich hier in diesen
Bergen und will meinen Fuss nicht ohne sie von dannen heben,

—auf Höhere, Stärkere, Sieghaftere, Wohlgemuthere, Solche, die
rechtwinklig gebaut sind an Leib und Seele: _lachende Löwen_ müssen
kommen!

Oh, meine Gastfreunde, ihr Wunderlichen,—hörtet ihr noch Nichts von
meinen Kindern? Und dass sie zu mir unterwegs sind?

Sprecht mir doch von meinen Gärten, von meinen glückseligen Inseln, von
meiner neuen schönen Art,—warum sprecht ihr mir nicht davon?

Diess Gastgeschenk erbitte ich mir von eurer Liebe, dass ihr mir von
meinen Kindern sprecht. Hierzu bin ich reich, hierzu ward ich arm: was
gab ich nicht hin,

—was gäbe ich nicht hin, dass ich Eins hätte: _diese_ Kinder, _diese_
lebendige Pflanzung, _diese_ Lebensbäume meines Willens und meiner
höchsten Hoffnung!“

Also sprach Zarathustra und hielt plötzlich inne in seiner Rede: denn
ihn überfiel seine Sehnsucht, und er schloss Augen und Mund vor der
Bewegung seines Herzens. Und auch alle seine Gäste schwiegen und
standen still und bestürzt: nur dass der alte Wahrsager mit Händen und
Gebärden Zeichen gab.


Das Abendmahl

An dieser Stelle nämlich unterbrach der Wahrsager die Begrüssung
Zarathustra’s und seiner Gäste: er drängte sich vor, wie Einer, der
keine Zeit zu verlieren hat, fasste die Hand Zarathustra’s und rief:
„Aber Zarathustra!

Eins ist nothwendiger als das Andre, so redest du selber: wohlan, Eins
ist _mir_ jetzt nothwendiger als alles Andere.

Ein Wort zur rechten Zeit: hast du mich nicht zum _Mahle_ eingeladen?
Und hier sind viele, die lange Wege machten. Du willst uns doch nicht
mit Reden abspeisen?

Auch gedachtet ihr Alle mir schon zu viel des Erfrierens, Ertrinkens,
Erstickens und andrer Leibes-Nothstände: Keiner aber gedachte _meines_
Nothstandes, nämlich des Verhungerns—„

(Also sprach der Wahrsager; wie die Thiere Zarathustra’s aber diese
Worte hörten, liefen sie vor Schrecken davon. Denn sie sahen, dass was
sie auch am Tage heimgebracht hatten, nicht genug sein werde, den Einen
Wahrsager zu stopfen.)

„Eingerechnet das Verdursten, fuhr der Wahrsager fort. Und ob ich schon
Wasser hier plätschern höre, gleich Reden der Weisheit, nämlich
reichlich und unermüdlich: ich—will _Wein_!

Nicht jeder ist gleich Zarathustra ein geborner Wassertrinker. Wasser
taugt auch nicht für Müde und Verwelkte: _uns_ gebührt Wein,—_der_ erst
giebt plötzliches Genesen und stegreife Gesundheit!“

Bei dieser Gelegenheit, da der Wahrsager nach Wein begehrte, geschah
es, dass auch der König zur Linken, der Schweigsame, einmal zu Worte
kam. „Für Wein, sprach er, trugen _wir_ Sorge, ich sammt meinem Bruder,
dem Könige zur Rechten: wir haben Weins genug,—einen ganzen Esel voll.
So fehlt Nichts als Brod.“

„Brod? entgegnete Zarathustra und lachte dazu. Nur gerade Brod haben
Einsiedler nicht. Aber der Mensch lebt nicht vom Brod allein, sondern
auch vom Fleische guter Lämmer, deren ich zwei habe:

—_Die_ soll man geschwinde schlachten und würzig, mit Salbei,
zubereiten: so liebe ich’s. Und auch an Wurzeln und Früchten fehlt es
nicht, gut genug selbst für Lecker- und Schmeckerlinge; noch an Nüssen
und andern Räthseln zum Knacken.

Also wollen wir in Kürze eine gute Mahlzeit machen. Wer aber mit essen
will, muss auch mit Hand anlegen, auch die Könige. Bei Zarathustra
nämlich darf auch ein König Koch sein.“

Mit diesem Vorschlage war Allen nach dem Herzen geredet: nur dass der
freiwillige Bettler sich gegen Fleisch und Wein und Würzen sträubte.

„Nun hört mir doch diesen Schlemmer Zarathustra! sagte er scherzhaft:
geht man dazu in Höhlen und Hoch-Gebirge, dass man solche Mahlzeiten
macht?

Nun freilich verstehe ich, was er einst uns lehrte: „Gelobt sei die
kleine Armuth!“ Und warum er die Bettler abschaffen will.“

„Sei guter Dinge, antwortete ihm Zarathustra, wie ich es bin. Bleibe
bei deiner Sitte, du Trefflicher, malme deine Körner, trink dein
Wasser, lobe deine Küche: wenn sie dich nur fröhlich macht!

Ich bin ein Gesetz nur für die Meinen, ich bin kein Gesetz für Alle.
Wer aber zu mir gehört, der muss von starken Knochen sein, auch von
leichten Füssen,—

—lustig zu Kriegen und Festen, kein Düsterling, kein Traum-Hans, bereit
zum Schwersten wie zu seinem Feste, gesund und heil.

Das Beste gehört den Meinen und mir; und giebt man’s uns nicht, so
nehmen wir’s:—die beste Nahrung, den reinsten Himmel, die stärksten
Gedanken, die schönsten Fraun!“—

Also sprach Zarathustra; der König zur Rechten aber entgegnete:
„Seltsam! Vernahm man je solche kluge Dinge aus dem Munde eines Weisen?

Und wahrlich, das ist das Seltsamste an einem Weisen, wenn er zu
alledem auch noch klug und kein Esel ist.“

Also sprach der König zur Rechten und wunderte sich; der Esel aber
sagte zu seiner Rede mit bösem Willen I-A. Diess aber war der Anfang
von jener langen Mahlzeit, welche „das Abendmahl“ in den
Historien-Büchern genannt wird. Bei derselben aber wurde von nichts
Anderem geredet als _vom höheren Menschen_.


Vom höheren Menschen

1.

Als ich zum ersten Male zu den Menschen kam, da that ich die
Einsiedler-Thorheit, die grosse Thorheit: ich stellte mich auf den
Markt.

Und als ich zu Allen redete, redete ich zu Keinem. Des Abends aber
waren Seiltänzer meine Genossen, und Leichname; und ich selber fast ein
Leichnam.

Mit dem neuen Morgen aber kam mir eine neue Wahrheit: da lernte ich
sprechen „Was geht mich Markt und Pöbel und Pöbel-Lärm und lange
Pöbel-Ohren an!“

Ihr höheren Menschen, Diess lernt von mir: auf dem Markt glaubt Niemand
an höhere Menschen. Und wollt ihr dort reden, wohlan! Der Pöbel aber
blinzelt „wir sind Alle gleich.“

„Ihr höheren Menschen,—so blinzelt der Pöbel—es giebt keine höheren
Menschen, wir sind Alle gleich, Mensch ist Mensch, vor Gott—sind wir
Alle gleich!“

Vor Gott!—Nun aber starb dieser Gott. Vor dem Pöbel aber wollen wir
nicht gleich sein. Ihr höheren Menschen, geht weg vom Markt!

2.

Vor Gott!—Nun aber starb dieser Gott! Ihr höheren Menschen, dieser Gott
war eure grösste Gefahr.

Seit er im Grabe liegt, seid ihr erst wieder auferstanden. Nun erst
kommt der grosse Mittag, nun erst wird der höhere Mensch—Herr!

Verstandet ihr diess Wort, oh meine Brüder? Ihr seid erschreckt: wird
euren Herzen schwindlig? Klafft euch hier der Abgrund? Kläfft euch hier
der Höllenhund?

Wohlan! Wohlauf! Ihr höheren Menschen! Nun erst kreisst der Berg der
Menschen-Zukunft. Gott starb: nun wollen _wir_,—dass der Übermensch
lebe.

3.

Die Sorglichsten fragen heute: „wie bleibt der Mensch erhalten?“
Zarathustra aber fragt als der Einzige und Erste: „wie wird der Mensch
_überwunden_?“

Der Übermensch liegt mir am Herzen, _der_ ist mein Erstes und
Einziges,—und _nicht_ der Mensch: nicht der Nächste, nicht der Ärmste,
nicht der Leidendste, nicht der Beste—

Oh meine Brüder, was ich lieben kann am Menschen, das ist, dass er ein
Übergang ist und ein Untergang. Und auch an euch ist vieles, das mich
lieben und hoffen macht.

Dass ihr verachtetet, ihr höheren Menschen, das macht mich hoffen. Die
grossen Verachtenden nämlich sind die grossen Verehrenden.

Dass ihr verzweifeltet, daran ist Viel zu ehren. Denn ihr lerntet
nicht, wie ihr euch ergäbet, ihr lerntet die kleinen Klugheiten nicht.

Heute nämlich wurden die kleinen Leute Herr: die predigen Alle Ergebung
und Bescheidung und Klugheit und Fleiss und Rücksicht und das lange
Und-so-weiter der kleinen Tugenden.

Was von Weibsart ist, was von Knechtsart stammt und sonderlich der
Pöbel-Mischmasch: _Das_ will nun Herr werden alles
Menschen-Schicksals—oh Ekel! Ekel! Ekel!

_Das_ frägt und frägt und wird nicht müde: „Wie erhält sich der Mensch,
am besten, am längsten, am angenehmsten?“ Damit—sind sie die Herrn von
Heute.

Diese Herrn von Heute überwindet mir, oh meine Brüder,—diese kleinen
Leute: _die_ sind des Übermenschen grösste Gefahr!

Überwindet mir, ihr höheren Menschen, die kleinen Tugenden, die kleinen
Klugheiten, die Sandkorn-Rücksichten, den Ameisen-Kribbelkram, das
erbärmliche Behagen, das „Glück der Meisten“ —!

Und lieber verzweifelt, als dass ihr euch ergebt. Und, wahrlich, ich
liebe euch dafür, dass ihr heute nicht zu leben wisst, ihr höheren
Menschen! So nämlich lebt _ihr_—am Besten!

4.

Habt ihr Muth, oh meine Brüder? Seid ihr herzhaft? _Nicht_ Muth vor
Zeugen, sondern Einsiedler- und Adler-Muth, dem auch kein Gott mehr
zusieht?

Kalte Seelen, Maulthiere, Blinde, Trunkene heissen mir nicht herzhaft.
Herz hat, wer Furcht kennt, aber Furcht _zwingt_, er den Abgrund sieht,
aber mit _Stolz_.

Wer den Abgrund sieht, aber mit Adlers-Augen, wer mit Adlers-Krallen
den Abgrund _fasst_: Der hat Muth.—

5.

„Der Mensch ist böse“ —so sprachen mir zum Troste alle Weisesten. Ach,
wenn es heute nur noch wahr ist! Denn das Böse ist des Menschen beste
Kraft.

„Der Mensch muss besser und böser werden“ —so lehre _ich_. Das Böseste
ist nöthig zu des Übermenschen Bestem.

Das mochte gut sein für jenen Prediger der kleinen Leute, dass er litt
und trug an des Menschen Sünde. Ich aber erfreue mich der grossen Sünde
als meines grossen _Trostes_.—

Solches ist aber nicht für lange Ohren gesagt. Jedwedes Wort gehört
auch nicht in jedes Maul. Das sind feine ferne Dinge: nach denen sollen
nicht Schafs-Klauen greifen!

6.

Ihr höheren Menschen, meint ihr, ich sei da, gut zu machen, was ihr
schlecht machtet?

Oder ich wollte fürderhin euch Leidende bequemer betten? Oder euch
Unstäten, Verirrten, Verkletterten neue leichtere Fusssteige zeigen?

Nein! Nein! Drei Mal Nein! Immer Mehr, immer Bessere eurer Art sollen
zu Grunde gehn,—denn ihr sollt es immer schlimmer und härter haben. So
allein—

—so allein wächst der Mensch in _die_ Höhe, wo der Blitz ihn trifft und
zerbricht: hoch genug für den Blitz!

Auf Weniges, auf Langes, auf Fernes geht mein Sinn und meine Sehnsucht:
was gienge mich euer kleines, vieles, kurzes Elend an!

Ihr leidet mir noch nicht genug! Denn ihr leidet an euch, ihr littet
noch nicht _am Menschen_. Ihr würdet lügen, wenn ihr’s anders sagtet!
Ihr leidet Alle nicht, woran ich litt.—

7.

Es ist mir nicht genug, dass der Blitz nicht mehr schadet. Nicht
ableiten will ich ihn: er soll lernen für _mich_—arbeiten.—

Meine Weisheit sammlet sich lange schon gleich einer Wolke, sie wird
stiller und dunkler. So thut jede Weisheit, welche _einst_ Blitze
gebären soll.—

Diesen Menschen von Heute will ich nicht _Licht_ sein, nicht Licht
heissen. _Die_—will ich blenden: Blitz meiner Weisheit! Stich ihnen die
Augen aus!

8.

Wollt Nichts über euer Vermögen: es giebt eine schlimme Falschheit bei
Solchen, die über ihr Vermögen wollen.

Sonderlich, wenn sie grosse Dinge wollen! Denn sie wecken Misstrauen
gegen grosse Dinge, diese feinen Falschmünzer und Schauspieler:—

—bis sie endlich falsch vor sich selber sind, schieläugig, übertünchter
Wurmfrass, bemäntelt durch starke Worte, durch Aushänge-Tugenden, durch
glänzende falsche Werke.

Habt da eine gute Vorsicht, ihr höheren Menschen! Nichts nämlich gilt
mir heute kostbarer und seltner als Redlichkeit.

Ist diess Heute nicht des Pöbels? Pöbel aber weiss nicht, was gross,
was klein, was gerade und redlich ist: der ist unschuldig krumm, der
lügt immer.

8.

Habt heute ein gutes Misstrauen, ihr höheren Menschen, ihr Beherzten!
Ihr Offenherzigen! Und haltet eure Gründe geheim! Diess Heute nämlich
ist des Pöbels.

Was der Pöbel ohne Gründe einst glauben lernte, wer könnte ihm durch
Gründe Das —umwerfen?

Und auf dem Markte überzeugt man mit Gebärden. Aber Gründe machen den
Pöbel misstrauisch.

Und wenn da einmal Wahrheit zum Siege kam, so fragt euch Mit gutem
Misstrauen: „welch starker Irrthum hat für sie gekämpft?“

Hütet euch auch vor den Gelehrten! Die hassen euch: denn sie sind
unfruchtbar! Sie haben kalte vertrocknete Augen, vor ihnen liegt jeder
Vogel entfedert.

Solche brüsten sich damit, dass sie nicht lügen: aber Ohnmacht zur Lüge
ist lange noch nicht Liebe zur Wahrheit. Hütet euch!

Freiheit von Fieber ist lange noch nicht Erkenntniss! Ausgekälteten
Geistern glaube ich nicht. Wer nicht lügen kann, weiss nicht, was
Wahrheit ist.

10.

Wollt ihr hoch hinaus, so braucht die eignen Beine! Lasst euch nicht
empor _tragen_, setzt euch nicht auf fremde Rücken und Köpfe!

Du aber stiegst zu Pferde? Du reitest nun hurtig hinauf zu deinem
Ziele? Wohlan, mein Freund! Aber dein lahmer Fuss sitzt auch mit zu
Pferde!

Wenn du an deinem Ziele bist, wenn du von deinem Pferde springst: auf
deiner _Höhe_ gerade, du höherer Mensch—wirst du stolpern!

11.

Ihr Schaffenden, ihr höheren Menschen! Man ist nur für das eigne Kind
schwanger.

Lasst euch Nichts vorreden, einreden! Wer ist denn _euer_ Nächster? Und
handelt ihr auch „für den Nächsten“ ,—ihr schafft doch nicht für ihn!

Verlernt mir doch diess „Für“, ihr Schaffenden: eure Tugend gerade will
es, dass ihr kein Ding mit „für“ und „um“ und „weil“ thut. Gegen diese
falschen kleinen Worte sollt ihr euer Ohr zukleben.

Das „für den Nächsten“  ist die Tugend nur der kleinen Leute: da heisst
es „gleich und gleich“ und „Hand wäscht Hand“:—sie haben nicht Recht
noch Kraft zu _eurem_ Eigennutz!

In eurem Eigennutz, ihr Schaffenden, ist der Schwangeren Vorsicht und
Vorsehung! Was Niemand noch mit Augen sah, die Frucht: die schirmt und
schont und nährt eure ganze Liebe.

Wo eure ganze Liebe ist, bei eurem Kinde, da ist auch eure ganze
Tugend! Euer Werk, euer Wille ist _euer_ „Nächster“: lasst euch keine
falschen Werthe einreden!

12.

Ihr Schaffenden, ihr höheren Menschen! Wer gebären muss, der ist krank;
wer aber geboren hat, ist unrein.

Fragt die Weiber: man gebiert nicht, weil es Vergnügen macht. Der
Schmerz macht Hühner und Dichter gackern.

Ihr Schaffenden, an euch ist viel Unreines. Das macht, ihr musstet
Mütter sein.

Ein neues Kind: oh wie viel neuer Schmutz kam auch zur Welt! Geht bei
Seite! Und wer geboren hat, soll seine Seele rein waschen!

13.

Seid nicht tugendhaft über eure Kräfte! Und wollt Nichts von euch wider
die Wahrscheinlichkeit!

Geht in den Fusstapfen, wo schon eurer Väter Tugend gierig! Wie wolltet
ihr hoch steigen, wenn nicht eurer Väter Wille mit euch steigt?

Wer aber Erstling sein will, sehe zu, dass er nicht auch Letztling
werde! Und wo die Laster eurer Väter sind, darin sollt ihr nicht
Heilige bedeuten wollen!

Wessen Väter es mit Weibern hielten und mit starken Weinen und
Wildschweinen: was wäre es, wenn Der von sich Keuschheit wollte?

Eine Narrheit wäre es! Viel, wahrlich, dünkt es mich für einen Solchen,
wenn er Eines oder zweier oder dreier Weiber Mann ist.

Und stiftete er Klöster und schriebe über die Thür: „der Weg zum
Heiligen,“—ich spräche doch: wozu! es ist eine neue Narrheit!

Er stiftete sich selber ein Zucht- und Fluchthaus: wohl bekomm’s! Aber
ich glaube nicht daran.

In der Einsamkeit wächst, was Einer in sie bringt, auch das innere
Vieh. Solchergestalt widerräth sich Vielen die Einsamkeit.

Gab es Schmutzigeres bisher auf Erden als Wüsten-Heilige? _Um die_
herum war nicht nur der Teufel los,—sondern auch das Schwein.

14.

Scheu, beschämt, ungeschickt, einem Tiger gleich, dem der Sprung
missrieth: also, ihr höheren Menschen, sah ich oft euch bei Seite
schleichen. Ein _Wurf_ missrieth euch.

Aber, ihr Würfelspieler, was liegt daran! Ihr lerntet nicht spielen und
spotten, wie man spielen und spotten muss! Sitzen wir nicht immer an
einem grossen Spott- und Spieltische?

Und wenn euch Grosses missrieth, seid ihr selber darum—missrathen? Und
missriethet ihr selber, missrieth darum—der Mensch? Missrieth aber der
Mensch: wohlan! wohlauf!

15.

Je höher von Art, je seltener geräth ein Ding. Ihr höheren Menschen
hier, seid ihr nicht alle—missgerathen?

Seid guten Muths, was liegt daran! Wie Vieles ist noch möglich! Lernt
über euch selber lachen, wie man lachen muss!

Was Wunders auch, dass ihr missriethet und halb geriethet, ihr
Halb-Zerbrochenen! Drängt und stösst sich nicht in euch—des Menschen
_Zukunft_?

Des Menschen Fernstes, Tiefstes, Sternen-Höchstes, seine ungeheure
Kraft: schäumt Das nicht alles gegen einander in eurem Topfe?

Was Wunders, dass mancher Topf zerbricht! Lernt über euch lachen, wie
man lachen muss! Ihr höheren Menschen, oh wie Vieles ist noch möglich!

Und wahrlich, wie Viel gerieth schon! Wie reich ist diese Erde an
kleinen guten vollkommenen Dingen, an Wohlgerathenem!

Stellt kleine gute vollkommne Dinge um euch, ihr höheren Menschen!
Deren goldene Reife heilt das Herz. Vollkommnes lehrt hoffen.

16.

Welches war hier auf Erden bisher die grösste Sünde? War es nicht das
Wort Dessen, der sprach: „Wehe Denen, die hier lachen!“

Fand er zum Lachen auf der Erde selber keine Gründe? So suchte er nur
schlecht. Ein Kind findet hier noch Gründe.

Der—liebte nicht genug: sonst hätte er auch uns geliebt, die Lachenden!
Aber er hasste und höhnte uns, Heulen und Zähneklappern verhiess er
uns.

Muss man denn gleich fluchen, wo man nicht liebt? Das—dünkt mich ein
schlechter Geschmack. Aber so that er, dieser Unbedingte. Er kam vom
Pöbel.

Und er selber liebte nur nicht genug: sonst hätte er weniger gezürnt,
dass man ihn nicht liebe. Alle grosse Liebe _will_ nicht Liebe:—die
will mehr.

Geht aus dem Wege allen solchen Unbedingten! Das ist eine arme kranke
Art, eine Pöbel-Art: sie sehn schlimm diesem Leben zu, sie haben den
bösen Blick für diese Erde.

Geht aus dem Wege allen solchen Unbedingten! Sie haben Schwere Füsse
und schwüle Herzen:—sie wissen nicht zu tanzen. Wie möchte Solchen wohl
die Erde leicht sein!

17.

Krumm kommen alle guten Dinge ihrem Ziele nahe. Gleich Katzen machen
sie Buckel, sie schnurren innewendig vor ihrem nahen Glücke,—alle guten
Dinge lachen.

Der Schritt verräth, ob Einer schon auf _seiner_ Bahn schreitet: so
seht mich gehn! Wer aber seinem Ziel nahe kommt, der tanzt.

Und, wahrlich, zum Standbild ward ich nicht, noch stehe ich nicht da,
starr, stumpf, steinern, eine Säule; ich liebe geschwindes Laufen.

Und wenn es auf Erden auch Moor und dicke Trübsal giebt: wer leichte
Füsse hat, läuft über Schlamm noch hinweg und tanzt wie auf gefegtem
Eise.

Erhebt eure Herzen, meine Brüder, hoch! höher! Und vergesst mir auch
die Beine nicht! Erhebt auch eure Beine, ihr guten Tänzer, und besser
noch: ihr steht auch auf dem Kopf!

18.

Diese Krone des Lachenden, diese Rosenkranz-Krone: ich selber setzte
mir diese Krone auf, ich selber sprach heilig mein Gelächter. Keinen
Anderen fand ich heute stark genug dazu.

Zarathustra der Tänzer, Zarathustra der Leichte, der mit den Flügeln
winkt, ein Flugbereiter, allen Vögeln zuwinkend, bereit und fertig, ein
Selig-Leichtfertiger:—

Zarathustra der Wahrsager, Zarathustra der Wahrlacher, kein
Ungeduldiger, kein Unbedingter, Einer, der Sprünge und Seitensprünge
liebt; ich selber setzte mir diese Krone auf!

19.

Erhebt eure Herzen, meine Brüder, hoch! höher! Und vergesst mir auch
die Beine nicht! Erhebt auch eure Beine, ihr guten Tänzer, und besser
noch: ihr steht auch auf dem Kopf!

Es giebt auch im Glück schweres Gethier, es giebt Plumpfüssler von
Anbeginn. Wunderlich müht sie sich ab, einem Elephanten gleich, der
sich müht auf dem Kopf zu stehn.

Besser aber noch närrisch sein vor Glücke als närrisch vor Unglücke,
besser plump tanzen als lahm gehn. So lernt mir doch meine Weisheit ab:
auch das schlimmste Ding hat zwei gute Kehrseiten,—

—auch das schlimmste Ding hat gute Tanzbeine: so lernt mir doch euch
selbst, ihr höheren Menschen, auf eure rechten Beine stellen!

So verlernt mir doch Trübsal-Blasen und alle Pöbel-Traurigkeit! Oh wie
traurig dünken mich heute des Pöbels Hanswürste noch! Diess Heute aber
ist des Pöbels.

20.

Dem Winde thut mir gleich, wenn er aus seinen Berghöhlen stürzt: nach
seiner eignen Pfeife will er tanzen, die Meere zittern und hüpfen unter
seinen Fusstapfen.

Der den Eseln Flügel giebt, der Löwinnen melkt, gelobt sei dieser gute
unbändige Geist, der allem Heute und allem Pöbel wie ein Sturmwind
kommt,—

—der Distel- und Tiftelköpfen feind ist und allen welken Blättern und
Unkräutern: gelobt sei dieser wilde gute freie Sturmgeist, welcher auf
Mooren und Trübsalen wie auf Wiesen tanzt!

Der die Pöbel-Schwindhunde hasst und alles missrathene düstere Gezücht:
gelobt sei dieser Geist aller freien Geister, der lachende Sturm,
welcher allen Schwarzsichtigen, Schwärsüchtigen Staub in die Augen
bläst!

Ihr höheren Menschen, euer Schlimmstes ist: ihr lerntet alle nicht
tanzen, wie man tanzen muss—über euch hinweg tanzen! Was liegt daran,
dass ihr missriethet!

Wie Vieles ist noch möglich! So _lernt_ doch über euch hinweg lachen!
Erhebt eure Herzen, ihr guten Tänzer, hoch! höher! Und vergesst mir
auch das gute Lachen nicht!

Diese Krone des Lachenden, diese Rosenkranz-Krone: euch, meinen
Brüdern, werfe ich diese Krone zu! Das Lachen sprach ich heilig; ihr
höheren Menschen, _lernt_ mir—lachen!


Das Lied der Schwermuth

1.

Als Zarathustra diese Reden sprach, stand er nahe dem Eingange seiner
Höhle; mit den letzten Worten aber entschlüpfte er seinen Gästen und
floh für eine kurze Weile in’s Freie.

„Oh reine Gerüche um mich, rief er aus, oh selige Stille um mich! Aber
wo sind meine Thiere? Heran, heran, mein Adler und meine Schlange!

Sagt mir doch, meine Thiere: diese höheren Menschen
insgesammt—_riechen_ sie vielleicht nicht gut? Oh reine Gerüche um
mich! Jetzo weiss und fühle ich erst, wie ich euch, meine Thiere,
liebe.“

—Und Zarathustra sprach nochmals: „ich liebe euch, meine Thiere!“ Der
Adler aber und die Schlange drängten sich an ihn, als er diese Worte
sprach, und sahen zu ihm hinauf. Solchergestalt waren sie zu drei still
beisammen und schnüffelten und schlürften mit einander die gute Luft.
Denn die Luft war hier draussen besser als bei den höheren Menschen.

2.

Kaum aber hatte Zarathustra seine Höhle verlassen, da erhob sich der
alte Zauberer, sah listig umher und sprach: „Er ist hinaus!

Und schon, ihr höheren Menschen—dass ich euch mit diesem Lob- und
Schmeichel-Namen kitzle, gleich ihm selber—schon fällt mich mein
schlimmer Trug- und Zaubergeist an, mein schwermüthiger Teufel,

—welcher diesem Zarathustra ein Widersacher ist aus dem Grunde: vergebt
es ihm! Nun will er vor euch zaubern, er hat gerade _seine_ Stunde;
umsonst ringe ich mit diesem bösen Geiste.

Euch Allen, welche Ehren ihr euch mit Worten geben mögt, ob ihr euch
„die freien Geister“ nennt oder „die Wahrhaftigen“ oder „die Büsser des
Geistes“ oder „die Entfesselten“ oder „die grossen Sehnsüchtigen“—

—euch Allen, die ihr _am grossen Ekel_ leidet gleich mir, denen der
alte Gott starb und noch kein neuer Gott in Wiegen und Windeln
liegt,—euch Allen ist mein böser Geist und Zauber-Teufel hold.

Ich kenne euch, ihr höheren Menschen, ich kenne ihn,—ich kenne auch
diesen Unhold, den ich wider Willen liebe, diesen Zarathustra: er
selber dünkt mich öfter gleich einer schönen Heiligen-Larve,

—gleich einem neuen wunderlichen Mummenschanze, in dem sich mein böser
Geist, der schwermüthige Teufel, gefällt:—ich liebe Zarathustra, so
dünkt mich oft, um meines bösen Geistes Willen.—

Aber schon fällt _der_ mich an und zwingt mich, dieser Geist der
Schwermuth, dieser Abend-Dämmerungs-Teufel: und, wahrlich, ihr höheren
Menschen, es gelüstet ihn—

—macht nur die Augen auf!—es gelüstet ihn, _nackt_ zu kommen, ob
männlich, ob weiblich, noch weiss ich’s nicht: aber er kommt, er zwingt
mich, wehe! macht eure Sinne auf!

Der Tag klingt ab, allen Dingen kommt nun der Abend, auch den besten
Dingen; hört nun und seht, ihr höheren Menschen, welcher Teufel, ob
Mann, ob Weib, dieser Geist der Abend-Schwermuth ist!“

Also sprach der alte Zauberer, sah listig umher und griff dann zu
seiner Harfe.

3.

Bei abgehellter Luft,
Wenn schon des Thau’s Tröstung
Zur Erde niederquillt,
Unsichtbar, auch ungehört:
—Denn zartes Schuhwerk trägt
Der Tröster Thau gleich allen Trost-Milden—:
Gedenkst du da, gedenkst du, heisses Herz,
Wie einst du durstetest,
Nach himmlischen Thränen und Thau-Geträufel
Versengt und müde durstetest,
Dieweil auf gelben Gras-Pfaden
Boshaft abendliche Sonnenblicke
Durch schwarze Bäume um dich liefen,
Blendende Sonnen-Gluthblicke, schadenfrohe.

„Der _Wahrheit_ Freier? Du?—so höhnten sie—
Nein! Nur ein Dichter!
Ein Thier, ein listiges, raubendes, schleichendes,
Das lügen muss,
Das wissentlich, willentlich lügen muss:
Nach Beute lüstern,
Bunt verlarvt,
Sich selber Larve,
Sich selbst zur Beute—
_Das_—der Wahrheit Freier? Nein!
Nur Narr! Nur Dichter!
Nur Buntes redend,
Aus Narren-Larven bunt herausschreiend,
Herumsteigend auf lügnerischen Wort-Brücken,
Auf bunten Regenbogen,
Zwischen falschen Himmeln
Und falschen Erden,
Herumschweifend, herumschwebend,—
_Nur_ Narr! _Nur_ Dichter!...

_Das_—der Wahrheit Freier?
Nicht still, starr, glatt, kalt,
Zum Bilde worden,
Zur Gottes-Säule,
Nicht aufgestellt vor Tempeln,
Eines Gottes Thürwart:
Nein! Feindselig solchen Wahrheits-Standbildern,
In jeder Wildniss heimischer als vor Tempeln,
Voll Katzen-Muthwillens,
Durch jedes Fenster springend
Husch! in jeden Zufall,
Jedem Urwalde zuschnüffelnd,
Süchtig-sehnsüchtig zuschnüffelnd,
Dass du in Urwäldern
Unter buntgefleckten Raubthieren
Sündlich-gesund und bunt und schön liefest,
Mit lüsternen Lefzen,
Selig-höhnisch, selig-höllisch, selig-blutgierig,
Raubend, schleichend, lügend liefest:...

Oder, dem Adler gleich, der lange,
Lange starr in Abgründe blickt,
In _seine_ Abgründe:...
-- Oh wie sie sich hier hinab,
Hinunter, hinein,
In immer tiefere Tiefen ringeln!—
Dann,
Plötzlich,
geraden Zugs,
Gezückten Flugs,
Auf Lämmer stossen,
Jach hinab, heisshungrig,
Nach Lämmern lüstern,
Gram allen Lamms-Seelen,
Grimmig-gram Allem, was blickt
Schafmässig, lammäugig, krauswollig,
Grau, mit Lamms-Schafs-Wohlwollen!

Also
Adlerhaft, pantherhaft
Sind des Dichters Sehnsüchte,
Sind _deine_ Sehnsüchte unter tausend Larven,
Du Narr! Du Dichter!

Der du den Menschen schautest
So Gott als Schaf—:
Den Gott _zerreissen_ im Menschen
Wie das Schaf im Menschen,
Und zerreisend _lachen_—

_Das_, _Das_ ist deine Seligkeit! Eines Panthers und Adlers Seligkeit!
Eines Dichters und Narren Seligkeit!“—

Bei abgehellter Luft,
Wenn schon des Monds Sichel
Grün zwischen Purpurröthen
Und neidisch hinschleicht:
—dem Tage feind,
Mit jedem Schritte heimlich
An Rosen-Hängematten
Hinsichelnd, bis sie sinken,
Nacht-abwärts blass hinabsinken:

So sank ich selber einstmals
Aus meinem Wahrheits-Wahnsinne,
Aus meinen Tages-Sehnsüchten,
Des Tages müde, krank vom Lichte,
—sank abwärts, abendwärts, schattenwärts:
Von Einer Wahrheit
Verbrannt und durstig:
—gedenkst du noch, gedenkst du, heisses Herz,
Wie da du durstetest?—
Dass ich verbannt sei
Von _aller_ Wahrheit,
Nur Narr! Nur Dichter!


Von der Wissenschaft

Also sang der Zauberer; und Alle, die beisammen waren, giengen gleich
Vögeln unvermerkt in das Netz seiner listigen und schwermüthigen
Wollust. Nur der Gewissenhafte des Geistes war nicht eingefangen: er
nahm flugs dem Zauberer die Harfe weg und rief „Luft! Lasst gute Luft
herein! Lass Zarathustra herein! Du machst diese Höhle schwül und
giftig, du schlimmer alter Zauberer!

Du verfährst, du Falscher, Feiner, zu unbekannten Begierden und
Wildnissen. Und wehe, wenn Solche, wie du, von der _Wahrheit_ Redens
und Wesens machen!

Wehe allen freien Geistern, welche nicht vor _solchen_ Zauberern auf
der Hut sind! Dahin ist es mit ihrer Freiheit: du lehrst und lockst
zurück in Gefängnisse,—

—du alter schwermüthiger Teufel, aus deiner Klage klingt eine
Lockpfeife, du gleichst Solchen, welche mit ihrem Lobe der Keuschheit
heimlich zu Wollüsten laden!“

Also sprach der Gewissenhafte; der alte Zauberer aber blickte um sich,
genoss seines Sieges und verschluckte darüber den Verdruss, welchen ihm
der Gewissenhafte machte. „Sei still! sagte er mit bescheidener Stimme,
gute Lieder wollen gut wiederhallen; nach guten Liedern soll man lange
schweigen.

So thun es diese Alle, die höheren Menschen. Du aber hast wohl Wenig
von meinem Lied verstanden? In dir ist Wenig von einem Zaubergeiste.“

„Du lobst mich, entgegnete der Gewissenhafte, indem du mich von dir
abtrennst, wohlan! Aber ihr Anderen, was sehe ich? Ihr sitzt alle noch
mit lüsternen Augen da—:

Ihr freien Seelen, wohin ist eure Freiheit! Fast, dünkt mich’s, gleicht
ihr Solchen, die lange schlimmen tanzenden nackten Mädchen zusahn: eure
Seelen tanzen selber!

In euch, ihr höheren Menschen, muss Mehr von Dem sein, was der Zauberer
seinen bösen Zauber- und Truggeist nennt:—wir müssen wohl verschieden
sein.

Und wahrlich, wir sprachen und dachten genug mitsammen, ehe Zarathustra
heimkam zu seiner Höhle, als dass ich nicht wüsste: wir _sind_
verschieden.

Wir _suchen_ Verschiednes auch hier oben, ihr und ich. Ich nämlich
suche _mehr Sicherheit_, desshalb kam ich zu Zarathustra. Der nämlich
ist noch der festeste Thurm und Wille—

—heute, wo Alles wackelt, wo alle Erde bebt. Ihr aber, wenn ich eure
Augen sehe, die ihr macht, fast dünkt mich’s, ihr sucht mehr
_Unsicherheit_,

—mehr Schauder, mehr Gefahr, mehr Erdbeben. Euch gelüstet, fast dünkt
mich’s so, vergebt meinem Dünkel, ihr höheren Menschen—

—euch gelüstet nach dem schlimmsten gefährlichsten Leben, das _mir_ am
meisten Furcht macht, nach dem Leben wilder Thiere, nach Wäldern,
Höhlen, steilen Bergen und Irr- Schlünden.

Und nicht die Führer _aus_ der Gefahr gefallen euch am besten, sondern
die euch von allen Wegen abführen, die Verführer. Aber, wenn solch
Gelüsten an euch _wirklich_ ist, so dünkt es mich trotzdem _unmöglich_.

Furcht nämlich—das ist des Menschen Erb- und Grundgefühl; aus der
Furcht erklärt sich jegliches, Erbsünde und Erbtugend. Aus der Furcht
wuchs auch _meine_ Tugend, die heisst: Wissenschaft.

Die Furcht nämlich vor wildem Gethier—die wurde dem Menschen am
längsten angezüchtet, einschliesslich das Thier, das er in sich selber
birgt und fürchtet:—Zarathustra heisst es „das innere Vieh“.

Solche lange alte Furcht, endlich fein geworden, geistlich,
geistig—heute, dünkt mich, heisst sie: Wissenschaft.“—

Also sprach der Gewissenhafte; aber Zarathustra, der eben in seine
Höhle zurückkam und die letzte Rede gehört und errathen hatte, warf dem
Gewissenhaften eine Hand voll Rosen zu und lachte ob seiner
„Wahrheiten“ . „Wie! rief er, was hörte ich da eben? Wahrlich, mich
dünkt, du bist ein Narr oder ich selber bin’s: und deine „Wahrheit“
stelle ich rucks und flugs auf den Kopf.

_Furcht_ nämlich—ist unsre Ausnahme. Muth aber und Abenteuer und Lust
am Ungewissen, am Ungewagten,—_Muth_ dünkt mich des Menschen ganze
Vorgeschichte.

Den wildesten muthigsten Thieren hat er alle ihre Tugenden abgeneidet
und abgeraubt: so erst wurde er—zum Menschen.

_Dieser_ Muth, endlich fein geworden, geistlich, geistig, dieser
Menschen-Muth mit Adler-Flügeln und Schlangen-Klugheit: _der_, dünkt
mich, heisst heute—„

„Zarathustra“! schrien Alle, die beisammen sassen, wie aus Einem Munde
und machten dazu ein grosses Gelächter; es hob sich aber von ihnen wie
eine schwere Wolke. Auch der Zauberer lachte und sprach mit Klugheit:
„Wohlan! Er ist davon, mein böser Geist!

Und habe ich euch nicht selber vor ihm gewarnt, als ich sagte, dass er
ein Betrüger sei, ein Lug- und Truggeist?

Sonderlich nämlich, wenn er sich nackend zeigt. Aber was kann _ich_ für
seine Tücken! Habe _ich_ ihn und die Welt geschaffen?

Wohlan! Seien wir wieder gut und guter Dinge! Und ob schon Zarathustra
böse blickt—seht ihn doch! er ist mir gram—:

—bevor die Nacht kommt, lernt er wieder, mich lieben und loben, er kann
nicht lange leben, ohne solche Thorheiten zu thun.

_Der_—liebt seine Feinde: diese Kunst versteht er am besten von Allen,
die ich sah. Aber er nimmt Rache dafür—an seinen Freunden!“

Also sprach der alte Zauberer, und die höheren Menschen zollten ihm
Beifall: so dass Zarathustra herumgieng und mit Bosheit und Liebe
seinen Freunden die Hände schüttelte,—gleichsam als Einer, der an Allen
Etwas gutzumachen und abzubitten hat. Als er aber dabei an die Thür
seiner Höhle kam, siehe, da gelüstete ihn schon wieder nach der guten
Luft da draussen und nach seinen Thieren,—und er wollte hinaus
schlüpfen.


Unter Töchtern der Wüste

1.

„Gehe nicht davon! sagte da der Wanderer, welcher sich den Schatten
Zarathustra’s nannte, bleibe bei uns, es möchte uns sonst die alte
dumpfe Trübsal wieder anfallen.

Schon gab uns jener alte Zauberer von seinem Schlimmsten zum Besten,
und siehe doch, der gute fromme Papst da hat Thränen in den Augen und
hat sich ganz wieder auf’s Meer der Schwermuth eingeschifft.

Diese Könige mögen wohl vor uns noch gute Miene machen: das lernten
_Die_ nämlich von uns Allen heute am Besten! Hätten sie aber keine
Zeugen, ich wette, auch bei ihnen fienge das böse Spiel wieder an—

—das böse Spiel der ziehenden Wolken, der feuchten Schwermuth, der
verhängten Himmel, der gestohlenen Sonnen, der heulenden Herbst-Winde,

—das böse Spiel unsres Heulens und Nothschreiens: bleibe bei uns, oh
Zarathustra! Hier ist viel verborgenes Elend, das reden will, viel
Abend, viel Wolke, viel dumpfe Luft!

Du nährtest uns mit starker Manns-Kost und kräftigen Sprüchen: lass es
nicht zu, dass uns zum Nachtisch die weichlichen weiblichen Geister
wieder anfallen!

Du allein machst die Luft um dich herum stark und klar! Fand ich je auf
Erden so gute Luft als bei dir in deiner Höhle?

Viele Länder sah ich doch, meine Nase lernte vielerlei Luft prüfen und
abschätzen: aber bei dir schmecken meine Nüstern ihre grösste Lust!

Es sei denn,—es sei denn—, oh vergieb eine alte Erinnerung! Vergieb mir
ein altes Nachtisch-Lied, das ich einst unter Töchtern der Wüste
dichtete:—

—bei denen nämlich gab es gleich gute helle morgenländische Luft; dort
war ich am fernsten vom wolkigen feuchten schwermüthigen Alt-Europa!

Damals liebte ich solcherlei Morgenland-Mädchen und andres blaues
Himmelreich, über dem keine Wolken und keine Gedanken hängen.

Ihr glaubt es nicht, wie artig sie dasassen, wenn sie nicht tanzten,
tief, aber ohne Gedanken, wie kleine Geheimnisse, wie bebänderte
Räthsel, wie Nachtisch-Nüsse—

bunt und fremd fürwahr! aber ohne Wolken: Räthsel, die sich rathen
lassen: solchen Mädchen zu Liebe erdachte ich damals einen
Nachtisch-Psalm.“

Also sprach der Wanderer und Schatten; und ehe Jemand ihm antwortete,
hatte er schon die Harfe des alten Zauberers ergriffen, die Beine
gekreuzt und blickte gelassen und weise um sich:—mit den Nüstern aber
zog er langsam und fragend die Luft ein, wie Einer, der in neuen
Ländern neue fremde Luft kostet. Darauf hob er mit einer Art Gebrüll zu
singen an.

2.

Die Wüste wächst: weh Dem, der Wüsten birgt!

—Ha! Feierlich!
In der That feierlich!
Ein würdiger Anfang!
Afrikanisch feierlich!
Eines Löwen würdig,
Oder eines moralischen Brüllaffen—
—aber Nichts für euch,
Ihr allerliebsten Freundinnen,
Zu deren Füssen mir
Zum ersten Male,
Einem Europäer, unter Palmen
Zu sitzen vergönnt ist. Sela.

Wunderbar wahrlich!
Da sitze ich nun,
Der Wüste nahe und bereits
So fern wieder der Wüste,
Auch in Nichts noch verwüstet:
Nämlich hinabgeschluckt
Von dieser kleinsten Oasis—:
—sie sperrte gerade gähnend
Ihr liebliches Maul auf.
Das wohlriechendste aller Mäulchen:
Da fiel ich hinein,
Hinab, hindurch—unter euch,
Ihr allerliebsten Freundinnen! Sela.

Heil, Heil jenem Wallfische,
Wenn er also es seinem Gaste
Wohl sein liess!—ihr versteht
Meine gelehrte Anspielung?
Heil seinem Bauche,
Wenn er also
Ein so lieblicher Oasis-Bauch war
Gleich diesem: was ich aber in Zweifel ziehe,
—dafür komme ich aus Europa,
Das zweifelsüchtiger ist als alle
Ältlichen Eheweibchen.
Möge Gott es bessern!
Amen!

Da sitze ich nun,
In dieser kleinsten Oasis,
Einer Dattel gleich,
Braun, durchsüsst, goldschwürig, lüstern
Nach einem runden Mädchenmunde,
Mehr noch aber nach mädchenhaften
Eiskalten schneeweissen schneidigen
Beisszähnen: nach denen nämlich
Lechzt das Herz allen heissen Datteln. Sela.

Den genannten Südfrüchten
Ähnlich, allzuähnlich
Liege ich hier, von kleinen
Flügelkäfern
Umtänzelt und umspielt,
Insgleichen von noch kleineren
Thörichteren boshafteren
Wünschen und Einfällen,
Umlagert von euch,
Ihr stummen, ihr ahnungsvollen
Mädchen-Katzen,
Dudu und Suleika,
—_umsphinxt_, dass ich in Ein Wort
Viel Gefühle stopfe:
(Vergebe mir Gott
Diese Sprach-Sünde!)
—sitze hier, die beste Luft schnüffelnd,
Paradieses-Luft wahrlich,
Lichte leichte Luft, goldgestreifte,
So gute Luft nur je
Vom Monde herabfiel—
Sei es aus Zufall,
Oder geschah es aus Übermuthe?
Wie die alten Dichter erzählen.
Ich Zweifler aber ziehe es
In Zweifel, dafür aber komme ich
Aus Europa,
Das zweifelsüchtiger ist als alle
Ältlichen Eheweibchen.
Möge Gott es bessern!
Amen!

Diese schönste Luft trinkend,
Mit Nüstern geschwellt gleich Bechern, Ohne Zukunft, ohne Erinnerungen,
So sitze ich hier, ihr
Allerliebsten Freundinnen,
Und sehe der Palme zu,
Wie sie, einer Tänzerin gleich,
Sich biegt und schmiegt und in der Hüfte wiegt,
—man thut es mit, sieht man lange zu!
Einer Tänzerin gleich, die, wie mir scheinen will,
Zu lange schon, gefährlich lange
Immer, immer nur auf Einem Beine stand?
—da vergass sie darob, wie mir scheinen will,
Das andre Beinchen?
Vergebens wenigstens
Suchte ich das vermisste Zwillings-Kleinod
—nämlich das andre Bein—
In der heiligen Nähe
Ihres allerliebsten, allerzierlichsten
Fächer- und Flatter- und Flitterröckchens.
ja, wenn ihr mir, ihr schönen Freundinnen,
Ganz glauben wollt:
Sie hat es verloren!
Es ist dahin!
Auf ewig dahin!
Das andre Bein!
Oh schade um dieses liebliche andre Bein!
Wo—mag es wohl weilen und verlassen trauern?
Das einsame Bein?
In Furcht vielleicht vor einem
Grimmen gelben blondgelockten
Löwen-Unthiere? Oder gar schon
Abgenagt, abgeknabbert—
Erbärmlich, wehe! wehe! abgeknabbert! Sela.

Oh weint mir nicht,
Weiche Herzen!
Weint mir nicht, ihr
Dattel-Herzen! Milch-Busen!
Ihr Süssholz-Herz-
Beutelchen!
Weine nicht mehr,
Bleiche Dudu!
Sei ein Mann, Suleika! Muth! Muth!
—Oder sollte vielleicht
Etwas Stärkendes, Herz-Stärkendes,
Hier am Platze sein?
Ein gesalbter Spruch?
Ein feierlicher Zuspruch?—

Ha! Herauf, Würde!
Tugend-Würde! Europäer-Würde!
Blase, blase wieder,
Blasebalg der Tugend!
Ha!
Noch Ein Mal brüllen,
Moralisch brüllen!
Als moralischer Löwe
Vor den Töchtern der Wüste brüllen!
—Denn Tugend-Geheul,
Ihr allerliebsten Mädchen,
Ist mehr als Alles
Europäer-Inbrunst, Europäer-Heisshunger!
Und da stehe ich schon,
Als Europäer,
Ich kann nicht anders, Gott helfe mir!
Amen!

Die Wüste wächst: weh Dem, der Wüsten birgt!


Die Erweckung

1.

Nach dem Liede des Wanderers und Schattens wurde die Höhle mit Einem
Male voll Lärmens und Lachens; und da die versammelten Gäste alle
zugleich redeten, und auch der Esel, bei einer solchen Ermuthigung,
nicht mehr still blieb, überkam Zarathustra ein kleiner Widerwille und
Spott gegen seinen Besuch: ob er sich gleich ihrer Fröhlichkeit
erfreute. Denn sie dünkte ihm ein Zeichen der Genesung. So schlüpfte er
hinaus in’s Freie und sprach zu seinen Thieren.

„Wo ist nun ihre Noth hin? sprach er, und schon athmete er selber von
seinem kleinen Überdrusse auf,—bei mir verlernten sie, wie mich dünkt,
das Nothschrein!

—wenn auch, leider, noch nicht das Schrein.“ Und Zarathustra hielt sich
die Ohren zu, denn eben mischte sich das I-A des Esels wunderlich mit
dem Jubel-Lärm dieser höheren Menschen.

„Sie sind lustig, begann er wieder, und wer weiss? vielleicht auf ihres
Wirthes Unkosten; und lernten sie von mir lachen, so ist es doch nicht
_mein_ Lachen, das sie lernten.

Aber was liegt daran! Es sind alte Leute: sie genesen auf ihre Art, sie
lachen auf ihre Art; meine Ohren haben schon Schlimmeres erduldet und
wurden nicht unwirsch.

Dieser Tag ist ein Sieg: er weicht schon, er flieht, _der Geist der
Schwere_, mein alter Erzfeind! Wie gut will dieser Tag enden, der so
schlimm und schwer begann!

Und enden _will_ er. Schon kommt der Abend: über das Meer her reitet
er, der gute Reiter! Wie er sich wiegt, der Selige, Heimkehrende, in
seinen purpurnen Sätteln!

Der Himmel blickt klar dazu, die Welt liegt tief: oh all ihr
Wunderlichen, die ihr zu mir kamt, es lohnt sich schon, bei mir zu
leben!“

Also sprach Zarathustra. Und wieder kam da das Geschrei und Gelächter
der höheren Menschen aus der Höhle: da begann er von Neuem.

„Sie beissen an, mein Köder wirkt, es weicht auch ihnen ihr Feind, der
Geist der Schwere. Schon lernen sie über sich selber lachen: höre ich
recht?

Meine Manns-Kost wirkt, mein Saft- und Kraft-Spruch: und wahrlich, ich
nährte sie nicht mit Bläh-Gemüsen! Sondern mit Krieger-Kost, mit
Eroberer-Kost: neue Begierden weckte ich.

Neue Hoffnungen sind in ihren Armen und Beinen, ihr Herz streckt sich
aus. Sie finden neue Worte, bald wird ihr Geist Muthwillen athmen.

Solche Kost mag freilich nicht für Kinder sein, noch auch für
sehnsüchtige alte und junge Weibchen. Denen überredet man anders die
Eingeweide; deren Arzt und Lehrer bin ich nicht.

Der _Ekel_ weicht diesen höheren Menschen: wohlan! das ist mein Sieg.
In meinem Reiche werden sie sicher, alle dumme Scham läuft davon, sie
schütten sich aus.

Sie schütten ihr Herz aus, gute Stunden kehren ihnen zurück, sie feiern
und käuen wieder,—sie werden _dankbar_.

_Das_ nehme ich als das beste Zeichen: sie werden dankbar. Nicht lange
noch, und sie denken sich Feste aus und stellen Denksteine ihren alten
Freuden auf.

Es sind _Genesende_!“ Also sprach Zarathustra fröhlich zu seinem Herzen
und schaute hinaus; seine Thiere aber drängten sich an ihn und ehrten
sein Glück und sein Stillschweigen.

2.

Plötzlich aber erschrak das Ohr Zarathustra’s: die Höhle nämlich,
welche bisher voller Lärmens und Gelächters war, wurde mit Einem Male
todtenstill;—seine Nase aber roch einen wohlriechenden Qualm und
Weihrauch, wie von brennenden Pinien-Zapfen.

„Was geschieht? Was treiben sie?“ fragte er sich und schlich zum
Eingange heran, dass er seinen Gästen, unvermerkt, zusehn könne. Aber,
Wunder über Wunder! was musste er da mit seinen eignen Augen sehn!

„Sie sind Alle wieder _fromm_ geworden, sie _beten_, sie sind toll!“
—sprach er und verwundene sich über die Maassen. Und, fürwahr!, alle
diese höheren Menschen, die zwei Könige, der Papst ausser Dienst, der
schlimme Zauberer, der freiwillige Bettler, der Wanderer und Schatten,
der alte Wahrsager, der Gewissenhafte des Geistes und der hässlichste
Mensch: sie lagen Alle gleich Kindern und gläubigen alten Weibchen auf
den Knien und beteten den Esel an. Und eben begann der hässlichste
Mensch zu gurgeln und zu schnauben, wie als ob etwas Unaussprechliches
aus ihm heraus wolle; als er es aber wirklich bis zu Worten gebracht
hatte, siehe, da war es eine fromme seltsame Litanei zur Lobpreisung
des angebeteten und angeräucherten Esels. Diese Litanei aber klang
also:

Amen! Und Lob und Ehre und Weisheit und Dank und Preis und Stärke sei
unserm Gott, von Ewigkeit zu Ewigkeit!

—Der Esel aber schrie dazu I-A.

Er trägt unsre Last, er nahm Knechtsgestalt an, er ist geduldsam von
Herzen und redet niemals Nein; und wer seinen Gott liebt, der züchtigt
ihn.

—Der Esel aber schrie dazu I-A.

Er redet nicht: es sei denn, dass er zur Welt, die er Schuf, immer Ja
sagt: also preist er seine Welt. Seine Schlauheit ist es, die nicht
redet: so bekommt er selten Unrecht.

—Der Esel aber schrie dazu I-A.

Unscheinbar geht er durch die Welt. Grau ist die Leib-Farbe, in welche
er seine Tugend hüllt. Hat er Geist, so verbirgt er ihn; Jedermann aber
glaubt an seine langen Ohren.

—Der Esel aber schrie dazu I-A.

Welche verborgene Weisheit ist das, dass er lange Ohren trägt und
allein ja und nimmer Nein sagt! Hat er nicht die Welt erschaffen nach
seinem Bilde, nämlich so dumm als möglich?

—Der Esel aber schrie dazu I-A.

Du gehst gerade und krumme Wege; es kümmert dich wenig, was uns
Menschen gerade oder krumm dünkt. Jenseits von Gut und Böse ist dein
Reich. Es ist deine Unschuld, nicht zu wissen, was Unschuld ist.

—Der Esel aber schrie dazu I-A.

Siehe doch, wie du Niemanden von dir stössest, die Bettler nicht, noch
die Könige. Die Kindlein lässest du zu dir kommen, und wenn dich die
bösen Buben locken, so sprichst du einfältiglich I-A.

—Der Esel aber schrie dazu I-A.

Du liebst Eselinnen und frische Feigen, du bist kein Kostverächter.
Eine Distel kitzelt dir das Herz, wenn du gerade Hunger hast. Darin
liegt eines Gottes Weisheit.

—Der Esel aber schrie dazu I-A.


Das Eselsfest

1.

An dieser Stelle der Litanei aber konnte Zarathustra sich nicht länger
bemeistern, schrie selber I-A, lauter noch als der Esel, und sprang
mitten unter seine tollgewordenen Gäste.

„Aber was treibt ihr da, ihr Menschenkinder? rief er, indem er die
Betenden vom Boden empor riss. Wehe, wenn euch Jemand Anderes zusähe
als Zarathustra:

Jeder würde urtheilen, ihr wäret mit eurem neuen Glauben die ärgsten
Gotteslästerer oder die thörichtsten aller alten Weiblein!

Und du selber, du alter Papst, wie stimmt Das mit dir selber zusammen,
dass du solchergestalt einen Esel hier als Gott anbetest?“—

„Oh Zarathustra, antwortete der Papst, vergieb mir, aber in Dingen
Gottes bin ich aufgeklärter noch als du. Und so ist’s billig.

Lieber Gott also anbeten, in dieser Gestalt, als in gar keiner Gestalt!
Denke über diesen Spruch nach, mein hoher Freund: du erräthst
geschwind, in solchem Spruch steckt Weisheit.

Der, welcher sprach „Gott ist ein Geist“—der machte bisher auf Erden
den grössten Schritt und Sprung zum Unglauben: solch Wort ist auf Erden
nicht leicht wieder gut zu machen!

Mein altes Herz springt und hüpft darob, dass es auf Erden noch Etwas
anzubeten giebt. Vergieb das, oh Zarathustra, einem alten frommen
Papst-Herzen!—„

—„Und du, sagte Zarathustra zu dem Wanderer und Schatten, du nennst und
wähnst dich einen freien Geist? Und treibst hier solchen Götzen- und
Pfaffendienst?

Schlimmer, wahrlich, treibst du’s hier noch als bei deinen schlimmen
braunen Mädchen, du schlimmer neuer Gläubiger!“

„Schlimm genug, antwortete der Wanderer und Schatten, du hast Recht:
aber was kann ich dafür! Der alte Gott lebt wieder, Oh Zarathustra, du
magst reden, was du willst.

Der hässlichste Mensch ist an Allem schuld: der hat ihn wieder
auferweckt. Und wenn er sagt, dass er ihn einst getödtet habe: _Tod_
ist bei Göttern immer nur ein Vorurtheil.“

—Und du, sprach Zarathustra, du schlimmer alter Zauberer, was thatest
du! Wer soll, in dieser freien Zeit, fürderhin an dich glauben, wenn
_du_ an solche Götter-Eseleien glaubst?

Es war eine Dummheit, was du thatest; wie konntest du, du Kluger, eine
solche Dummheit thun!

„Oh Zarathustra, antwortete der kluge Zauberer, du hast Recht, es war
eine Dummheit,—es ist mir auch schwer genug geworden.“

—„Und du gar, sagte Zarathustra, zu dem Gewissenhaften des Geistes,
erwäge doch und lege den Finger an deine Nase! Geht hier denn Nichts
wider dein Gewissen? Ist dein Geist nicht zu reinlich für diess Beten
und den Dunst dieser Betbrüder?“

„Es ist Etwas daran, antwortete der Gewissenhafte und legte den Finger
an die Nase, es ist Etwas an diesem Schauspiele, das meinem Gewissen
sogar wohlthut.

Vielleicht, dass ich an Gott nicht glauben darf: gewiss aber ist, dass
Gott mir in dieser Gestalt noch am glaubwürdigsten dünkt.

Gott soll ewig sein, nach dem Zeugnisse der Frömmsten: wer so viel Zeit
hat, lässt sich Zeit. So langsam und so dumm als möglich: _damit_ kann
ein Solcher es doch sehr weit bringen.

Und wer des Geistes zu viel hat, der möchte sich wohl in die Dumm- und
Narrheit selber vernarren. Denke über dich selber nach, oh Zarathustra!

Du selber—wahrlich! auch du könntest wohl aus Überfluss und Weisheit zu
einem Esel werden.

Geht nicht ein vollkommner Weiser gern auf den krümmsten Wegen? Der
Augenschein lehrt es, oh Zarathustra,—_dein_ Augenschein!“

—„Und du selber zuletzt, sprach Zarathustra und wandte sich gegen den
hässlichsten Menschen, der immer noch auf dem Boden lag, den Arm zu dem
Esel emporhebend (er gab ihm nämlich Wein zu trinken). Sprich, du
Unaussprechlicher, was hast du da gemacht!

Du dünkst mich verwandelt, dein Auge glüht, der Mantel des Erhabenen
liegt um deine Hässlichkeit: _was_ thatest du?

Ist es denn wahr, was jene sagen, dass du ihn wieder auferwecktest? Und
wozu? War er nicht mit Grund abgetödtet und abgethan?

Du selber dünkst mich aufgeweckt: was thatest du? was kehrtest _du_ um?
Was bekehrtest _du_ dich? Sprich, du Unaussprechlicher?“

„Oh Zarathustra, antwortete der hässlichste Mensch, du bist ein Schelm!

Ob _Der_ noch lebt oder wieder lebt oder gründlich todt ist,—wer von
uns Beiden weiss Das am Besten? Ich frage dich.

Eins aber weiss ich,—von dir selber lernte ich’s einst, oh Zarathustra:
wer am gründlichsten tödten will, der _lacht_.

„Nicht durch Zorn, sondern durch Lachen tödtet man“—so sprachst du
einst. Oh Zarathustra, du Verborgener, du Vernichter ohne Zorn, du
gefährlicher Heiliger, - du bist ein Schelm!“

2.

Da aber geschah es, dass Zarathustra, verwundert über lauter solche
Schelmen-Antworten, zur Thür seiner Höhle zurück sprang und, gegen alle
seine Gäste gewendet, mit starker Stimme schrie:

„Oh ihr Schalks-Narren allesammt, ihr Possenreisser! Was verstellt und
versteckt ihr euch vor mir!

Wie doch einem jeden von euch das Herz zappelte vor Lust und Bosheit,
darob, dass ihr endlich einmal wieder wurdet wie die Kindlein, nämlich
fromm,—

—dass ihr endlich wieder thatet wie Kinder thun, nämlich betetet,
hände-faltetet und „lieber Gott“ sagtet!

Aber nun lasst mir _diese_ Kinderstube, meine eigne Höhle, wo heute
alle Kinderei zu Hause ist. Kühlt hier draussen euren heissen
Kinder-Übermuth und Herzenslärm ab!

Freilich: so ihr nicht werdet wie die Kindlein, so kommt ihr nicht in
_das_ Himmelreich. (Und Zarathustra zeigte mit den Händen nach Oben.)

Aber wir wollen auch gar nicht in’s Himmelreich: Männer sind wir
worden,—so wollen wir das Erdenreich.“

3.

Und noch einmal hob Zarathustra an zu reden. „Oh meine neuen Freunde,
sprach er,—ihr Wunderlichen, ihr höheren Menschen, wie gut gefallt ihr
mir nun,—

—seit ihr wieder fröhlich wurdet! Ihr seid wahrlich Alle aufgeblüht:
mich dünkt, solchen Blumen, wie ihr seid, thun _neue Feste_ noth,

—ein kleiner tapferer Unsinn, irgend ein Gottesdienst und Eselsfest,
irgend ein alter fröhlicher Zarathustra-Narr, ein Brausewind, der euch
die Seelen hell bläst.

Vergesst die Nacht und diess Eselsfest nicht, ihr höheren Menschen!
_Das_ erfandet ihr bei mir, Das nehme ich als gutes
Wahrzeichen,—Solcherlei erfinden nur Genesende!

Und feiert ihr es abermals, dieses Eselsfest, thut’s euch zu Liebe,
thut’s auch mir zu Liebe! Und zu _meinem_ Gedächtniss!“

Also sprach Zarathustra.


Das Nachtwandler-Lied

1.

Inzwischen aber war Einer nach dem Andern hinaus getreten, in’s Freie
und in die kühle nachdenkliche Nacht; Zarathustra selber aber führte
den hässlichsten Menschen an der Hand, dass er ihm seine Nacht-Welt und
den grossen runden Mond und die silbernen Wasserstürze bei seiner Höhle
zeige. Da standen sie endlich still bei einander, lauter alte Leute,
aber mit einem getrösteten tapferen Herzen und verwundert bei sich,
dass es ihnen auf Erden so wohl war; die Heimlichkeit der Nacht aber
kam ihnen näher und näher an’s Herz. Und von Neuem dachte Zarathustra
bei sich: „oh wie gut sie mir nun gefallen, diese höheren
Menschen!“—aber er sprach es nicht aus, denn er ehrte ihr Glück und ihr
Stillschweigen.—

Da aber geschah Das, was an jenem erstaunlichen langen Tage das
Erstaunlichste war: der hässlichste Mensch begann noch ein Mal und zum
letzten Mal zu gurgeln und zu schnauben, und als er es bis zu Worten
gebracht hatte, siehe, da sprang eine Frage rund und reinlich aus
seinem Munde, eine gute tiefe klare Frage, welche Allen, die ihm
zuhörten, das Herz im Leibe bewegte.

„Meine Freunde insgesammt, sprach der hässlichste Mensch, was dünket
euch? Um dieses Tags Willen—_ich_ bin’s zum ersten Male zufrieden, dass
ich das ganze Leben lebte.

Und dass ich so viel bezeuge, ist mir noch nicht genug. Es lohnt sich
auf der Erde zu leben: Ein Tag, Ein Fest mit Zarathustra lehrte mich
die Erde lieben.

„War _Das_—das Leben?“ will ich zum Tode sprechen. „Wohlan! Noch Ein
Mal!“

Meine Freunde, was dünket euch? Wollt ihr nicht gleich mir zum Tode
sprechen: War Das—das Leben? Um Zarathustra’s Willen, wohlan! Noch Ein
Mal!“—

Also sprach der hässlichste Mensch; es war aber nicht lange vor
Mitternacht. Und was glaubt ihr wohl, dass damals sich zutrug? Sobald
die höheren Menschen seine Frage hörten, wurden sie sich mit Einem Male
ihrer Verwandlung und Genesung bewusst, und wer ihnen dieselbe gegeben
habe: da sprangen sie auf Zarathustra zu, dankend, verehrend,
liebkosend, ihm die Hände küssend, so wie es der Art eines Jeden eigen
war: also dass Einige lachten, Einige weinten. Der alte Wahrsager aber
tanzte vor Vergnügen; und wenn er auch, wie manche Erzähler meinen,
damals voll süssen Weines war, so war er gewisslich noch voller des
süssen Lebens und hatte aller Müdigkeit abgesagt. Es giebt sogar
Solche, die erzählen, dass damals der Esel getanzt habe: nicht umsonst
nämlich habe ihm der hässlichste Mensch vorher Wein zu trinken gegeben.
Diess mag sich nun so verhalten oder auch anders; und wenn in Wahrheit
an jenem Abende der Esel nicht getanzt hat, so geschahen doch damals
grössere und seltsamere Wunderdinge als es das Tanzen eines Esels wäre.
Kurz, wie das Sprichwort Zarathustra’s lautet: „was liegt daran!“

2.

Zarathustra aber, als sich diess mit dem hässlichsten Menschen zutrug,
stand da, wie ein Trunkener: sein Blick erlosch, seine Zunge lallte,
seine Füsse schwankten. Und wer möchte auch errathen, welche Gedanken
dabei über Zarathustra’s Seele liefen? Ersichtlich aber wich sein Geist
zurück und floh voraus und war in weiten Fernen und gleichsam „auf
hohem Joche, wie geschrieben steht, zwischen zwei Meeren,

—zwischen Vergangenem und Zukünftigem als schwere Wolke wandelnd.“
Allgemach aber, während ihn die höheren Menschen in den Armen hielten,
kam er ein Wenig zu sich selber zurück und wehrte mit den Händen dem
Gedränge der Verehrenden und Besorgten; doch sprach er nicht. Mit Einem
Male aber wandte er schnell den Kopf, denn er schien Etwas zu hören: da
legte er den Finger an den Mund und sprach: „Kommt!“

Und alsbald wurde es rings still und heimlich; aus der Tiefe aber kam
langsam der Klang einer Glocke herauf. Zarathustra horchte darnach,
gleich den höheren Menschen; dann aber legte er zum andern Male den
Finger an den Mund und sprach wiederum: „Kommt! Kommt! Es geht gen
Mitternacht!“—und seine Stimme hatte sich verwandelt. Aber immer noch
rührte er sich nicht von der Stelle: da wurde es noch stiller und
heimlicher, und Alles horchte, auch der Esel, und Zarathustra’s
Ehrenthiere, der Adler und die Schlange, insgleichen die Höhle
Zarathustra’s und der grosse kühle Mond und die Nacht selber.
Zarathustra aber legte zum dritten Male die Hand an den Mund und
sprach:

Kommt! Kommt! Kommt! Lasst uns jetzo wandeln! Es ist die Stunde: lasst
uns in die Nacht wandeln!

3.

Ihr höheren Menschen, es geht gen Mitternacht: da will ich euch Etwas
in die Ohren sagen, wie jene alte Glocke es mir in’s Ohr sagt,—

—so heimlich, so schrecklich, so herzlich, wie jene Mitternachts-Glocke
zu mir es redet, die mehr erlebt hat als Ein Mensch:

—welche schon eurer Väter Herzens-Schmerzens-Schläge abzählte—ach! ach!
wie sie seufzt! wie sie im Traume lacht! die alte tiefe tiefe
Mitternacht!

Still! Still! Da hört sich Manches, das am Tage nicht laut werden darf;
nun aber, bei kühler Luft, da auch aller Lärm eurer Herzen stille
ward,—

—nun redet es, nun hört es sich, nun schleicht es sich in nächtliche
überwache Seelen: ach! ach! wie sie seufzt! wie sie im Traume lacht!

—hörst du’s nicht, wie sie heimlich, schrecklich, herzlich zu _dir_
redet, die alte tiefe tiefe Mitternacht? Oh Mensch, gieb Acht!

4.

Wehe mir! Wo ist die Zeit hin? Sank ich nicht in tiefe Brunnen? Die
Welt schläft—

Ach! Ach! Der Hund heult, der Mond scheint. Lieber will ich sterben,
sterben, als euch sagen, was mein Mitternachts-Herz eben denkt.

Nun starb ich schon. Es ist dahin. Spinne, was spinnst du um mich?
Willst du Blut? Ach! Ach! der Thau fällt, die Stunde kommt—

—die Stunde, wo mich fröstelt und friert, die fragt und fragt und
fragt: „wer hat Herz genug dazu?

—wer soll der Erde Herr sein? Wer will sagen: _so_ sollt ihr laufen,
ihr grossen und kleinen Ströme!“

—die Stunde naht: oh Mensch, du höherer Mensch, gieb Acht! diese Rede
ist für feine Ohren, für deine Ohren was spricht die tiefe Mitternacht?

5.

Es trägt mich dahin, meine Seele tanzt. Tagewerk! Tagewerk! Wer soll
der Erde Herr sein?

Der Mond ist kühl, der Wind schweigt. Ach! Ach! Flogt ihr schon hoch
genug? Ihr tanztet: aber ein Bein ist doch kein Flügel.

Ihr guten Tänzer, nun ist alle Lust vorbei, Wein ward Hefe, jeder
Becher ward mürbe, die Gräber stammeln.

Ihr flogt nicht hoch genug: nun stammeln die Gräber „erlöst doch die
Todten! Warum ist so lange Nacht? Macht uns nicht der Mond trunken?“

Ihr höheren Menschen, erlöst doch die Gräber, weckt die Leichname auf!
Ach, was gräbt noch der Wurm? Es naht, es naht die Stunde,—

—es brummt die Glocke, es schnarrt noch das Herz, es gräbt noch der
Holzwurm, der Herzenswurm. Ach! Ach! Die Welt ist tief!

6.

Süsse Leier! Süsse Leier! Ich liebe deinen Ton, deinen trunkenen
Unken-Ton!—wie lang her, wie fern her kommt mir dein Ton, weit her, von
den Teichen der Liebe!

Du alte Glocke, du süsse Leier! Jeder Schmerz riss dir in’s Herz,
Vaterschmerz, Väterschmerz, Urväterschmerz, deine Rede wurde reif,-

—reif gleich goldenem Herbste und Nachmittage, gleich meinem
Einsiedlerherzen - nun redest du: die Welt selber ward reif, die Traube
bräunt,

—nun will sie sterben, vor Glück sterben. Ihr höheren Menschen, riecht
ihr’s nicht? Es quillt heimlich ein Geruch herauf,

—ein Duft und Geruch der Ewigkeit, ein rosenseliger, brauner
Gold-Wein-Geruch von altem Glücke,

von trunkenem Mitternachts-Sterbeglücke, welches singt: die Welt ist
tief und tiefer als der Tag gedacht!

7.

Lass mich! Lass mich! Ich bin zu rein für dich. Rühre mich nicht an!
Ward meine Welt nicht eben vollkommen?

Meine Haut ist zu rein für deine Hände. Lass mich, du dummer tölpischer
dumpfer Tag! Ist die Mitternacht nicht heller?

Die Reinsten sollen der Erde Herrn sein, die Unerkanntesten, Stärksten,
die Mitternachts-Seelen, die heller und tiefer sind als jeder Tag.

Oh Tag, du tappst nach mir? Du tastest nach meinem Glücke? Ich bin dir
reich, einsam, eine Schatzgrube, eine Goldkammer?

Oh Welt, du willst _mich_? Bin ich dir weltlich? Bin ich dir geistlich?
Bin ich dir göttlich? Aber Tag und Welt, ihr seid zu plump,—

—habt klügere Hände, greift nach tieferem Glücke, nach tieferem
Unglücke, greift nach irgend einem Gotte, greift nicht nach mir:

—mein Unglück, mein Glück ist tief, du wunderlicher Tag, aber doch bin
ich kein Gott, keine Gottes-Hölle: tief ist ihr Weh.

8.

Gottes Weh ist tiefer, du wunderliche Welt! Greife nach Gottes Weh,
nicht nach mir! Was bin ich! Eine trunkene süsse Leier,—

eine Mitternachts-Leier, eine Glocken-Unke, die Niemand versteht, aber
welche reden _muss_, vor Tauben, ihr höheren Menschen! Denn ihr
versteht mich nicht!

Dahin! Dahin! Oh Jugend! Oh Mittag! Oh Nachmittag! Nun kam Abend und
Nacht und Mitternacht,—der Hund heult, der Wind:

—ist der Wind nicht ein Hund? Er winselt, er kläfft, er heult. Ach!
Ach! wie sie seufzt! wie sie lacht, wie sie röchelt und keucht, die
Mitternacht!

Wie sie eben nüchtern spricht, diese trunkene Dichterin! sie übertrat
wohl ihre Trunkenheit? sie wurde überwach? sie käut zurück?

—ihr Weh käut sie zurück, im Traume, die alte tiefe Mitternacht, und
mehr noch ihre Lust. Lust nämlich, wenn schon Weh tief ist: Lust ist
tiefer noch als Herzeleid.

8.

Du Weinstock! Was preisest du mich? Ich schnitt dich doch! Ich bin
grausam, du blutest—: was will dein Lob meiner trunkenen Grausamkeit?

„Was vollkommen ward, alles Reife—will sterben!“ so redest du.
Gesegnet, gesegnet sei das Winzermesser! Aber alles Unreife will leben:
wehe!

Weh spricht: „Vergeh! Weg, du Wehe!“ Aber Alles, was leidet, will
leben, dass es reif werde und lustig und sehnsüchtig,

—sehnsüchtig nach Fernerem, Höherem, Hellerem. „Ich will Erben, so
spricht Alles, was leidet, ich will Kinder, ich will nicht _mich_,“—

Lust aber will nicht Erben, nicht Kinder,—Lust will sich selber, will
Ewigkeit, will Wiederkunft, will Alles-sich-ewig-gleich.

Weh spricht: „Brich, blute, Herz! Wandle, Bein! Flügel, flieg! Hinan!
Hinauf! Schmerz!“ Wohlan! Wohlauf! Oh mein altes Herz: Weh spricht:
„vergeh!“

10.

Ihr höheren Menschen, was dünket euch? Bin ich ein Wahrsager? Ein
Träumender? Trunkener? Ein Traumdeuter? Eine Mitternachts-Glocke?

Ein Tropfen Thau’s? Ein Dunst und Duft der Ewigkeit? Hört ihr’s nicht?
Riecht ihr’s nicht? Eben ward meine Welt vollkommen, Mitternacht ist
auch Mittag,—

Schmerz ist auch eine Lust, Fluch ist auch ein Segen, Nacht ist auch
eine Sonne,—geht davon oder ihr lernt: ein Weiser ist auch ein Narr.

Sagtet ihr jemals ja zu Einer Lust? Oh, meine Freunde, so sagtet ihr Ja
auch zu _allem_ Wehe. Alle Dinge sind verkettet, verfädelt, verliebt,—

—wolltet ihr jemals Ein Mal Zwei Mal, spracht ihr jemals „du gefällst
mir, Glück! Husch! Augenblick!“ so wolltet ihr _Alles_ zurück!

—Alles von neuem, Alles ewig, Alles verkettet, verfädelt, verliebt, oh
so _liebtet_ ihr die Welt,—

—ihr Ewigen, liebt sie ewig und allezeit: und auch zum Weh sprecht ihr:
vergeh, aber komm zurück! Denn alle Lust will—Ewigkeit!

11.

Alle Lust will aller Dinge Ewigkeit, will Honig, will Hefe, will
trunkene Mitternacht, will Gräber, will Gräber-Thränen-Trost, will
vergüldetes Abendroth -

—_was_ will nicht Lust! sie ist durstiger, herzlicher, hungriger,
schrecklicher, heimlicher als alles Weh, sie will _sich_, sie beisst in
_sich_, des Ringes Wille ringt in ihr,—

—sie will Liebe, sie will Hass, sie ist überreich, schenkt, wirft weg,
bettelt, dass Einer sie nimmt, dankt dem Nehmenden, sie möchte gern
gehasst sein,—

—so reich ist Lust, dass sie nach Wehe durstet, nach Hölle, nach Hass,
nach Schmach, nach dem Krüppel, nach _Welt_,—denn diese Welt, oh ihr
kennt sie ja!

Ihr höheren Menschen, nach euch sehnt sie sich, die Lust, die
unbändige, selige,—nach eurem Weh, ihr Missrathenen! Nach Missrathenem
sehnt sich alle ewige Lust.

Denn alle Lust will sich selber, drum will sie auch Herzeleid! Oh
Glück, oh Schmerz! Oh brich, Herz! Ihr höheren Menschen, lernt es doch,
Lust will Ewigkeit,

—Lust will _aller_ Dinge Ewigkeit, will tiefe, tiefe Ewigkeit!

12.

Lerntet ihr nun mein Lied? Erriethet ihr, was es will? Wohlan! Wohlauf!
Ihr höheren Menschen, so singt mir nun meinen Rundgesang!

Singt mir nun selber das Lied, dess Name ist „Noch ein Mal“, dess Sinn
ist „in alle Ewigkeit!“, singt, ihr höheren Menschen, Zarathustra’s
Rundgesang!

Oh Mensch! Gieb Acht!
Was spricht die tiefe Mitternacht?
„Ich schlief, ich schlief—,
Aus tiefem Traum bin ich erwacht:—
Die Welt ist tief,
Und tiefer als der Tag gedacht.
Tief ist ihr Weh—,
Lust—tiefer noch als Herzeleid:
Weh spricht: Vergeh!
Doch alle Lust will Ewigkeit
will tiefe, tiefe Ewigkeit!“


Das Zeichen

Des Morgens aber nach dieser Nacht sprang Zarathustra von seinem Lager
auf, gürtete sich die Lenden und kam heraus aus seiner Höhle, glühend
und stark, wie eine Morgensonne, die aus dunklen Bergen kommt.

„Du grosses Gestirn, sprach er, wie er einstmal gesprochen hatte, du
tiefes Glücks-Auge, was wäre all dein Glück, wenn du nicht _Die_
hättest, welchen du leuchtest!

Und wenn sie in ihren Kammern blieben, während du schon wach bist und
kommst und schenkst und austheilst: wie würde darob deine stolze Scham
zürnen!

Wohlan! sie schlafen noch, diese höheren Menschen, während _ich_ wach
bin: _das_ sind nicht meine rechten Gefährten! Nicht auf sie warte ich
hier in meinen Bergen.

Zu meinem Werke will ich, zu meinem Tage: aber sie verstehen nicht, was
die Zeichen meines Morgens sind, mein Schritt—ist für sie kein Weckruf.

Sie schlafen noch in meiner Höhle, ihr Traum käut noch an meinen
Mitternächten. Das Ohr, das nach _mir_ horcht,—das _gehorchende_ Ohr
fehlt in ihren Gliedern.“

—Diess hatte Zarathustra zu seinem Herzen gesprochen, als die Sonne
aufgieng: da blickte er fragend in die Höhe, denn er hörte über sich
den scharfen Ruf seines Adlers. „Wohlan! rief er hinauf, so gefällt und
gebührt es mir. Meine Thiere sind wach, denn ich bin wach.

Mein Adler ist wach und ehrt gleich mir die Sonne. Mit Adlers-Klauen
greift er nach dem neuen Lichte. Ihr seid meine rechten Thiere; ich
liebe euch.

Aber noch fehlen mir meine rechten Menschen!“—

Also sprach Zarathustra; da aber geschah es, dass er sich plötzlich wie
von unzähligen Vögeln umschwärmt und umflattert hörte,—das Geschwirr so
vieler Flügel aber und das Gedräng um sein Haupt war so gross, dass er
die Augen schloss. Und wahrlich, einer Wolke gleich fiel es über ihn
her, einer Wolke von Pfeilen gleich, welche sich über einen neuen Feind
ausschüttet. Aber siehe, hier war es eine Wolke der Liebe, und über
einen neuen Freund.

„Was geschieht mir?“ dachte Zarathustra in seinem erstaunten Herzen und
liess sich langsam auf dem grossen Steine nieder, der neben dem
Ausgange seiner Höhle lag. Aber, indem er mit den Händen um sich und
über sich und unter sich griff, und den zärtlichen Vögeln wehrte,
siehe, da geschah ihm etwas noch Seltsameres: er griff nämlich dabei
unvermerkt in ein dichtes warmes Haar-Gezottel hinein; zugleich aber
erscholl vor ihm ein Gebrüll,—ein sanftes langes Löwen-Brüllen.

„Das Zeichen kommt,“ sprach Zarathustra und sein Herz verwandelte sich.
Und in Wahrheit, als es helle vor ihm wurde, da lag ihm ein gelbes
mächtiges Gethier zu Füssen und schmiegte das Haupt an seine Knie und
wollte nicht von ihm lassen vor Liebe und that einem Hunde gleich,
welcher seinen alten Herrn wiederfindet. Die Tauben aber waren mit
ihrer Liebe nicht minder eifrig als der Löwe; und jedes Mal, wenn eine
Taube über die Nase des Löwen huschte, schüttelte der Löwe das Haupt
und wunderte sich und lachte dazu.

Zu dem Allen sprach Zarathustra nur Ein Wort: „meine Kinder sind nahe,
meine Kinder“—, dann wurde er ganz stumm. Sein Herz aber war gelöst,
und aus seinen Augen tropften Thränen herab und fielen auf seine Hände.
Und er achtete keines Dings mehr und sass da, unbeweglich und ohne dass
er sich noch gegen die Thiere wehrte. Da flogen die Tauben ab und zu
und setzten sich ihm auf die Schulter und liebkosten sein weisses Haar
und wurden nicht müde mit Zärtlichkeit und Frohlocken. Der starke Löwe
aber leckte immer die Thränen, welche auf die Hände Zarathustra’s
herabfielen und brüllte und brummte schüchtern dazu. Also trieben es
diese Thiere.—

Diess Alles dauerte eine lange Zeit, oder eine kurze Zeit: denn, recht
gesprochen, giebt es für dergleichen Dinge auf Erden _keine_ Zeit—.
Inzwischen aber waren die höheren Menschen in der Höhle Zarathustra’s
wach geworden und ordneten sich mit einander zu einem Zuge an, dass sie
Zarathustra entgegen giengen und ihm den Morgengruss böten: denn sie
hatten gefunden, als sie erwachten, dass er schon nicht mehr unter
ihnen weilte. Als sie aber zur Thür der Höhle gelangten, und das
Geräusch ihrer Schritte ihnen voranlief, da stutzte der Löwe gewaltig,
kehrte sich mit Einem Male von Zarathustra ab und sprang, wild
brüllend, auf die Höhle los; die höheren Menschen aber, als sie ihn
brüllen hörten, schrien alle auf, wie mit Einem Munde, und flohen
zurück und waren im Nu verschwunden.

Zarathustra selber aber, betäubt und fremd, erhob sich von seinem
Sitze, sah um sich, stand staunend da, fragte sein Herz, besann sich
und war allein. „Was hörte ich doch? sprach er endlich langsam, was
geschah mir eben?“

Und schon kam ihm die Erinnerung, und er begriff mit Einem Blicke
Alles, was zwischen Gestern und Heute sich begeben hatte. „Hier ist ja
der Stein, sprach er und strich sich den Bart, auf _dem_ sass ich
gestern am Morgen; und hier trat der Wahrsager zu mir, und hier hörte
ich zuerst den Schrei, den ich eben hörte, den grossen Nothschrei.

Oh ihr höheren Menschen, von _eurer_ Noth war’s ja, dass gestern am
Morgen jener alte Wahrsager mir wahrsagte,—

—zu eurer Noth wollte er mich verfuhren und versuchen: oh Zarathustra,
sprach er zu mir, ich komme, dass ich dich zu deiner letzten Sünde
verführe.

Zu meiner letzten Sünde? rief Zarathustra und lachte zornig über sein
eigenes Wort: _was_ blieb mir doch aufgespart als meine letzte Sünde?“

—Und noch ein Mal versank Zarathustra in sich und setzte sich wieder
auf den grossen Stein nieder und sann nach. Plötzlich sprang er empor,—

„Mitleiden! Das Mitleiden mit dem höheren Menschen! schrie er auf, und
sein Antlitz verwandelte sich in Erz. Wohlan! _Das_—hatte seine Zeit!

Mein Leid und mein Mitleiden—was liegt daran! Trachte ich denn nach
_Glücke_? Ich trachte nach meinem _Werke_!

Wohlan! Der Löwe kam, meine Kinder sind nahe, Zarathustra ward reif,
meine Stunde kam:—

Dies ist _mein_ Morgen, _mein_ Tag hebt an: herauf nun, herauf, du
grosser Mittag!“—

Also sprach Zarathustra und verliess seine Höhle, glühend und stark,
wie eine Morgensonne, die aus dunklen Bergen kommt.


================================================================================
[The Birth of Tragedy (비극의 탄생)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, Part 8.
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, Part 8.

Author: Mark Twain


        
Release date: June 30, 2004 [eBook #7200]
                Most recently updated: December 30, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/7200

Credits: Produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER, PART 8. ***




Produced by David Widger





                    THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER
                                BY
                            MARK TWAIN
                     (Samuel Langhorne Clemens)

                              Part 8



CHAPTER XXXII

TUESDAY afternoon came, and waned to the twilight. The village of St.
Petersburg still mourned. The lost children had not been found. Public
prayers had been offered up for them, and many and many a private
prayer that had the petitioner's whole heart in it; but still no good
news came from the cave. The majority of the searchers had given up the
quest and gone back to their daily avocations, saying that it was plain
the children could never be found. Mrs. Thatcher was very ill, and a
great part of the time delirious. People said it was heartbreaking to
hear her call her child, and raise her head and listen a whole minute
at a time, then lay it wearily down again with a moan. Aunt Polly had
drooped into a settled melancholy, and her gray hair had grown almost
white. The village went to its rest on Tuesday night, sad and forlorn.

Away in the middle of the night a wild peal burst from the village
bells, and in a moment the streets were swarming with frantic half-clad
people, who shouted, "Turn out! turn out! they're found! they're
found!" Tin pans and horns were added to the din, the population massed
itself and moved toward the river, met the children coming in an open
carriage drawn by shouting citizens, thronged around it, joined its
homeward march, and swept magnificently up the main street roaring
huzzah after huzzah!

The village was illuminated; nobody went to bed again; it was the
greatest night the little town had ever seen. During the first half-hour
a procession of villagers filed through Judge Thatcher's house, seized
the saved ones and kissed them, squeezed Mrs. Thatcher's hand, tried to
speak but couldn't--and drifted out raining tears all over the place.

Aunt Polly's happiness was complete, and Mrs. Thatcher's nearly so. It
would be complete, however, as soon as the messenger dispatched with
the great news to the cave should get the word to her husband. Tom lay
upon a sofa with an eager auditory about him and told the history of
the wonderful adventure, putting in many striking additions to adorn it
withal; and closed with a description of how he left Becky and went on
an exploring expedition; how he followed two avenues as far as his
kite-line would reach; how he followed a third to the fullest stretch of
the kite-line, and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-off
speck that looked like daylight; dropped the line and groped toward it,
pushed his head and shoulders through a small hole, and saw the broad
Mississippi rolling by! And if it had only happened to be night he would
not have seen that speck of daylight and would not have explored that
passage any more! He told how he went back for Becky and broke the good
news and she told him not to fret her with such stuff, for she was
tired, and knew she was going to die, and wanted to. He described how he
labored with her and convinced her; and how she almost died for joy when
she had groped to where she actually saw the blue speck of daylight; how
he pushed his way out at the hole and then helped her out; how they sat
there and cried for gladness; how some men came along in a skiff and Tom
hailed them and told them their situation and their famished condition;
how the men didn't believe the wild tale at first, "because," said they,
"you are five miles down the river below the valley the cave is in"
--then took them aboard, rowed to a house, gave them supper, made them
rest till two or three hours after dark and then brought them home.

Before day-dawn, Judge Thatcher and the handful of searchers with him
were tracked out, in the cave, by the twine clews they had strung
behind them, and informed of the great news.

Three days and nights of toil and hunger in the cave were not to be
shaken off at once, as Tom and Becky soon discovered. They were
bedridden all of Wednesday and Thursday, and seemed to grow more and
more tired and worn, all the time. Tom got about, a little, on
Thursday, was down-town Friday, and nearly as whole as ever Saturday;
but Becky did not leave her room until Sunday, and then she looked as
if she had passed through a wasting illness.

Tom learned of Huck's sickness and went to see him on Friday, but
could not be admitted to the bedroom; neither could he on Saturday or
Sunday. He was admitted daily after that, but was warned to keep still
about his adventure and introduce no exciting topic. The Widow Douglas
stayed by to see that he obeyed. At home Tom learned of the Cardiff
Hill event; also that the "ragged man's" body had eventually been found
in the river near the ferry-landing; he had been drowned while trying
to escape, perhaps.

About a fortnight after Tom's rescue from the cave, he started off to
visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough, now, to hear exciting
talk, and Tom had some that would interest him, he thought. Judge
Thatcher's house was on Tom's way, and he stopped to see Becky. The
Judge and some friends set Tom to talking, and some one asked him
ironically if he wouldn't like to go to the cave again. Tom said he
thought he wouldn't mind it. The Judge said:

"Well, there are others just like you, Tom, I've not the least doubt.
But we have taken care of that. Nobody will get lost in that cave any
more."

"Why?"

"Because I had its big door sheathed with boiler iron two weeks ago,
and triple-locked--and I've got the keys."

Tom turned as white as a sheet.

"What's the matter, boy! Here, run, somebody! Fetch a glass of water!"

The water was brought and thrown into Tom's face.

"Ah, now you're all right. What was the matter with you, Tom?"

"Oh, Judge, Injun Joe's in the cave!"



CHAPTER XXXIII

WITHIN a few minutes the news had spread, and a dozen skiff-loads of
men were on their way to McDougal's cave, and the ferryboat, well
filled with passengers, soon followed. Tom Sawyer was in the skiff that
bore Judge Thatcher.

When the cave door was unlocked, a sorrowful sight presented itself in
the dim twilight of the place. Injun Joe lay stretched upon the ground,
dead, with his face close to the crack of the door, as if his longing
eyes had been fixed, to the latest moment, upon the light and the cheer
of the free world outside. Tom was touched, for he knew by his own
experience how this wretch had suffered. His pity was moved, but
nevertheless he felt an abounding sense of relief and security, now,
which revealed to him in a degree which he had not fully appreciated
before how vast a weight of dread had been lying upon him since the day
he lifted his voice against this bloody-minded outcast.

Injun Joe's bowie-knife lay close by, its blade broken in two. The
great foundation-beam of the door had been chipped and hacked through,
with tedious labor; useless labor, too, it was, for the native rock
formed a sill outside it, and upon that stubborn material the knife had
wrought no effect; the only damage done was to the knife itself. But if
there had been no stony obstruction there the labor would have been
useless still, for if the beam had been wholly cut away Injun Joe could
not have squeezed his body under the door, and he knew it. So he had
only hacked that place in order to be doing something--in order to pass
the weary time--in order to employ his tortured faculties. Ordinarily
one could find half a dozen bits of candle stuck around in the crevices
of this vestibule, left there by tourists; but there were none now. The
prisoner had searched them out and eaten them. He had also contrived to
catch a few bats, and these, also, he had eaten, leaving only their
claws. The poor unfortunate had starved to death. In one place, near at
hand, a stalagmite had been slowly growing up from the ground for ages,
builded by the water-drip from a stalactite overhead. The captive had
broken off the stalagmite, and upon the stump had placed a stone,
wherein he had scooped a shallow hollow to catch the precious drop
that fell once in every three minutes with the dreary regularity of a
clock-tick--a dessertspoonful once in four and twenty hours. That drop
was falling when the Pyramids were new; when Troy fell; when the
foundations of Rome were laid when Christ was crucified; when the
Conqueror created the British empire; when Columbus sailed; when the
massacre at Lexington was "news." It is falling now; it will still be
falling when all these things shall have sunk down the afternoon of
history, and the twilight of tradition, and been swallowed up in the
thick night of oblivion. Has everything a purpose and a mission? Did
this drop fall patiently during five thousand years to be ready for
this flitting human insect's need? and has it another important object
to accomplish ten thousand years to come? No matter. It is many and
many a year since the hapless half-breed scooped out the stone to catch
the priceless drops, but to this day the tourist stares longest at that
pathetic stone and that slow-dropping water when he comes to see the
wonders of McDougal's cave. Injun Joe's cup stands first in the list of
the cavern's marvels; even "Aladdin's Palace" cannot rival it.

Injun Joe was buried near the mouth of the cave; and people flocked
there in boats and wagons from the towns and from all the farms and
hamlets for seven miles around; they brought their children, and all
sorts of provisions, and confessed that they had had almost as
satisfactory a time at the funeral as they could have had at the
hanging.

This funeral stopped the further growth of one thing--the petition to
the governor for Injun Joe's pardon. The petition had been largely
signed; many tearful and eloquent meetings had been held, and a
committee of sappy women been appointed to go in deep mourning and wail
around the governor, and implore him to be a merciful ass and trample
his duty under foot. Injun Joe was believed to have killed five
citizens of the village, but what of that? If he had been Satan himself
there would have been plenty of weaklings ready to scribble their names
to a pardon-petition, and drip a tear on it from their permanently
impaired and leaky water-works.

The morning after the funeral Tom took Huck to a private place to have
an important talk. Huck had learned all about Tom's adventure from the
Welshman and the Widow Douglas, by this time, but Tom said he reckoned
there was one thing they had not told him; that thing was what he
wanted to talk about now. Huck's face saddened. He said:

"I know what it is. You got into No. 2 and never found anything but
whiskey. Nobody told me it was you; but I just knowed it must 'a' ben
you, soon as I heard 'bout that whiskey business; and I knowed you
hadn't got the money becuz you'd 'a' got at me some way or other and
told me even if you was mum to everybody else. Tom, something's always
told me we'd never get holt of that swag."

"Why, Huck, I never told on that tavern-keeper. YOU know his tavern
was all right the Saturday I went to the picnic. Don't you remember you
was to watch there that night?"

"Oh yes! Why, it seems 'bout a year ago. It was that very night that I
follered Injun Joe to the widder's."

"YOU followed him?"

"Yes--but you keep mum. I reckon Injun Joe's left friends behind him,
and I don't want 'em souring on me and doing me mean tricks. If it
hadn't ben for me he'd be down in Texas now, all right."

Then Huck told his entire adventure in confidence to Tom, who had only
heard of the Welshman's part of it before.

"Well," said Huck, presently, coming back to the main question,
"whoever nipped the whiskey in No. 2, nipped the money, too, I reckon
--anyways it's a goner for us, Tom."

"Huck, that money wasn't ever in No. 2!"

"What!" Huck searched his comrade's face keenly. "Tom, have you got on
the track of that money again?"

"Huck, it's in the cave!"

Huck's eyes blazed.

"Say it again, Tom."

"The money's in the cave!"

"Tom--honest injun, now--is it fun, or earnest?"

"Earnest, Huck--just as earnest as ever I was in my life. Will you go
in there with me and help get it out?"

"I bet I will! I will if it's where we can blaze our way to it and not
get lost."

"Huck, we can do that without the least little bit of trouble in the
world."

"Good as wheat! What makes you think the money's--"

"Huck, you just wait till we get in there. If we don't find it I'll
agree to give you my drum and every thing I've got in the world. I
will, by jings."

"All right--it's a whiz. When do you say?"

"Right now, if you say it. Are you strong enough?"

"Is it far in the cave? I ben on my pins a little, three or four days,
now, but I can't walk more'n a mile, Tom--least I don't think I could."

"It's about five mile into there the way anybody but me would go,
Huck, but there's a mighty short cut that they don't anybody but me
know about. Huck, I'll take you right to it in a skiff. I'll float the
skiff down there, and I'll pull it back again all by myself. You
needn't ever turn your hand over."

"Less start right off, Tom."

"All right. We want some bread and meat, and our pipes, and a little
bag or two, and two or three kite-strings, and some of these
new-fangled things they call lucifer matches. I tell you, many's
the time I wished I had some when I was in there before."

A trifle after noon the boys borrowed a small skiff from a citizen who
was absent, and got under way at once. When they were several miles
below "Cave Hollow," Tom said:

"Now you see this bluff here looks all alike all the way down from the
cave hollow--no houses, no wood-yards, bushes all alike. But do you see
that white place up yonder where there's been a landslide? Well, that's
one of my marks. We'll get ashore, now."

They landed.

"Now, Huck, where we're a-standing you could touch that hole I got out
of with a fishing-pole. See if you can find it."

Huck searched all the place about, and found nothing. Tom proudly
marched into a thick clump of sumach bushes and said:

"Here you are! Look at it, Huck; it's the snuggest hole in this
country. You just keep mum about it. All along I've been wanting to be
a robber, but I knew I'd got to have a thing like this, and where to
run across it was the bother. We've got it now, and we'll keep it
quiet, only we'll let Joe Harper and Ben Rogers in--because of course
there's got to be a Gang, or else there wouldn't be any style about it.
Tom Sawyer's Gang--it sounds splendid, don't it, Huck?"

"Well, it just does, Tom. And who'll we rob?"

"Oh, most anybody. Waylay people--that's mostly the way."

"And kill them?"

"No, not always. Hive them in the cave till they raise a ransom."

"What's a ransom?"

"Money. You make them raise all they can, off'n their friends; and
after you've kept them a year, if it ain't raised then you kill them.
That's the general way. Only you don't kill the women. You shut up the
women, but you don't kill them. They're always beautiful and rich, and
awfully scared. You take their watches and things, but you always take
your hat off and talk polite. They ain't anybody as polite as robbers
--you'll see that in any book. Well, the women get to loving you, and
after they've been in the cave a week or two weeks they stop crying and
after that you couldn't get them to leave. If you drove them out they'd
turn right around and come back. It's so in all the books."

"Why, it's real bully, Tom. I believe it's better'n to be a pirate."

"Yes, it's better in some ways, because it's close to home and
circuses and all that."

By this time everything was ready and the boys entered the hole, Tom
in the lead. They toiled their way to the farther end of the tunnel,
then made their spliced kite-strings fast and moved on. A few steps
brought them to the spring, and Tom felt a shudder quiver all through
him. He showed Huck the fragment of candle-wick perched on a lump of
clay against the wall, and described how he and Becky had watched the
flame struggle and expire.

The boys began to quiet down to whispers, now, for the stillness and
gloom of the place oppressed their spirits. They went on, and presently
entered and followed Tom's other corridor until they reached the
"jumping-off place." The candles revealed the fact that it was not
really a precipice, but only a steep clay hill twenty or thirty feet
high. Tom whispered:

"Now I'll show you something, Huck."

He held his candle aloft and said:

"Look as far around the corner as you can. Do you see that? There--on
the big rock over yonder--done with candle-smoke."

"Tom, it's a CROSS!"

"NOW where's your Number Two? 'UNDER THE CROSS,' hey? Right yonder's
where I saw Injun Joe poke up his candle, Huck!"

Huck stared at the mystic sign awhile, and then said with a shaky voice:

"Tom, less git out of here!"

"What! and leave the treasure?"

"Yes--leave it. Injun Joe's ghost is round about there, certain."

"No it ain't, Huck, no it ain't. It would ha'nt the place where he
died--away out at the mouth of the cave--five mile from here."

"No, Tom, it wouldn't. It would hang round the money. I know the ways
of ghosts, and so do you."

Tom began to fear that Huck was right. Misgivings gathered in his
mind. But presently an idea occurred to him--

"Lookyhere, Huck, what fools we're making of ourselves! Injun Joe's
ghost ain't a going to come around where there's a cross!"

The point was well taken. It had its effect.

"Tom, I didn't think of that. But that's so. It's luck for us, that
cross is. I reckon we'll climb down there and have a hunt for that box."

Tom went first, cutting rude steps in the clay hill as he descended.
Huck followed. Four avenues opened out of the small cavern which the
great rock stood in. The boys examined three of them with no result.
They found a small recess in the one nearest the base of the rock, with
a pallet of blankets spread down in it; also an old suspender, some
bacon rind, and the well-gnawed bones of two or three fowls. But there
was no money-box. The lads searched and researched this place, but in
vain. Tom said:

"He said UNDER the cross. Well, this comes nearest to being under the
cross. It can't be under the rock itself, because that sets solid on
the ground."

They searched everywhere once more, and then sat down discouraged.
Huck could suggest nothing. By-and-by Tom said:

"Lookyhere, Huck, there's footprints and some candle-grease on the
clay about one side of this rock, but not on the other sides. Now,
what's that for? I bet you the money IS under the rock. I'm going to
dig in the clay."

"That ain't no bad notion, Tom!" said Huck with animation.

Tom's "real Barlow" was out at once, and he had not dug four inches
before he struck wood.

"Hey, Huck!--you hear that?"

Huck began to dig and scratch now. Some boards were soon uncovered and
removed. They had concealed a natural chasm which led under the rock.
Tom got into this and held his candle as far under the rock as he
could, but said he could not see to the end of the rift. He proposed to
explore. He stooped and passed under; the narrow way descended
gradually. He followed its winding course, first to the right, then to
the left, Huck at his heels. Tom turned a short curve, by-and-by, and
exclaimed:

"My goodness, Huck, lookyhere!"

It was the treasure-box, sure enough, occupying a snug little cavern,
along with an empty powder-keg, a couple of guns in leather cases, two
or three pairs of old moccasins, a leather belt, and some other rubbish
well soaked with the water-drip.

"Got it at last!" said Huck, ploughing among the tarnished coins with
his hand. "My, but we're rich, Tom!"

"Huck, I always reckoned we'd get it. It's just too good to believe,
but we HAVE got it, sure! Say--let's not fool around here. Let's snake
it out. Lemme see if I can lift the box."

It weighed about fifty pounds. Tom could lift it, after an awkward
fashion, but could not carry it conveniently.

"I thought so," he said; "THEY carried it like it was heavy, that day
at the ha'nted house. I noticed that. I reckon I was right to think of
fetching the little bags along."

The money was soon in the bags and the boys took it up to the cross
rock.

"Now less fetch the guns and things," said Huck.

"No, Huck--leave them there. They're just the tricks to have when we
go to robbing. We'll keep them there all the time, and we'll hold our
orgies there, too. It's an awful snug place for orgies."

"What orgies?"

"I dono. But robbers always have orgies, and of course we've got to
have them, too. Come along, Huck, we've been in here a long time. It's
getting late, I reckon. I'm hungry, too. We'll eat and smoke when we
get to the skiff."

They presently emerged into the clump of sumach bushes, looked warily
out, found the coast clear, and were soon lunching and smoking in the
skiff. As the sun dipped toward the horizon they pushed out and got
under way. Tom skimmed up the shore through the long twilight, chatting
cheerily with Huck, and landed shortly after dark.

"Now, Huck," said Tom, "we'll hide the money in the loft of the
widow's woodshed, and I'll come up in the morning and we'll count it
and divide, and then we'll hunt up a place out in the woods for it
where it will be safe. Just you lay quiet here and watch the stuff till
I run and hook Benny Taylor's little wagon; I won't be gone a minute."

He disappeared, and presently returned with the wagon, put the two
small sacks into it, threw some old rags on top of them, and started
off, dragging his cargo behind him. When the boys reached the
Welshman's house, they stopped to rest. Just as they were about to move
on, the Welshman stepped out and said:

"Hallo, who's that?"

"Huck and Tom Sawyer."

"Good! Come along with me, boys, you are keeping everybody waiting.
Here--hurry up, trot ahead--I'll haul the wagon for you. Why, it's not
as light as it might be. Got bricks in it?--or old metal?"

"Old metal," said Tom.

"I judged so; the boys in this town will take more trouble and fool
away more time hunting up six bits' worth of old iron to sell to the
foundry than they would to make twice the money at regular work. But
that's human nature--hurry along, hurry along!"

The boys wanted to know what the hurry was about.

"Never mind; you'll see, when we get to the Widow Douglas'."

Huck said with some apprehension--for he was long used to being
falsely accused:

"Mr. Jones, we haven't been doing nothing."

The Welshman laughed.

"Well, I don't know, Huck, my boy. I don't know about that. Ain't you
and the widow good friends?"

"Yes. Well, she's ben good friends to me, anyway."

"All right, then. What do you want to be afraid for?"

This question was not entirely answered in Huck's slow mind before he
found himself pushed, along with Tom, into Mrs. Douglas' drawing-room.
Mr. Jones left the wagon near the door and followed.

The place was grandly lighted, and everybody that was of any
consequence in the village was there. The Thatchers were there, the
Harpers, the Rogerses, Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, the minister, the editor,
and a great many more, and all dressed in their best. The widow
received the boys as heartily as any one could well receive two such
looking beings. They were covered with clay and candle-grease. Aunt
Polly blushed crimson with humiliation, and frowned and shook her head
at Tom. Nobody suffered half as much as the two boys did, however. Mr.
Jones said:

"Tom wasn't at home, yet, so I gave him up; but I stumbled on him and
Huck right at my door, and so I just brought them along in a hurry."

"And you did just right," said the widow. "Come with me, boys."

She took them to a bedchamber and said:

"Now wash and dress yourselves. Here are two new suits of clothes
--shirts, socks, everything complete. They're Huck's--no, no thanks,
Huck--Mr. Jones bought one and I the other. But they'll fit both of you.
Get into them. We'll wait--come down when you are slicked up enough."

Then she left.



CHAPTER XXXIV

HUCK said: "Tom, we can slope, if we can find a rope. The window ain't
high from the ground."

"Shucks! what do you want to slope for?"

"Well, I ain't used to that kind of a crowd. I can't stand it. I ain't
going down there, Tom."

"Oh, bother! It ain't anything. I don't mind it a bit. I'll take care
of you."

Sid appeared.

"Tom," said he, "auntie has been waiting for you all the afternoon.
Mary got your Sunday clothes ready, and everybody's been fretting about
you. Say--ain't this grease and clay, on your clothes?"

"Now, Mr. Siddy, you jist 'tend to your own business. What's all this
blow-out about, anyway?"

"It's one of the widow's parties that she's always having. This time
it's for the Welshman and his sons, on account of that scrape they
helped her out of the other night. And say--I can tell you something,
if you want to know."

"Well, what?"

"Why, old Mr. Jones is going to try to spring something on the people
here to-night, but I overheard him tell auntie to-day about it, as a
secret, but I reckon it's not much of a secret now. Everybody knows
--the widow, too, for all she tries to let on she don't. Mr. Jones was
bound Huck should be here--couldn't get along with his grand secret
without Huck, you know!"

"Secret about what, Sid?"

"About Huck tracking the robbers to the widow's. I reckon Mr. Jones
was going to make a grand time over his surprise, but I bet you it will
drop pretty flat."

Sid chuckled in a very contented and satisfied way.

"Sid, was it you that told?"

"Oh, never mind who it was. SOMEBODY told--that's enough."

"Sid, there's only one person in this town mean enough to do that, and
that's you. If you had been in Huck's place you'd 'a' sneaked down the
hill and never told anybody on the robbers. You can't do any but mean
things, and you can't bear to see anybody praised for doing good ones.
There--no thanks, as the widow says"--and Tom cuffed Sid's ears and
helped him to the door with several kicks. "Now go and tell auntie if
you dare--and to-morrow you'll catch it!"

Some minutes later the widow's guests were at the supper-table, and a
dozen children were propped up at little side-tables in the same room,
after the fashion of that country and that day. At the proper time Mr.
Jones made his little speech, in which he thanked the widow for the
honor she was doing himself and his sons, but said that there was
another person whose modesty--

And so forth and so on. He sprung his secret about Huck's share in the
adventure in the finest dramatic manner he was master of, but the
surprise it occasioned was largely counterfeit and not as clamorous and
effusive as it might have been under happier circumstances. However,
the widow made a pretty fair show of astonishment, and heaped so many
compliments and so much gratitude upon Huck that he almost forgot the
nearly intolerable discomfort of his new clothes in the entirely
intolerable discomfort of being set up as a target for everybody's gaze
and everybody's laudations.

The widow said she meant to give Huck a home under her roof and have
him educated; and that when she could spare the money she would start
him in business in a modest way. Tom's chance was come. He said:

"Huck don't need it. Huck's rich."

Nothing but a heavy strain upon the good manners of the company kept
back the due and proper complimentary laugh at this pleasant joke. But
the silence was a little awkward. Tom broke it:

"Huck's got money. Maybe you don't believe it, but he's got lots of
it. Oh, you needn't smile--I reckon I can show you. You just wait a
minute."

Tom ran out of doors. The company looked at each other with a
perplexed interest--and inquiringly at Huck, who was tongue-tied.

"Sid, what ails Tom?" said Aunt Polly. "He--well, there ain't ever any
making of that boy out. I never--"

Tom entered, struggling with the weight of his sacks, and Aunt Polly
did not finish her sentence. Tom poured the mass of yellow coin upon
the table and said:

"There--what did I tell you? Half of it's Huck's and half of it's mine!"

The spectacle took the general breath away. All gazed, nobody spoke
for a moment. Then there was a unanimous call for an explanation. Tom
said he could furnish it, and he did. The tale was long, but brimful of
interest. There was scarcely an interruption from any one to break the
charm of its flow. When he had finished, Mr. Jones said:

"I thought I had fixed up a little surprise for this occasion, but it
don't amount to anything now. This one makes it sing mighty small, I'm
willing to allow."

The money was counted. The sum amounted to a little over twelve
thousand dollars. It was more than any one present had ever seen at one
time before, though several persons were there who were worth
considerably more than that in property.



CHAPTER XXXV

THE reader may rest satisfied that Tom's and Huck's windfall made a
mighty stir in the poor little village of St. Petersburg. So vast a
sum, all in actual cash, seemed next to incredible. It was talked
about, gloated over, glorified, until the reason of many of the
citizens tottered under the strain of the unhealthy excitement. Every
"haunted" house in St. Petersburg and the neighboring villages was
dissected, plank by plank, and its foundations dug up and ransacked for
hidden treasure--and not by boys, but men--pretty grave, unromantic
men, too, some of them. Wherever Tom and Huck appeared they were
courted, admired, stared at. The boys were not able to remember that
their remarks had possessed weight before; but now their sayings were
treasured and repeated; everything they did seemed somehow to be
regarded as remarkable; they had evidently lost the power of doing and
saying commonplace things; moreover, their past history was raked up
and discovered to bear marks of conspicuous originality. The village
paper published biographical sketches of the boys.

The Widow Douglas put Huck's money out at six per cent., and Judge
Thatcher did the same with Tom's at Aunt Polly's request. Each lad had
an income, now, that was simply prodigious--a dollar for every week-day
in the year and half of the Sundays. It was just what the minister got
--no, it was what he was promised--he generally couldn't collect it. A
dollar and a quarter a week would board, lodge, and school a boy in
those old simple days--and clothe him and wash him, too, for that
matter.

Judge Thatcher had conceived a great opinion of Tom. He said that no
commonplace boy would ever have got his daughter out of the cave. When
Becky told her father, in strict confidence, how Tom had taken her
whipping at school, the Judge was visibly moved; and when she pleaded
grace for the mighty lie which Tom had told in order to shift that
whipping from her shoulders to his own, the Judge said with a fine
outburst that it was a noble, a generous, a magnanimous lie--a lie that
was worthy to hold up its head and march down through history breast to
breast with George Washington's lauded Truth about the hatchet! Becky
thought her father had never looked so tall and so superb as when he
walked the floor and stamped his foot and said that. She went straight
off and told Tom about it.

Judge Thatcher hoped to see Tom a great lawyer or a great soldier some
day. He said he meant to look to it that Tom should be admitted to the
National Military Academy and afterward trained in the best law school
in the country, in order that he might be ready for either career or
both.

Huck Finn's wealth and the fact that he was now under the Widow
Douglas' protection introduced him into society--no, dragged him into
it, hurled him into it--and his sufferings were almost more than he
could bear. The widow's servants kept him clean and neat, combed and
brushed, and they bedded him nightly in unsympathetic sheets that had
not one little spot or stain which he could press to his heart and know
for a friend. He had to eat with a knife and fork; he had to use
napkin, cup, and plate; he had to learn his book, he had to go to
church; he had to talk so properly that speech was become insipid in
his mouth; whithersoever he turned, the bars and shackles of
civilization shut him in and bound him hand and foot.

He bravely bore his miseries three weeks, and then one day turned up
missing. For forty-eight hours the widow hunted for him everywhere in
great distress. The public were profoundly concerned; they searched
high and low, they dragged the river for his body. Early the third
morning Tom Sawyer wisely went poking among some old empty hogsheads
down behind the abandoned slaughter-house, and in one of them he found
the refugee. Huck had slept there; he had just breakfasted upon some
stolen odds and ends of food, and was lying off, now, in comfort, with
his pipe. He was unkempt, uncombed, and clad in the same old ruin of
rags that had made him picturesque in the days when he was free and
happy. Tom routed him out, told him the trouble he had been causing,
and urged him to go home. Huck's face lost its tranquil content, and
took a melancholy cast. He said:

"Don't talk about it, Tom. I've tried it, and it don't work; it don't
work, Tom. It ain't for me; I ain't used to it. The widder's good to
me, and friendly; but I can't stand them ways. She makes me get up just
at the same time every morning; she makes me wash, they comb me all to
thunder; she won't let me sleep in the woodshed; I got to wear them
blamed clothes that just smothers me, Tom; they don't seem to any air
git through 'em, somehow; and they're so rotten nice that I can't set
down, nor lay down, nor roll around anywher's; I hain't slid on a
cellar-door for--well, it 'pears to be years; I got to go to church and
sweat and sweat--I hate them ornery sermons! I can't ketch a fly in
there, I can't chaw. I got to wear shoes all Sunday. The widder eats by
a bell; she goes to bed by a bell; she gits up by a bell--everything's
so awful reg'lar a body can't stand it."

"Well, everybody does that way, Huck."

"Tom, it don't make no difference. I ain't everybody, and I can't
STAND it. It's awful to be tied up so. And grub comes too easy--I don't
take no interest in vittles, that way. I got to ask to go a-fishing; I
got to ask to go in a-swimming--dern'd if I hain't got to ask to do
everything. Well, I'd got to talk so nice it wasn't no comfort--I'd got
to go up in the attic and rip out awhile, every day, to git a taste in
my mouth, or I'd a died, Tom. The widder wouldn't let me smoke; she
wouldn't let me yell, she wouldn't let me gape, nor stretch, nor
scratch, before folks--" [Then with a spasm of special irritation and
injury]--"And dad fetch it, she prayed all the time! I never see such a
woman! I HAD to shove, Tom--I just had to. And besides, that school's
going to open, and I'd a had to go to it--well, I wouldn't stand THAT,
Tom. Looky here, Tom, being rich ain't what it's cracked up to be. It's
just worry and worry, and sweat and sweat, and a-wishing you was dead
all the time. Now these clothes suits me, and this bar'l suits me, and
I ain't ever going to shake 'em any more. Tom, I wouldn't ever got into
all this trouble if it hadn't 'a' ben for that money; now you just take
my sheer of it along with your'n, and gimme a ten-center sometimes--not
many times, becuz I don't give a dern for a thing 'thout it's tollable
hard to git--and you go and beg off for me with the widder."

"Oh, Huck, you know I can't do that. 'Tain't fair; and besides if
you'll try this thing just a while longer you'll come to like it."

"Like it! Yes--the way I'd like a hot stove if I was to set on it long
enough. No, Tom, I won't be rich, and I won't live in them cussed
smothery houses. I like the woods, and the river, and hogsheads, and
I'll stick to 'em, too. Blame it all! just as we'd got guns, and a
cave, and all just fixed to rob, here this dern foolishness has got to
come up and spile it all!"

Tom saw his opportunity--

"Lookyhere, Huck, being rich ain't going to keep me back from turning
robber."

"No! Oh, good-licks; are you in real dead-wood earnest, Tom?"

"Just as dead earnest as I'm sitting here. But Huck, we can't let you
into the gang if you ain't respectable, you know."

Huck's joy was quenched.

"Can't let me in, Tom? Didn't you let me go for a pirate?"

"Yes, but that's different. A robber is more high-toned than what a
pirate is--as a general thing. In most countries they're awful high up
in the nobility--dukes and such."

"Now, Tom, hain't you always ben friendly to me? You wouldn't shet me
out, would you, Tom? You wouldn't do that, now, WOULD you, Tom?"

"Huck, I wouldn't want to, and I DON'T want to--but what would people
say? Why, they'd say, 'Mph! Tom Sawyer's Gang! pretty low characters in
it!' They'd mean you, Huck. You wouldn't like that, and I wouldn't."

Huck was silent for some time, engaged in a mental struggle. Finally
he said:

"Well, I'll go back to the widder for a month and tackle it and see if
I can come to stand it, if you'll let me b'long to the gang, Tom."

"All right, Huck, it's a whiz! Come along, old chap, and I'll ask the
widow to let up on you a little, Huck."

"Will you, Tom--now will you? That's good. If she'll let up on some of
the roughest things, I'll smoke private and cuss private, and crowd
through or bust. When you going to start the gang and turn robbers?"

"Oh, right off. We'll get the boys together and have the initiation
to-night, maybe."

"Have the which?"

"Have the initiation."

"What's that?"

"It's to swear to stand by one another, and never tell the gang's
secrets, even if you're chopped all to flinders, and kill anybody and
all his family that hurts one of the gang."

"That's gay--that's mighty gay, Tom, I tell you."

"Well, I bet it is. And all that swearing's got to be done at
midnight, in the lonesomest, awfulest place you can find--a ha'nted
house is the best, but they're all ripped up now."

"Well, midnight's good, anyway, Tom."

"Yes, so it is. And you've got to swear on a coffin, and sign it with
blood."

"Now, that's something LIKE! Why, it's a million times bullier than
pirating. I'll stick to the widder till I rot, Tom; and if I git to be
a reg'lar ripper of a robber, and everybody talking 'bout it, I reckon
she'll be proud she snaked me in out of the wet."




CONCLUSION

SO endeth this chronicle. It being strictly a history of a BOY, it
must stop here; the story could not go much further without becoming
the history of a MAN. When one writes a novel about grown people, he
knows exactly where to stop--that is, with a marriage; but when he
writes of juveniles, he must stop where he best can.

Most of the characters that perform in this book still live, and are
prosperous and happy. Some day it may seem worth while to take up the
story of the younger ones again and see what sort of men and women they
turned out to be; therefore it will be wisest not to reveal any of that
part of their lives at present.


================================================================================
[On the Genealogy of Morals (도덕의 계보)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Human, All-Too-Human: A Book for Free Spirits, Part 2
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Human, All-Too-Human: A Book for Free Spirits, Part 2

Author: Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche

Translator: Paul V. Cohn


        
Release date: October 24, 2011 [eBook #37841]
                Most recently updated: June 17, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/37841


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN: A BOOK FOR FREE SPIRITS, PART 2 ***





                           Friedrich Nietzsche

                                  Human

                              All-Too-Human

                         A Book For Free Spirits

                                 Part II

                              Translated By

                            Paul V. Cohn, B.A.

                                 New York

                          The MacMillan Company

                                   1913





CONTENTS


Translator’s Introduction.
Preface.
Part I. Miscellaneous Maxims And Opinions.
Part II. The Wanderer And His Shadow.
Footnotes






TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION.


The publication of _Human, all-too-Human_ extends over the period
1878-1880. Of the two divisions which constitute the Second Part,
“Miscellaneous Maxims and Opinions” appeared in 1879, and “The Wanderer
and his Shadow” in 1880, Nietzsche being then in his thirty-sixth year.
The Preface was added in 1886. The whole book forms Nietzsche’s first
lengthy contribution to literature. His previous works comprise only the
philological treatises, _The Birth of Tragedy_, and the essays on Strauss,
Schopenhauer, and Wagner in _Thoughts out of Season_.

With the volumes of _Human, all-too-Human_ Nietzsche appears for the first
time in his true colours as philosopher. His purely scholarly
publications, his essays in literary and musical criticism—especially the
essay on Richard Wagner at Bayreuth—had, of course, foreshadowed his work
as a thinker.

These efforts, however, had been mere fragments, from which hardly any one
could observe that a new philosophical star had arisen on the horizon. But
by 1878 the period of transition had definitely set in. Outwardly, the new
departure is marked by Nietzsche’s resignation in that year of his
professorship at Bâle—a resignation due partly to ill-health, and partly
to his conviction that his was a voice that should speak not merely to
students of philology, but to all mankind.

Nietzsche himself characterises _Human, all-too-Human_ as “the monument of
a crisis.” He might as fitly have called it the first-fruits of a new
harvest. Now, for the first time, he practises the form which he was to
make so peculiarly his own. We are told—and we may well believe—that the
book came as a surprise even to his most intimate friends. Wagner had
already seen how matters stood at the publication of the first part, and
the gulf between the two probably widened on the appearance of the Second
Part.

Several aphorisms are here, varying in length as in subject, and ranging
over the whole human province—the emotions and aspirations, the religions
and cultures and philosophies, the arts and literatures and politics of
mankind. Equally varied is the range of style, the incisive epigram and
the passage of pure poetry jostling each other on the same page. In this
curious power of alternating between cynicism and lyricism, Nietzsche
appears as the prose counterpart of Heine.

One or two of the aphorisms are of peculiar interest to English readers.
The essay (as it may almost be called) on Sterne (p. 60, No. 113) does
ample justice, if not more than justice, to that wayward genius. The
allusion to Milton (p. 77, No. 150) will come as somewhat of a shock to
English readers, especially to those who hold that in Milton Art triumphed
over Puritanism. It should be remembered, however, that Nietzsche’s view
coincides with Goethe’s. The dictum that Shakespeare’s gold is to be
valued for its quantity rather than its quality (p. 81, No. 162) also
betrays a certain exclusiveness—a legacy from that eighteenth-century
France which appealed so strongly to Nietzsche on its intellectual side.
To Nietzsche, as to Voltaire, Shakespeare is after all “the great
barbarian.”

The title of the book may be explained from a phrase in _Thus Spake
Zarathustra_: “Verily, even the greatest I found—all-too-human.” The
keynote of these volumes is indeed disillusion and destruction. Nor is
this to be wondered at, for all men must sweep away the rubbish before
they can build. Hence we find here little of the constructive philosophy
of Nietzsche—so far as he had a constructive philosophy. The Superman
appears but faintly, the doctrine of Eternal Recurrence not at all. For
this very reason, _Human, all-too-Human_ is perhaps the best
starting-point for the study of Nietzsche. The difficulties in style and
thought of the later work—difficulties that at times become well-nigh
insuperable in _Thus Spake Zarathustra_—are here practically absent. The
book may, in fact, almost be described as “popular,” bearing the same
relation to Nietzsche’s later productions as Wagner’s _Tannhäuser_ and
_Lohengrin_ bear to the _Ring_.

The translator’s thanks are due to Mr. Thomas Common for his careful
revision of the manuscript and many valuable suggestions.

P. V. C.





PREFACE.




1.


One should only speak where one cannot remain silent, and only speak of
what one has _conquered_—the rest is all chatter, “literature,” bad
breeding. My writings speak only of my conquests, “I” am in them, with all
that is hostile to me, _ego ipsissimus_, or, if a more haughty expression
be permitted, _ego ipsissimum_. It may be guessed that I have many below
me.... But first I always needed time, convalescence, distance,
separation, before I felt the stirrings of a desire to flay, despoil, lay
bare, “represent” (or whatever one likes to call it) for the additional
knowledge of the world, something that I had lived through and outlived,
something done or suffered. Hence all my writings,—with one exception,
important, it is true,—must be _ante-dated_—they always tell of a
“behind-me.” Some even, like the first three _Thoughts out of Season_,
must be thrown back before the period of creation and experience of a
previously published book (_The Birth of Tragedy_ in the case cited, as
any one with subtle powers of observation and comparison could not fail to
perceive). That wrathful outburst against the Germanism, smugness, and
raggedness of speech of old David Strauss, the contents of the first
_Thought out of Season_, gave a vent to feelings that had inspired me long
before, as a student, in the midst of German culture and cultured
Philistinism (I claim the paternity of the now much used and misused
phrase “cultured Philistinism”). What I said against the “historical
disease” I said as one who had slowly and laboriously recovered from that
disease, and who was not at all disposed to renounce “history” in the
future because he had suffered from her in the past. When in the third
_Thought out of Season_ I gave expression to my reverence for my first and
only teacher, the _great_ Arthur Schopenhauer—I should now give it a far
more personal and emphatic voice—I was for my part already in the throes
of moral scepticism and dissolution, that is, as much concerned with the
criticism as with the study of all pessimism down to the present day. I
already did not believe in “a blessed thing,” as the people say, not even
in Schopenhauer. It was at this very period that an unpublished essay of
mine, “On Truth and Falsehood in an Extra-Moral Sense,” came into being.
Even my ceremonial oration in honour of Richard Wagner, on the occasion of
his triumphal celebration at Bayreuth in 1876—Bayreuth signifies the
greatest triumph that an artist has ever won—a work that bears the
strongest stamp of “individuality,” was in the background an act of homage
and gratitude to a bit of the past in me, to the fairest but most perilous
calm of my sea-voyage ... and as a matter of fact a severance and a
farewell. (Was Richard Wagner mistaken on this point? I do not think so.
So long as we still love, we do not paint such pictures, we do not yet
“examine,” we do not place ourselves so far away as is essential for one
who “examines.” “Examining needs at least a secret antagonism, that of an
opposite point of view,” it is said on page 46 of the above-named work
itself, with an insidious, melancholy application that was perhaps
understood by few.) The composure that gave me the _power_ to speak after
many intervening years of solitude and abstinence, first came with the
book, _Human, All-too Human_, to which this second preface and apologia(1)
is dedicated. As a book for “free spirits” it shows some trace of that
almost cheerful and inquisitive coldness of the psychologist, who has
_behind_ him many painful things that he keeps _under_ him, and moreover
establishes them for himself and fixes them firmly as with a needle-point.
Is it to be wondered at that at such sharp, ticklish work blood flows now
and again, that indeed the psychologist has blood on his fingers and not
_only_ on his fingers?




2.


The _Miscellaneous Maxims and Opinions_ were in the first place, like _The
Wanderer and His Shadow_, published separately as continuations and
appendices to the above-mentioned human, all-too human _Book for Free
Spirits_: and at the same time, as a continuation and confirmation of an
intellectual cure, consisting in a course of anti-romantic self-treatment,
such as my instinct, which had always remained healthy, had itself
discovered and prescribed against a temporary attack of the most dangerous
form of romantics. After a convalescence of six years I may well be
permitted to collect these same writings and publish them as a second
volume of _Human, All-too Human_. Perhaps, if surveyed together, they will
more clearly and effectively teach their lesson—a lesson of health that
may be recommended as a _disciplina voluntatis_ to the more intellectual
natures of the rising generation. Here speaks a pessimist who has often
leaped out of his skin but has always returned into it, thus, a pessimist
with goodwill towards pessimism—at all events a romanticist no longer. And
has not a pessimist, who possesses this serpentine knack of changing his
skin, the right to read a lecture to our pessimists of to-day, who are one
and all still in the toils of romanticism? Or at least to show them how it
is—done?




3.


It was then, in fact, high time to bid farewell, and I soon received
proof. Richard Wagner, who seemed all-conquering, but was in reality only
a decayed and despairing romantic, suddenly collapsed, helpless and
broken, before the Christian Cross.... Was there not a single German with
eyes in his head and sympathy in his heart for this appalling spectacle?
Was I the only one whom he caused—suffering? In any case, the unexpected
event illumined for me in one lightning flash the place that I had
abandoned, and also the horror that is felt by every one who is
unconscious of a great danger until he has passed through it. As I went
forward alone, I shuddered, and not long afterwards I was ill, or rather
more than ill—weary: weary from my ceaseless disappointment about all that
remained to make us modern men enthusiastic, at the thought of the power,
work, hope, youth, love, flung to all the winds: weary from disgust at the
effeminacy and undisciplined rhapsody of this romanticism, at the whole
tissue of idealistic lies and softening of conscience, which here again
had won the day over one of the bravest of men: last, and not least, weary
from the bitterness of an inexorable suspicion—that after this
disappointment I was doomed to mistrust more thoroughly, to despise more
thoroughly, to be alone more thoroughly than ever before. My task—whither
had it flown? Did it not look now as if my task were retreating from me
and as if I should for a long future period have no more right to it? What
was I to do to endure this most terrible privation?—I began by entirely
forbidding myself all romantic music, that ambiguous, pompous, stifling
art, which robs the mind of its sternness and its joyousness and provides
a fertile soil for every kind of vague yearning and spongy sensuality.
“Cave musicam” is even to-day my advice to all who are enough of men to
cling to purity in matters of the intellect. Such music enervates,
softens, feminises, its “eternal feminine” draws us—_down_!(2) My first
suspicion, my most immediate precaution, was directed against romantic
music. If I hoped for anything at all from music, it was in the
expectation of the coming of a musician bold, subtle, malignant, southern,
healthy enough to take an immortal revenge upon that other music.




4.


Lonely now and miserably self-distrustful, I took sides, not without
resentment, _against_ myself and _for_ everything that hurt me and was
hard to me. Thus I once more found the way to that courageous pessimism
that is the antithesis of all romantic fraud, and, as it seems to me
to-day, the way to “myself,” to my task. That hidden masterful Something,
for which we long have no name until at last it shows itself as our
task—that tyrant in us exacts a terrible price for every attempt that we
make to escape him or give him the slip, for every premature act of
self-constraint, for every reconciliation with those to whom we do not
belong, for every activity, however reputable, which turns us aside from
our main purpose, yes, even for every virtue that would fain protect us
from the cruelty of our most individual responsibility. “Disease” is
always the answer when we wish to have doubts of our rights to our own
task, when we begin to make it easier for ourselves in any way. How
strange and how terrible! It is our very alleviations for which we have to
make the severest atonement! And if we want to return to health, we have
no choice left—we must load ourselves _more heavily_ than we were ever
laden before.




5.


It was then that I learnt the hermitical habit of speech acquired only by
the most silent and suffering. I spoke without witnesses, or rather
indifferent to the presence of witnesses, so as not to suffer from
silence, I spoke of various things that did not concern me in a style that
gave the impression that they did. Then, too, I learnt the art of showing
myself cheerful, objective, inquisitive in the presence of all that is
healthy and evil—is this, in an invalid, as it seems to me, his “good
taste”? Nevertheless, a more subtle eye and sympathy will not miss what
perhaps gives a charm to these writings—the fact that here speaks one who
has suffered and abstained in such a way as if he had never suffered or
abstained. Here equipoise, composure, even gratitude towards life _shall_
be maintained, here rules a stern, proud, ever vigilant, ever susceptible
will, which has undertaken the task of defending life against pain and
snapping off all conclusions that are wont to grow like poisonous fungi
from pain, disappointment, satiety, isolation and other morasses. Perhaps
this gives our pessimists a hint to self-examination? For it was then that
I hit upon the aphorism, “a sufferer has as yet no right to pessimism,”
and that I engaged in a tedious, patient campaign against the unscientific
first principles of all romantic pessimism, which seeks to magnify and
interpret individual, personal experiences into “general judgments,”
universal condemnations—it was then, in short, that I sighted a new world.
Optimism for the sake of restitution, in order at some time to have the
right to become a pessimist—do you understand that? Just as a physician
transfers his patient to totally strange surroundings, in order to
displace him from his entire “past,” his troubles, friends, letters,
duties, stupid mistakes and painful memories, and teaches him to stretch
out hands and senses towards new nourishment, a new sun, a new future: so
I, as physician and invalid in one, forced myself into an utterly
different and untried zone of the soul, and particularly into an absorbing
journey to a strange land, a strange atmosphere, into a curiosity for all
that was strange. A long process of roaming, seeking, changing followed, a
distaste for fixity of any kind—a dislike for clumsy affirmation and
negation: and at the same time a dietary and discipline which aimed at
making it as easy as possible for the soul to fly high, and above all
constantly to fly away. In fact a minimum of life, an unfettering from all
coarser forms of sensuality, an independence in the midst of all marks of
outward disfavour, together with the pride in being able to live in the
midst of all this disfavour: a little cynicism perhaps, a little of the
“tub of Diogenes,” a good deal of whimsical happiness, whimsical gaiety,
much calm, light, subtle folly, hidden enthusiasm—all this produced in the
end a great spiritual strengthening, a growing joy and exuberance of
health. Life itself rewards us for our tenacious will to life, for such a
long war as I waged against the pessimistic weariness of life, even for
every observant glance of our gratitude, glances that do not miss the
smallest, most delicate, most fugitive gifts.... In the end we receive
Life’s great gifts, perhaps the greatest it can bestow—we regain _our_
task.




6.


Should my experience—the history of an illness and a convalescence, for it
resulted in a convalescence—be only my personal experience? and merely
just my “Human, All-too-human”? To-day I would fain believe the reverse,
for I am becoming more and more confident that my books of travel were not
penned for my sole benefit, as appeared for a time to be the case. May I,
after six years of growing assurance, send them once more on a journey for
an experiment?—May I commend them particularly to the ears and hearts of
those who are afflicted with some sort of a “past,” and have enough
intellect left to suffer even intellectually from their past? But above
all would I commend them to you whose burden is heaviest, you choice
spirits, most encompassed with perils, most intellectual, most courageous,
who must be the _conscience_ of the modern soul and as such be versed in
its _science_:(3) in whom is concentrated all of disease, poison or danger
that can exist to-day: whose lot decrees that you must be more sick than
any individual because you are not “mere individuals”: whose consolation
it is to know and, ah! to walk the path to a new health, a health of
to-morrow and the day after: you men of destiny, triumphant, conquerors of
time, the healthiest and the strongest, you _good Europeans_!




7.


To express finally in a single formula my opposition to the romantic
pessimism of the abstinent, the unfortunate, the conquered: there is a
will to the tragic and to pessimism, which is a sign as much of the
severity as of the strength of the intellect (taste, emotion, conscience).
With this will in our hearts we do not fear, but we investigate ourselves
the terrible and the problematical elements characteristic of all
existence. Behind such a will stand courage and pride and the desire for a
really great enemy. That was _my_ pessimistic outlook from the first—a new
outlook, methinks, an outlook that even at this day is new and strange? To
this moment I hold to it firmly and (if it will be believed) not only
_for_ myself but occasionally _against_ myself.... You would prefer to
have that proved first? Well, what else does all this long preface—prove?

SILS-MARIA, UPPER ENGADINE,
_September, 1886_.





PART I. MISCELLANEOUS MAXIMS AND OPINIONS.




1.


TO THE DISILLUSIONED IN PHILOSOPHY.—If you hitherto believed in the
highest value of life and now find yourselves disillusioned, must you
immediately get rid of life at the lowest possible price?




2.


OVERNICE.—One can even become overnice as regards the clearness of
concepts. How disgusted one is then at having truck with the half-clear,
the hazy, the aspiring, the doubting! How ridiculous and yet not
mirth-provoking is their eternal fluttering and straining without ever
being able to fly or to grasp!




3.


THE WOOERS OF REALITY.—He who realises at last how long and how thoroughly
he has been befooled, embraces out of spite even the ugliest reality. So
that in the long run of the world’s history the best men have always been
wooers of reality, for the best have always been longest and most
thoroughly deceived.




4.


ADVANCE OF FREETHINKING.—The difference between past and present
freethinking cannot better be characterised than by that aphorism for the
recognition and expression of which all the fearlessness of the eighteenth
century was needed, and which even then, if measured by our modern view,
sinks into an unconscious naïveté. I mean Voltaire’s aphorism,
“croyez-moi, mon ami, l’erreur aussi a son mérite.”




5.


A HEREDITARY SIN OF PHILOSOPHERS.—Philosophers have at all times
appropriated and _corrupted_ the maxims of censors of men (moralists), by
taking them over without qualification and trying to prove as necessary
what the moralists only meant as a rough indication or as a truth suited
to their fellow-countrymen or fellow-townsmen for a single decade.
Moreover, the philosophers thought that they were thereby raising
themselves above the moralists! Thus it will be found that the celebrated
teachings of Schopenhauer as to the supremacy of the will over the
intellect, of the immutability of character, the negativity of
pleasure—all errors, in the sense in which he understands them—rest upon
principles of popular wisdom enunciated by the moralists. Take the very
word “will,” which Schopenhauer twisted so as to become a common
denotation of several human conditions and with which he filled a gap in
the language (to his own great advantage, in so far as he was a moralist,
for he became free to speak of the will as Pascal had spoken of it). In
the hands of its creator, Schopenhauer’s “will,” through the philosophic
craze for generalisation, already turned out to be a bane to knowledge.
For this will was made into a poetic metaphor, when it was held that all
things in nature possess will. Finally, that it might be applied to all
kinds of disordered mysticism, the word was misused by a fraudulent
convention. So now all our fashionable philosophers repeat it and seem to
be perfectly certain that all things have a will and are in fact One Will.
According to the description generally given of this All-One-Will, this is
much as if one should positively try to have the stupid Devil for one’s
God.




6.


AGAINST VISIONARIES.—The visionary denies the truth to himself, the liar
only to others.




7.


ENMITY TO LIGHT.—If we make it clear to any one that, strictly, he can
never speak of truth, but only of probability and of its degrees, we
generally discover, from the undisguised joy of our pupil, how greatly men
prefer the uncertainty of their intellectual horizon, and how in their
heart of hearts they hate truth because of its definiteness.—Is this due
to a secret fear felt by all that the light of truth may at some time be
turned too brightly upon themselves? To their wish to be of some
consequence, and accordingly their concealment from the world of what they
are? Or is it to be traced to their horror of the all-too brilliant light,
to which their crepuscular, easily dazzled, bat-like souls are not
accustomed, so that hate it they must?




8.


CHRISTIAN SCEPTICISM.—Pilate, with his question, “What is Truth?” is now
gleefully brought on the scene as an advocate of Christ, in order to cast
suspicion on all that is known or knowable as being mere appearance, and
to erect the Cross on the appalling background of the Impossibility of
Knowledge.




9.


“NATURAL LAW,” A PHRASE OF SUPERSTITION.—When you talk so delightedly of
Nature acting according to law, you must either assume that all things in
Nature follow their law from a voluntary obedience imposed by
themselves—in which case you admire the morality of Nature: or you are
enchanted with the idea of a creative mechanician, who has made a most
cunning watch with human beings as accessory ornaments.—Necessity, through
the expression, “conformity to law,” then becomes more human and a coign
of refuge in the last instance for mythological reveries.




10.


FALLEN FORFEIT TO HISTORY.—All misty philosophers and obscurers of the
world, in other words all metaphysicians of coarse or refined texture are
seized with eyeache, earache, and toothache when they begin to suspect
that there is truth in the saying: “All philosophy has from now fallen
forfeit to history.” In view of their aches and pains we may pardon them
for throwing stones and filth at him who talks like this, but this
teaching may itself thereby become dirty and disreputable for a time and
lose in effect.




11.


THE PESSIMIST OF THE INTELLECT.—He whose intellect is really free will
think freely about the intellect itself, and will not shut his eyes to
certain terrible aspects of its source and tendency. For this reason
others will perhaps designate him the bitterest opponent of free thought
and give him that dreadful, abusive name of “pessimist of the intellect”:
accustomed as they are to typify a man not by his strong point, his
pre-eminent virtue, but by the quality that is most foreign to his nature.




12.


THE METAPHYSICIANS’ KNAPSACK.—To all who talk so boastfully of the
scientific basis of their metaphysics it is best to make no reply. It is
enough to tug at the bundle that they rather shyly keep hidden behind
their backs. If one succeeds in lifting it, the results of that
“scientific basis” come to light, to their great confusion: a dear little
“God,” a genteel immortality, perhaps a little spiritualism, and in any
case a complicated mass of poor-sinners’-misery and pharisee-arrogance.




13.


OCCASIONAL HARMFULNESS OF KNOWLEDGE.—The utility involved in the unchecked
investigation of knowledge is so constantly proved in a hundred different
ways that one must remember to include in the bargain the subtler and
rarer damage which individuals must suffer on that account. The chemist
cannot avoid occasionally being poisoned or burnt at his experiments. What
applies to the chemist, is true of the whole of our culture. This, it may
be added, clearly shows that knowledge should provide itself with healing
balsam against burns and should always have antidotes ready against
poisons.




14.


THE CRAVING OF THE PHILISTINE.—The Philistine thinks that his most urgent
need is a purple patch or turban of metaphysics, nor will he let it slip.
Yet he would look less ridiculous without this adornment.




15.


ENTHUSIASTS.—With all that enthusiasts say in favour of their gospel or
their master they are defending themselves, however much they comport
themselves as the judges and not the accused: because they are
involuntarily reminded almost at every moment that they are exceptions and
have to assert their legitimacy.




16.


THE GOOD SEDUCES TO LIFE.—All good things, even all good books that are
written against life, are strong means of attraction to life.




17.


THE HAPPINESS OF THE HISTORIAN.—“When we hear the hair-splitting
metaphysicians and prophets of the after-world speak, we others feel
indeed that we are the ‘poor in spirit,’ but that ours is the heavenly
kingdom of change, with spring and autumn, summer and winter, and theirs
the after-world, with its grey, everlasting frosts and shadows.” Thus
soliloquised a man as he walked in the morning sunshine, a man who in his
pursuit of history has constantly changed not only his mind but his heart.
In contrast to the metaphysicians, he is happy to harbour in himself not
an “immortal soul” but many _mortal_ souls.




18.


THREE VARIETIES OF THINKERS.—There are streaming, flowing, trickling
mineral springs, and three corresponding varieties of thinkers. The layman
values them by the volume of the water, the expert by the contents of the
water—in other words, by the elements in them that are not water.




19.


THE PICTURE OF LIFE.—The task of painting the picture of life, often as it
has been attempted by poets and philosophers, is nevertheless irrational.
Even in the hands of the greatest artist-thinkers, pictures and miniatures
of one life only—their own—have come into being, and indeed no other
result is possible. While in the process of developing, a thing that
develops, cannot mirror itself as fixed and permanent, as a _definite
object_.




20.


TRUTH WILL HAVE NO GODS BEFORE IT.—The belief in truth begins with the
doubt of all truths in which one has previously believed.




21.


WHERE SILENCE IS REQUIRED.—If we speak of freethinking as of a highly
dangerous journey over glaciers and frozen seas, we find that those who do
not care to travel on this track are offended, as if they had been
reproached with cowardice and weak knees. The difficult, which we find to
be beyond our powers, must not even be mentioned in our presence.




22.


_Historia in Nuce._—The most serious parody I ever heard was this: “In the
beginning was the nonsense, and the nonsense was with God, and the
nonsense was God.”(4)




23.


INCURABLE.—The idealist is incorrigible: if he be thrown out of his
Heaven, he makes himself a suitable ideal out of Hell. Disillusion him,
and lo! he will embrace disillusionment with no less ardour than he
recently embraced hope. In so far as his impulse belongs to the great
incurable impulses of human nature, he can bring about tragic destinies
and later become a subject for tragedy himself, for such tragedies as deal
with the incurable, implacable, inevitable in the lot and character of
man.




24.


APPLAUSE ITSELF AS THE CONTINUATION OF THE PLAY.—Sparkling eyes and an
amiable smile are the tributes of applause paid to all the great comedy of
world and existence—but this applause is a comedy within a comedy, meant
to tempt the other spectators to a _plaudite amici_.




25.


COURAGE FOR TEDIUM.—He who has not the courage to allow himself and his
work to be considered tedious, is certainly no intellect of the first
rank, whether in the arts or in the sciences.—A scoffer, who happened for
once in a way to be a thinker, might add, with a glance at the world and
at history: “God did not possess this courage, for he wanted to make and
he made all things so interesting.”




26.


FROM THE MOST INTIMATE EXPERIENCE OF THE THINKER.—Nothing is harder for a
man than to conceive of an object impersonally, I mean to see in it an
object and not a person. One may even ask whether it is possible for him
to dispense for a single moment with the machinery of his instinct to
create and construct a personality. After all, he associates with his
thoughts, however abstract they may be, as with individuals, against whom
he must fight or to whom he must attach himself, whom he must protect,
support and nourish. Let us watch or listen to ourselves at the moment
when we hear or discover a new idea. Perhaps it displeases us because it
is so defiant and so autocratic, and we unconsciously ask ourselves
whether we cannot place a contradiction of it by its side as an enemy, or
fasten on to it a “perhaps” or a “sometimes”: the mere little word
“probably” gives us a feeling of satisfaction, for it shatters the
oppressive tyranny of the unconditional. If, on the other hand, the new
idea enters in gentle shape, sweetly patient and humble, and falling at
once into the arms of contradiction, we put our autocracy to the test in
another way. Can we not come to the aid of this weak creature, stroke it
and feed it, give it strength and fulness, and truth and even
unconditionality? Is it possible for us to show ourselves parental or
chivalrous or compassionate towards our idea?—Then again, we see here a
judgment and there a judgment, sundered from each other, never looking at
or making any movement towards each other. So we are tickled by the
thought, whether it be not here feasible to make a match, to draw a
_conclusion_, with the anticipation that if a consequence follows this
conclusion it is not only the two judgments united in wedlock but the
matchmakers that will gain honour. If, however, we cannot acquire a hold
upon that thought either on the path of defiance and ill-will or on that
of good-will (if we hold it to be true)—then we submit to it and do homage
to it as a leader and a prince, give it a chair of honour, and speak not
of it without a flourish of trumpets: for we are bright in its brightness.
Woe to him who tries to dim this brightness! Perhaps we ourselves one day
grow suspicious of our idea. Then we, the indefatigable “king-makers” of
the history of the intellect, cast it down from its throne and immediately
exalt its adversary. Surely if this be considered and thought out a little
further, no one will speak of an “absolute impulse to knowledge”!

Why, then, does man prefer the true to the untrue, in this secret combat
with thought-personalities, in this generally clandestine match-making of
thoughts, constitution-founding of thoughts, child-rearing of thoughts,
nursing and almsgiving of thoughts? For the same reason that he practises
honesty in intercourse with real persons: _now_ from habit, heredity, and
training, _originally_ because the true, like the fair and the just, is
more expedient and more reputable than the untrue. For in the realm of
thought it is difficult to assume a power and glory that are built on
error or on falsehood. The feeling that such an edifice might at some time
collapse is humiliating to the self-esteem of the architect—he is ashamed
of the fragility of the material, and, as he considers himself more
important than the rest of the world, he would fain construct nothing that
is less durable than the rest of the world. In his longing for truth he
embraces the belief in a personal immortality, the most arrogant and
defiant idea that exists, closely allied as it is to the underlying
thought, _pereat mundus, dum ego salvus sim!_ His work has become his
“ego,” he transforms himself into the Imperishable with its universal
challenge. It is his immeasurable pride that will only employ the best and
hardest stones for the work—truths, or what he holds for such. Arrogance
has always been justly called the “vice of the sage”; yet without this
vice, fruitful in impulses, Truth and her status on earth would be in a
parlous plight. In our propensity to fear our thoughts, concepts and
words, and yet to honour ourselves in them, unconsciously to ascribe to
them the power of rewarding, despising, praising, and blaming us, and so
to associate with them as with free intellectual personalities, as with
independent powers, as with our equals—herein lie the roots of the
remarkable phenomenon which I have called “intellectual conscience.” Thus
something of the highest moral species has bloomed from a black root.




27.


THE OBSCURANTISTS.—The essential feature of the black art of obscurantism
is not its intention of clouding the brain, but its attempt to darken the
picture of the world and cloud our idea of existence. It often employs the
method of thwarting all illumination of the intellect, but at times it
uses the very opposite means, seeking by the highest refinement of the
intellect to induce a satiety of the intellect’s fruits. Hair-splitting
metaphysicians, who pave the way for scepticism and by their excessive
acumen provoke a distrust of acumen, are excellent instruments of the more
subtle form of obscurantism.—Is it possible that even Kant may be applied
to this purpose? Did he even _intend_ something of the sort, for a time at
least, to judge from his own notorious exposition: “to clear the way for
belief by setting limitations to knowledge”?—Certainly he did not succeed,
nor did his followers, on the wolf and fox tracks of this highly refined
and dangerous form of obscurantism—the most dangerous of all, for the
black art here appears in the garb of light.




28.


BY WHAT KIND OF PHILOSOPHY ART IS CORRUPTED.—When the mists of a
metaphysical-mystical philosophy succeed in making all æsthetic phenomena
_opaque_, it follows that these phenomena cannot be comparatively valued,
inasmuch as each becomes individually inexplicable. But when once they
cannot be compared for the sake of valuation, there arises an entire
absence-of-criticism, a blind indulgence. From this source springs a
continual diminution of the enjoyment of art (which is only distinguished
from the crude satisfaction of a need by the highest refinement of taste
and appreciation). The more taste diminishes, the more does the desire for
art change and revert to a vulgar hunger, which the artist henceforth
seeks to appease by ever coarser fare.




29.


ON GETHSEMANE.—The most painful thing a thinker can say to artists is:
“Could ye not _watch_ with me one hour?”




30.


AT THE LOOM.—There are many (artists and women, for instance) who work
against the few that take a pleasure in untying the knot of things and
unravelling their woof. The former always want to weave the woof together
again and entangle it and so turn the conceived into the unconceived and
if possible inconceivable. Whatever the result may be, the woof and knot
always look rather untidy, because too many hands are working and tugging
at them.




31.


IN THE DESERT OF SCIENCE.—As the man of science proceeds on his modest and
toilsome wanderings, which must often enough be journeys in the desert, he
is confronted with those brilliant mirages known as “philosophic systems.”
With magic powers of deception they show him that the solution of all
riddles and the most refreshing draught of true water of life are close at
hand. His weary heart rejoices, and he well-nigh touches with his lips the
goal of all scientific endurance and hardship, so that almost
unconsciously he presses forward. Other natures stand still, as if
spellbound by the beautiful illusion: the desert swallows them up, they
become lost to science. Other natures, again, that have often experienced
these subjective consolations, become very disheartened and curse the
salty taste which these mirages leave behind in the mouth and from which
springs a raging thirst—without one’s having come one step nearer to any
sort of a spring.




32.


THE SO-CALLED “REAL REALITY.”—When the poet depicts the various
callings—such as those of the warrior, the silk-weaver, the sailor—he
feigns to know all these things thoroughly, to be an expert. Even in the
exposition of human actions and destinies he behaves as if he had been
present at the spinning of the whole web of existence. In so far he is an
impostor. He practises his frauds on pure ignoramuses, and that is why he
succeeds. They praise him for his deep, genuine knowledge, and lead him
finally into the delusion that he really knows as much as the individual
experts and creators, yes, even as the great world-spinners themselves. In
the end, the impostor becomes honest, and actually believes in his own
sincerity. Emotional people say to his very face that he has the “higher”
truth and sincerity—for they are weary of reality for the time being, and
accept the poetic dream as a pleasant relaxation and a night’s rest for
head and heart. The visions of the dream now appear to them of more value,
because, as has been said, they find them more beneficial, and mankind has
always held that what is apparently of more value is more true, more real.
All that is generally called reality, the poets, conscious of this power,
proceed with intention to disparage and to distort into the uncertain, the
illusory, the spurious, the impure, the sinful, sorrowful, and deceitful.
They make use of all doubts about the limits of knowledge, of all
sceptical excesses, in order to spread over everything the rumpled veil of
uncertainty. For they desire that when this darkening process is complete
their wizardry and soul-magic may be accepted without hesitation as the
path to “true truth” and “real reality.”




33.


THE WISH TO BE JUST AND THE WISH TO BE A JUDGE.—Schopenhauer, whose
profound understanding of what is human and all-too-human and original
sense for facts was not a little impaired by the bright leopard-skin of
his metaphysic (the skin must first be pulled off him if one wants to find
the real moralist genius beneath)—Schopenhauer makes this admirable
distinction, wherein he comes far nearer the mark than he would himself
dare to admit: “Insight into the stern necessity of human actions is the
boundary line that divides philosophic from other brains.” He worked
against that wonderful insight of which he was sometimes capable by the
prejudice that he had in common with the moral man (not the moralist), a
prejudice that he expresses quite guilelessly and devoutly as follows:
“The ultimate and true explanation of the inner being of the entirety of
things must of necessity be closely connected with that about the ethical
significance of human actions.” This connection is not “necessary” at all:
such a connection must rather be rejected by that principle of the stern
necessity of human actions, that is, the unconditioned non-freedom and
non-responsibility of the will. Philosophic brains will accordingly be
distinguished from others by their disbelief in the metaphysical
significance of morality. This must create between the two kinds of brain
a gulf of a depth and unbridgeableness of which the much-deplored gulf
between “cultured” and “uncultured” scarcely gives a conception. It is
true that many back doors, which the “philosophic brains,” like
Schopenhauer’s own, have left for themselves, must be recognised as
useless. None leads into the open, into the fresh air of the free will,
but every door through which people had slipped hitherto showed behind it
once more the gleaming brass wall of fate. For we are in a prison, and can
only dream of freedom, not make ourselves free. That the recognition of
this fact cannot be resisted much longer is shown by the despairing and
incredible postures and grimaces of those who still press against it and
continue their wrestling-bout with it. Their attitude at present is
something like this: “So no one is responsible for his actions? And all is
full of guilt and the consciousness of guilt? But some one _must_ be the
sinner. If it is no longer possible or permissible to accuse and sentence
the individual, the one poor wave in the inevitable rough-and-tumble of
the waves of development—well, then, let this stormy sea, this development
itself, be the sinner. Here is free will: this totality can be accused and
sentenced, can atone and expiate. _So let God be the sinner and man his
redeemer._ Let the world’s history be guilt, expiation, and self-murder.
Let the evil-doer be his own judge, the judge his own hangman.” This
Christianity strained to its limits—for what else is it?—is the last
thrust in the fencing-match between the teaching of unconditioned morality
and the teaching of unconditioned non-freedom. It would be quite horrible
if it were anything more than a logical pose, a hideous grimace of the
underlying thought, perhaps the death-convulsion of the heart that seeks a
remedy in its despair, the heart to which delirium whispers: “Behold, thou
art the lamb which taketh away the sin of God.” This error lies not only
in the feeling, “I am responsible,” but just as much in the contradiction,
“I am not responsible, but some one must be.” That is simply not true.
Hence the philosopher must say, like Christ, “Judge not,” and the final
distinction between the philosophic brains and the others would be that
the former wish to be just and the latter wish to be judges.




34.


_Sacrifice._—You hold that sacrifice is the hallmark of moral action?—Just
consider whether in every action that is done with deliberation, in the
best as in the worst, there be not a sacrifice.




35.


AGAINST THE “TRIERS OF THE REINS” OF MORALITY.—One must know the best and
the worst that a man is capable of in theory and in practice before one
can judge how strong his moral nature is and can be. But this is an
experiment that one can never carry out.




36.


SERPENT’S TOOTH.—Whether we have a serpent’s tooth or not we cannot know
before some one has set his heel upon our necks. A wife or a mother could
say: until some one has put his heel upon the neck of our darling, our
child.—Our character is determined more by the absence of certain
experiences than by the experiences we have undergone.




37.


DECEPTION IN LOVE.—We forget and purposely banish from our minds a good
deal of our past. In other words, we wish our picture, that beams at us
from the past, to belie us, to flatter our vanity—we are constantly
engaged in this self-deception. And you who talk and boast so much of
“self-oblivion in love,” of the “absorption of the ego in the other
person”—you hold that this is something different? So you break the
mirror, throw yourselves into another personality that you admire, and
enjoy the new portrait of your ego, though calling it by the other
person’s name—and this whole proceeding is not to be thought
self-deception, self-seeking, you marvellous beings?—It seems to me that
those who hide something of themselves from themselves, or hide their
whole selves from themselves, are alike committing a theft from the
treasury of knowledge. It is clear, then, against what transgression the
maxim “Know thyself” is a warning.




38.


TO THE DENIER OF HIS VANITY.—He who denies his own vanity usually
possesses it in so brutal a form that he instinctively shuts his eyes to
avoid the necessity of despising himself.




39.


WHY THE STUPID SO OFTEN BECOME MALIGNANT.—To those arguments of our
adversary against which our head feels too weak our heart replies by
throwing suspicion on the motives of his arguments.




40.


THE ART OF MORAL EXCEPTIONS.—An art that points out and glorifies the
exceptional cases of morality—where the good becomes bad and the unjust
just—should rarely be given a hearing: just as now and again we buy
something from gipsies, with the fear that they are diverting to their own
pockets much more than their mere profit from the purchase.




41.


ENJOYMENT AND NON-ENJOYMENT OF POISONS.—The only decisive argument that
has always deterred men from drinking a poison is not that it is deadly,
but that it has an unpleasant taste.




42.


THE WORLD WITHOUT CONSCIOUSNESS OF SIN.—If men only committed such deeds
as do not give rise to a bad conscience, the human world would still look
bad and rascally enough, but not so sickly and pitiable as at
present.—Enough wicked men without conscience have existed at all times,
and many good honest folk lack the feeling of pleasure in a good
conscience.




43.


THE CONSCIENTIOUS.—It is more convenient to follow one’s conscience than
one’s intelligence, for at every failure conscience finds an excuse and an
encouragement in itself. That is why there are so many conscientious and
so few intelligent people.




44.


OPPOSITE MEANS OF AVOIDING BITTERNESS.—One temperament finds it useful to
be able to give vent to its disgust in words, being made sweeter by
speech. Another reaches its full bitterness only by speaking out: it is
more advisable for it to have to gulp down something—the restraint that
men of this stamp place upon themselves in the presence of enemies and
superiors improves their character and prevents it from becoming too acrid
and sour.




45.


NOT TO BE TOO DEJECTED.—To get bed-sores is unpleasant, but no proof
against the merits of the cure that prescribes that you should take to
your bed. Men who have long lived outside themselves, and have at last
devoted themselves to the inward philosophic life, know that one can also
get sores of character and intellect. This, again, is on the whole no
argument against the chosen way of life, but necessitates a few small
exceptions and apparent relapses.




46.


THE HUMAN “THING IN ITSELF.”—The most vulnerable and yet most
unconquerable of things is human vanity: nay, through being wounded its
strength increases and can grow to giant proportions.




47.


THE FARCE OF MANY INDUSTRIOUS PERSONS.—By an excess of effort they win
leisure for themselves, and then they can do nothing with it but count the
hours until the tale is ended.




48.


THE POSSESSION OF JOY ABOUNDING.—He that has joy abounding must be a good
man, but perhaps he is not the cleverest of men, although he has reached
the very goal towards which the cleverest man is striving with all his
cleverness.




49.


IN THE MIRROR OF NATURE.—Is not a man fairly well described, when we are
told that he likes to walk between tall fields of golden corn: that he
prefers the forest and flower colours of sere and chilly autumn to all
others, because they point to something more beautiful than Nature has
ever attained: that he feels as much at home under big broad-leaved walnut
trees as among his nearest kinsfolk: that in the mountains his greatest
joy is to come across those tiny distant lakes from which the very eyes of
solitude seem to peer at him: that he loves that grey calm of the misty
twilight that steals along the windows on autumn and early winter evenings
and shuts out all soulless sounds as with velvet curtains: that in unhewn
stones he recognises the last remaining traces of the primeval age, eager
for speech, and honours them from childhood upwards: that, lastly, the sea
with its shifting serpent skin and wild-beast beauty is, and remains to
him, unfamiliar?—Yes, something of the man is described herewith, but the
mirror of Nature does not say that the same man, with (and not even “in
spite of”) all his idyllic sensibilities, might be disagreeable, stingy,
and conceited. Horace, who was a good judge of such matters, in his famous
_beatus ille qui procul negotiis_ puts the tenderest feeling for country
life into the mouth of a Roman money-lender.




50.


POWER WITHOUT VICTORY.—The strongest cognition (that of the complete
non-freedom of the human will) is yet the poorest in results, for it has
always had the mightiest of opponents—human vanity.




51.


PLEASURE AND ERROR.—A beneficial influence on friends is exerted by one
man unconsciously, through his nature; by another consciously, through
isolated actions. Although the former nature is held to be the higher, the
latter alone is allied to good conscience and pleasure—the pleasure in
justification by good works, which rests upon a belief in the volitional
character of our good and evil doing—that is to say, upon a mistake.




52.


THE FOLLY OF COMMITTING INJUSTICE.—The injustice we have inflicted
ourselves is far harder to bear than the injustice inflicted upon us by
others (not always from moral grounds, be it observed). After all, the
doer is always the sufferer—that is, if he be capable of feeling the sting
of conscience or of perceiving that by his action he has armed society
against himself and cut himself off. For this reason we should beware
still more of doing than of suffering injustice, for the sake of our own
inward happiness—so as not to lose our feeling of well-being—quite apart
from any consideration of the precepts of religion and morality. For in
suffering injustice we have the consolation of a good conscience, of hope
and of revenge, together with the sympathy and applause of the just, nay
of the whole of society, which is afraid of the evil-doer. Not a few are
skilled in the impure self-deception that enables them to transform every
injustice of their own into an injustice inflicted upon them from without,
and to reserve for their own acts the exceptional right to the plea of
self-defence. Their object, of course, is to make their own burden
lighter.




53.


ENVY WITH OR WITHOUT A MOUTHPIECE.—Ordinary envy is wont to cackle when
the envied hen has laid an egg, thereby relieving itself and becoming
milder. But there is a yet deeper envy that in such a case becomes dead
silent, desiring that every mouth should be sealed and always more and
more angry because this desire is not gratified. Silent envy grows in
silence.




54.


ANGER AS A SPY.—Anger exhausts the soul and brings its very dregs to
light. Hence, if we know no other means of gaining certainty, we must
understand how to arouse anger in our dependents and adversaries, in order
to learn what is really done and thought to our detriment.




55.


DEFENCE MORALLY MORE DIFFICULT THAN ATTACK.—The true heroic deed and
masterpiece of the good man does not lie in attacking opinions and
continuing to love their propounders, but in the far harder task of
defending his own position without causing or intending to cause bitter
heartburns to his opponent. The sword of attack is honest and broad, the
sword of defence usually runs out to a needle point.




56.


HONEST TOWARDS HONESTY.—One who is openly honest towards himself ends by
being rather conceited about this honesty. He knows only too well why he
is honest—for the same reason that another man prefers outward show and
hypocrisy.




57.


COALS OF FIRE.—The heaping of coals of fire on another’s head is generally
misunderstood and falls flat, because the other knows himself to be just
as much in the right, and on his side too has thought of collecting coals.




58.


DANGEROUS BOOKS.—A man says: “Judging from my own case, I find that this
book is harmful.” Let him but wait, and perhaps one day he will confess
that the book did him a great service by thrusting forward and bringing to
light the hidden disease of his soul.—Altered opinions alter not at all
(or very little) the character of a man: but they illuminate individual
facets of his personality, which hitherto, in another constellation of
opinions, had remained dark and unrecognisable.




59.


SIMULATED PITY.—We simulate pity when we wish to show ourselves superior
to the feeling of animosity, but generally in vain. This point is not
noticed without a considerable enhancement of that feeling of animosity.




60.


OPEN CONTRADICTION OFTEN CONCILIATORY.—At the moment when a man openly
makes known his difference of opinion from a well-known party leader, the
whole world thinks that he must be angry with the latter. Sometimes,
however, he is just on the point of ceasing to be angry with him. He
ventures to put himself on the same plane as his opponent, and is free
from the tortures of suppressed envy.




61.


SEEING OUR LIGHT SHINING.—In the darkest hour of depression, sickness, and
guilt, we are still glad to see others taking a light from us and making
use of us as of the disk of the moon. By this roundabout route we derive
some light from our own illuminating faculty.




62.


FELLOWSHIP IN JOY.(5)—The snake that stings us means to hurt us and
rejoices in so doing: the lowest animal can picture to itself the _pain_
of others. But to picture to oneself the _joy_ of others and to rejoice
thereat is the highest privilege of the highest animals, and again,
amongst them, is the property only of the most select
specimens—accordingly a rare “human thing.” Hence there have been
philosophers who denied fellowship in joy.




63.


_Supplementary Pregnancy._—Those who have arrived at works and deeds are
in an obscure way, they know not how, all the more pregnant with them, as
if to prove supplementarily that these are their children and not those of
chance.




64.


HARD-HEARTED FROM VANITY.—Just as justice is so often a cloak for
weakness, so men who are fairly intelligent, but weak, sometimes attempt
dissimulation from ambitious motives and purposely show themselves unjust
and hard, in order to leave behind them the impression of strength.




65.


HUMILIATION.—If in a large sack of profit we find a single grain of
humiliation we still make a wry face even at our good luck.




66.


EXTREME HEROSTRATISM.(6)—There might be Herostratuses who set fire to
their own temple, in which their images are honoured.




67.


A WORLD OF DIMINUTIVES.—The fact that all that is weak and in need of help
appeals to the heart induces in us the habit of designating by diminutive
and softening terms all that appeals to our hearts—and accordingly
_making_ such things weak and clinging to our imaginations.




68.


THE BAD CHARACTERISTIC OF SYMPATHY.—Sympathy has a peculiar impudence for
its companion. For, wishing to help at all costs, sympathy is in no
perplexity either as to the means of assistance or as to the nature and
cause of the disease, and goes on courageously administering all its quack
medicines to restore the health and reputation of the patient.




69.


IMPORTUNACY.—There is even an importunacy in relation to works, and the
act of associating oneself from early youth on an intimate footing with
the illustrious works of all times evinces an entire absence of
shame.—Others are only importunate from ignorance, not knowing with whom
they have to do—for instance classical scholars young and old in relation
to the works of the Greeks.




70.


THE WILL IS ASHAMED OF THE INTELLECT.—In all coolness we make reasonable
plans against our passions. But we make the most serious mistake in this
connection in being often ashamed, when the design has to be carried out,
of the coolness and calculation with which we conceived it. So we do just
the unreasonable thing, from that sort of defiant magnanimity that every
passion involves.




71.


WHY THE SCEPTICS OFFEND MORALITY.—He who takes his morality solemnly and
seriously is enraged against the sceptics in the domain of morals. For
where he lavishes all his force, he wishes others to marvel but not to
investigate and doubt. Then there are natures whose last shred of morality
is just the belief in morals. They behave in the same way towards
sceptics, if possible still more passionately.




72.


SHYNESS.—All moralists are shy, because they know they are confounded with
spies and traitors, so soon as their penchant is noticed. Besides, they
are generally conscious of being impotent in action, for in the midst of
work the motives of their activity almost withdraw their attention from
the work.




73.


A DANGER TO UNIVERSAL MORALITY.—People who are at the same time noble and
honest come to deify every devilry that brings out their honesty, and to
suspend for a time the balance of their moral judgment.




74.


THE SADDEST ERROR.—It is an unpardonable offence when one discovers that
where one was convinced of being loved, one is only regarded as a
household utensil and decoration, whereby the master of the house can find
an outlet for his vanity before his guests.




75.


LOVE AND DUALITY.—What else is love but understanding and rejoicing that
another lives, works, and feels in a different and opposite way to
ourselves? That love may be able to bridge over the contrasts by joys, we
must not remove or deny those contrasts. Even self-love presupposes an
irreconcileable duality (or plurality) in one person.




76.


SIGNS FROM DREAMS.—What one sometimes does not know and feel accurately in
waking hours—whether one has a good or a bad conscience as regards some
person—is revealed completely and unambiguously by dreams.




77.


DEBAUCHERY.—Not joy but joylessness is the mother of debauchery.




78.


REWARD AND PUNISHMENT.—No one accuses without an underlying notion of
punishment and revenge, even when he accuses his fate or himself. All
complaint is accusation, all self-congratulation is praise. Whether we do
one or the other, we always make some one responsible.




79.


DOUBLY UNJUST.—We sometimes advance truth by a twofold injustice: when we
see and represent consecutively the two sides of a case which we are not
in a position to see together, but in such a way that every time we
mistake or deny the other side, fancying that what we see is the whole
truth.




80.


MISTRUST.—Self-mistrust does not always proceed uncertainly and shyly, but
sometimes in a furious rage, having worked itself into a frenzy in order
not to tremble.




81.


PHILOSOPHY OF PARVENUS.—If you want to be a personality you must even hold
your shadow in honour.




82.


KNOWING HOW TO WASH ONESELF CLEAN.—We must know how to emerge cleaner from
unclean conditions, and, if necessary, how to wash ourselves even with
dirty water.




83.


LETTING YOURSELF GO.—The more you let yourself go, the less others let you
go.




84.


THE INNOCENT ROGUE.—There is a slow, gradual path to vice and rascality of
every description. In the end, the traveller is quite abandoned by the
insect-swarms of a bad conscience, and although a thorough scoundrel he
walks in innocence.




85.


MAKING PLANS.—Making plans and conceiving projects involves many agreeable
sentiments. He that had the strength to be nothing but a contriver of
plans all his life would be a happy man. But one must occasionally have a
rest from this activity by carrying a plan into execution, and then comes
anger and sobriety.




86.


WHEREWITH WE SEE THE IDEAL.—Every efficient man is blocked by his
efficiency and cannot look out freely from its prison. Had he not also a
goodly share of imperfection, he could, by reason of his virtue, never
arrive at an intellectual or moral freedom. Our shortcomings are the eyes
with which we see the ideal.




87.


DISHONEST PRAISE.—Dishonest praise causes many more twinges of conscience
than dishonest blame, probably only because we have exposed our capacity
for judgment far more completely through excessive praise than through
excessive and unjust blame.




88.


HOW ONE DIES IS INDIFFERENT.—The whole way in which a man thinks of death
during the prime of his life and strength is very expressive and
significant for what we call his character. But the hour of death itself,
his behaviour on the death-bed, is almost indifferent. The exhaustion of
waning life, especially when old people die, the irregular or insufficient
nourishment of the brain during this last period, the occasionally violent
pain, the novel and untried nature of the whole position, and only too
often the ebb and flow of superstitious impressions and fears, as if dying
were of much consequence and meant the crossing of bridges of the most
terrible kind—all this forbids our using death as a testimony concerning
the living. Nor is it true that the dying man is generally more honest
than the living. On the contrary, through the solemn attitude of the
bystanders, the repressed or flowing streams of tears and emotions, every
one is inveigled into a comedy of vanity, now conscious, now unconscious.
The serious way in which every dying man is treated must have been to many
a poor despised devil the highest joy of his whole life and a sort of
compensation and repayment for many privations.




89.


MORALITY AND ITS SACRIFICE.—The origin of morality may be traced to two
ideas: “The community is of more value than the individual,” and “The
permanent interest is to be preferred to the temporary.” The conclusion
drawn is that the permanent interest of the community is unconditionally
to be set above the temporary interest of the individual, especially his
momentary well-being, but also his permanent interest and even the
prolongation of his existence. Even if the individual suffers by an
arrangement that suits the mass, even if he is depressed and ruined by it,
morality must be maintained and the victim brought to the sacrifice. Such
a trend of thought arises, however, only in those who are _not_ the
victims—for in the victim’s case it enforces the claim that the individual
might be worth more than the many, and that the present enjoyment, the
“moment in paradise,”(7) should perhaps be rated higher than a tame
succession of untroubled or comfortable circumstances. But the philosophy
of the sacrificial victim always finds voice too late, and so victory
remains with morals and morality: which are really nothing more than the
sentiment for the whole concept of morals under which one lives and has
been reared—and reared not as an individual but as a member of the whole,
as a cipher in a majority. Hence it constantly happens that the individual
makes himself into a majority by means of his morality.




90.


THE GOOD AND THE GOOD CONSCIENCE.—You hold that all good things have at
all times had a good conscience? Science, which is certainly a very good
thing, has come into the world without such a conscience and quite free
from all pathos, rather clandestinely, by roundabout ways, walking with
shrouded or masked face like a sinner, and always with the feeling at
least of being a smuggler. Good conscience has bad conscience for its
stepping-stone, not for its opposite. For all that is good has at one time
been new and consequently strange, against morals, immoral, and has gnawed
like a worm at the heart of the fortunate discoverer.




91.


SUCCESS SANCTIFIES THE INTENTIONS.—We should not shrink from treading the
road to a virtue, even when we see clearly that nothing but egotism, and
accordingly utility, personal comfort, fear, considerations of health,
reputation, or glory, are the impelling motives. These motives are styled
ignoble and selfish. Very well, but if they stimulate us to some
virtue—for example, self-denial, dutifulness, order, thrift, measure, and
moderation—let us listen to them, whatever their epithets may be! For if
we reach the goal to which they summon us, then the virtue we have
attained, by means of the pure air it makes us breathe and the spiritual
well-being it communicates, ennobles the remoter impulses of our action,
and afterwards we no longer perform those actions from the same coarse
motives that inspired us before.—Education should therefore force the
virtues on the pupil, as far as possible, according to his disposition.
Then virtue, the sunshine and summer atmosphere of the soul, can
contribute her own share of work and add mellowness and sweetness.




92.


DABBLERS IN CHRISTIANITY, NOT CHRISTIANS.—So that is your Christianity!—To
annoy humanity you praise “God and His Saints,” and again when you want to
praise humanity you go so far that God and His Saints must be annoyed.—I
wish you would at least learn Christian manners, as you are so deficient
in the civility of the Christian heart.




93.


THE RELIGIOUS AND IRRELIGIOUS IMPRESSION OF NATURE.—A true believer must
be to us an object of veneration, but the same holds good of a true,
sincere, convinced unbeliever. With men of the latter stamp we are near to
the high mountains where mighty rivers have their source, and with
believers we are under vigorous, shady, restful trees.




94.


JUDICIAL MURDER.—The two greatest judicial murders(8) in the world’s
history are, to speak without exaggeration, concealed and well-concealed
suicide. In both cases a man _willed_ to die, and in both cases he let his
breast be pierced by the sword in the hand of human injustice.




95.


“LOVE.”—The finest artistic conception wherein Christianity had the
advantage over other religious systems lay in one word—Love. Hence it
became the _lyric_ religion (whereas in its two other creations Semitism
bestowed heroico-epical religions upon the world). In the word “love”
there is so much meaning, so much that stimulates and appeals to memory
and hope, that even the meanest intelligence and the coldest heart feel
some glimmering of its sense. The cleverest woman and the lowest man think
of the comparatively unselfish moments of their whole life, even if with
them Eros never soared high: and the vast number of beings who _miss_ love
from their parents or children or sweethearts, especially those whose
sexual instincts have been refined away, have found their heart’s desire
in Christianity.




96.


THE FULFILMENT OF CHRISTIANITY.—In Christianity there is also an Epicurean
trend of thought, starting from the idea that God can only demand of man,
his creation and his image, what it is possible for man to fulfil, and
accordingly that Christian virtue and perfection are attainable and often
attained. Now, for instance, the belief in loving one’s enemies—even if it
is only a belief or fancy, and by no means a psychological reality (a real
love)—gives unalloyed happiness, so long as it is genuinely believed. (As
to the reason of this, psychologist and Christian might well differ.)
Hence earthly life, through the belief, I mean the fancy, that it
satisfies not only the injunction to love our enemies, but all the other
injunctions of Christianity, and that it has really assimilated and
embodied in itself the Divine perfection according to the command, “Be
perfect as your Father in heaven is perfect,” might actually become a holy
life. Thus error can make Christ’s promise come true.




97.


OF THE FUTURE OF CHRISTIANITY.—We may be allowed to form a conjecture as
to the disappearance of Christianity and as to the places where it will be
the slowest to retreat, if we consider where and for what reasons
Protestantism spread with such startling rapidity. As is well known,
Protestantism promised to do far more cheaply all that the old Church did,
without costly masses, pilgrimages, and priestly pomp and circumstance. It
spread particularly among the Northern nations, which were not so deeply
rooted as those of the South in the old Church’s symbolism and love of
ritual. In the South the more powerful pagan religion survived in
Christianity, whereas in the North Christianity meant an opposition to and
a break with the old-time creed, and hence was from the first more
thoughtful and less sensual, but for that very reason, in times of peril,
more fanatical and more obstinate. If from the standpoint of _thought_ we
succeed in uprooting Christianity, we can at once know the point where it
will begin to disappear—the very point at which it will be most stubborn
in defence. In other places it will bend but not break, lose its leaves
but burst into leaf afresh, because the senses, and not thought, have gone
over to its side. But it is the senses that maintain the belief that with
all its expensive outlay the Church is more cheaply and conveniently
managed than under the stern conditions of work and wages. Yet what does
one hold leisure (or semi-idleness) to be worth, when once one has become
accustomed to it? The senses plead against a dechristianised world, saying
that there would be too much work to do in it and an insufficient supply
of leisure. They take the part of magic—that is, they let God work himself
(_oremus nos, Deus laboret_).




98.


THEATRICALITY AND HONESTY OF UNBELIEVERS.—There is no book that contains
in such abundance or expresses so faithfully all that man occasionally
finds salutary—ecstatic inward happiness, ready for sacrifice or death in
the belief in and contemplation of _his_ truth—as the book that tells of
Christ. From that book a clever man may learn all the means whereby a book
can be made into a world-book, a vade-mecum for all, and especially that
master-means of representing everything as discovered, nothing as future
and uncertain. All influential books try to leave the same impression, as
if the widest intellectual horizon were circumscribed here and as if about
the sun that shines here every constellation visible at present or in the
future must revolve.—Must not then all purely scientific books be poor in
influence on the same grounds as such books are rich in influence? Is not
the book fated to live humble and among humble folk, in order to be
crucified in the end and never resurrected? In relation to what the
religious inform us of their “knowledge” and their “holy spirit,” are not
all upright men of science “poor in spirit”? Can any religion demand more
self-denial and draw the selfish out of themselves more inexorably than
science?—This and similar things we may say, in any case with a certain
theatricality, when we have to defend ourselves against believers, for it
is impossible to conduct a defence without a certain amount of
theatricality. But between ourselves our language must be more honest, and
we employ a freedom that those believers are not even allowed, in their
own interests, to understand. Away, then, with the monastic cowl of
self-denial, with the appearance of humility! Much more and much better—so
rings our truth! If science were not linked with the pleasure of
knowledge, the utility of the thing known, what should we care for
science? If a little faith, love, and hope did not lead our souls to
knowledge, what would attract us to science? And if in science the ego
means nothing, still the inventive, happy ego, every upright and
industrious ego, means a great deal in the republic of the men of science.
The homage of those who pay homage, the joy of those whom we wish well or
honour, in some cases glory and a fair share of immortality, is the
personal reward for every suppression of personality: to say nothing here
of meaner views and rewards, although it is just on this account that the
majority have sworn and always continue to swear fidelity to the laws of
the republic and of science. If we had not remained in some degree
unscientific, what would science matter to us? Taking everything together
and speaking in plain language: “To a purely knowing being knowledge would
be indifferent.”—Not the quality but the quantity of faith and devoutness
distinguishes us from the pious, the believers. We are content with less.
But should one of them cry out to us: “Be content and show yourselves
contented!” we could easily answer: “As a matter of fact, we do not belong
to the most discontented class. But you, if your faith makes you happy,
show yourselves to be happy. Your faces have always done more harm to your
faith than our reasons! If that glad message of your Bible were written in
your faces, you would not need to demand belief in the authority of that
book in such stiff-necked fashion. Your words, your actions should
continually make the Bible superfluous—in fact, through you a new Bible
should continually come into being. As it is, your apologia for
Christianity is rooted in your unchristianity, and with your defence you
write your own condemnation. If you, however, should wish to emerge from
your dissatisfaction with Christianity, you should ponder over the
experience of two thousand years, which, clothed in the modest form of a
question, may be voiced as follows: ‘If Christ really intended to redeem
the world, may he not be said to have failed?’ ”




99.


THE POET AS GUIDE TO THE FUTURE.—All the surplus poetical force that still
exists in modern humanity, but is not used under our conditions of life,
should (without any deduction) be devoted to a definite goal—not to
depicting the present nor to reviving and summarising the past, but to
pointing the way to the future. Nor should this be so done as if the poet,
like an imaginative political economist, had to anticipate a more
favourable national and social state of things and picture their
realisation. Rather will he, just as the earlier poets portrayed the
images of the Gods, portray the fair images of men. He will divine those
cases where, in the midst of our modern world and reality (which will not
be shirked or repudiated in the usual poetic fashion), a great, noble soul
is still possible, where it may be embodied in harmonious, equable
conditions, where it may become permanent, visible, and representative of
a type, and so, by the stimulus to imitation and envy, help to create the
future. The poems of such a poet would be distinguished by appearing
secluded and protected from the heated atmosphere of the passions. The
irremediable failure, the shattering of all the strings of the human
instrument, the scornful laughter and gnashing of teeth, and all tragedy
and comedy in the usual old sense, would appear by the side of this new
art as mere archaic lumber, a blurring of the outlines of the
world-picture. Strength, kindness, gentleness, purity, and an unsought,
innate moderation in the personalities and their action: a levelled soil,
giving rest and pleasure to the foot: a shining heaven mirrored in faces
and events: science and art welded into a new unity: the mind living
together with her sister, the soul, without arrogance or jealousy, and
enticing from contrasts the grace of seriousness, not the impatience of
discord—all this would be the general environment, the background on which
the delicate differences of the embodied ideals would make the real
picture, that of ever-growing human majesty. Many roads to this poetry of
the future start from Goethe, but the quest needs good pathfinders and
above all a far greater strength than is possessed by modern poets, who
unscrupulously represent the half-animal and the immaturity and
intemperance that are mistaken by them for power and naturalness.




100.


THE MUSE AS PENTHESILEA.(9)—“Better to rot than to be a woman without
charm.” When once the Muse thinks thus, the end of her art is again at
hand. But it can be a tragic and also a comic finale.




101.


THE CIRCUITOUS PATH TO THE BEAUTIFUL.—If the beautiful is to be identified
with that which gives pleasure—and thus sang the Muses once—the useful is
often the necessary circuitous path to the beautiful, and has a perfect
right to spurn the short-sighted censure of men who live for the moment,
who will not wait, and who think that they can reach all good things
without ever taking a circuitous path.




102.


AN EXCUSE FOR MANY A TRANSGRESSION.—The ceaseless desire to create, the
eternal looking outward of the artist, hinders him from becoming better
and more beautiful as a personality: unless his craving for glory be great
enough to compel him to exhibit in his relations with other men a growth
corresponding to the growing beauty and greatness of his works. In any
case he has but a limited measure of strength, and how could the
proportion of strength that he spends on himself be of any benefit to his
work—or _vice versa_?




103.


SATISFYING THE BEST PEOPLE.—If we have satisfied the best people of our
time with our art, it is a sign that we shall not satisfy the best people
of the succeeding period. We have indeed “lived for all time,” and the
applause of the best people ensures our fame.(10)




104.


OF ONE SUBSTANCE.—If we are of one substance with a book or a work of art,
we think in our heart of hearts that it must be excellent, and are
offended if others find it ugly, over-spiced, or pretentious.




105.


SPEECH AND EMOTION.—That speech is not given to us to communicate our
emotions may be seen from the fact that all simple men are ashamed to seek
for words to express their deeper feelings. These feelings are expressed
only in actions, and even here such men blush if others seem to divine
their motives. After all, among poets, to whom God generally denies this
shame, the more noble are more monosyllabic in the language of emotion,
and evince a certain constraint: whereas the real poets of emotion are for
the most part shameless in practical life.




106.


A MISTAKE ABOUT A PRIVATION.—He that has not for a long time been
completely weaned from an art, and is still always at home in it, has no
idea how small a privation it is to live without that art.




107.


THREE-QUARTER STRENGTH.—A work that is meant to give an impression of
health should be produced with three-quarters, at the most, of the
strength of its creator. If he has gone to his farthest limit, the work
excites the observer and disconcerts him by its tension. All good things
have something lazy about them and lie like cows in the meadow.




108.


REFUSING TO HAVE HUNGER AS A GUEST.—As refined fare serves a hungry man as
well as and no better than coarser food, the more pretentious artist will
not dream of inviting the hungry man to his meal.




109.


LIVING WITHOUT ART AND WINE.—It is with works of art as with wine—it is
better if one can do without both and keep to water, and if from the inner
fire and inner sweetness of the soul the water spontaneously changes again
into wine.




110.


THE PIRATE-GENIUS.—The pirate-genius in art, who even knows how to deceive
subtle minds, arises when some one unscrupulously and from youth upwards
regards all good things, that are not protected by law, as the property of
a particular person, as his legitimate spoil. Now all the good things of
past ages and masters lie free around us, hedged about and protected by
the reverential awe of the few who know them. To these few our
robber-genius, by the force of his impudence, bids defiance and
accumulates for himself a wealth that once more calls forth homage and
awe.




111.


TO THE POETS OF GREAT TOWNS.—In the gardens of modern poetry it will
clearly be observed that the sewers of great towns are too near. With the
fragrance of flowers is mingled something that betrays abomination and
putrescence. With pain I ask: “Must you poets always request wit and dirt
to stand godfather, when an innocent and beautiful sensation has to be
christened by you? Are you obliged to dress your noble goddess in a hood
of devilry and caricature? But whence this necessity, this obligation?”
The reason is—because you live too near the sewers.




112.


OF THE SALT OF SPEECH.—No one has ever explained why the Greek writers,
having at command such an unparalleled wealth and power of language, made
so sparing a use of their resources that every post-classical Greek book
appears by comparison crude, over-coloured, and extravagant. It is said
that towards the North Polar ice and in the hottest countries salt is
becoming less and less used, whereas on the other hand the dwellers on the
plains and by the coast in the more temperate zones use salt in great
abundance. Is it possible that the Greeks from a twofold reason—because
their intellect was colder and clearer but their fundamental passionate
nature far more tropical than ours—did not need salt and spice to the same
extent that we do?




113.


THE FREEST WRITER.—In a book for free spirits one cannot avoid mention of
Laurence Sterne, the man whom Goethe honoured as the freest spirit of his
century. May he be satisfied with the honour of being called the freest
writer of all times, in comparison with whom all others appear stiff,
square-toed, intolerant, and downright boorish! In his case we should not
speak of the clear and rounded but of “the endless melody”—if by this
phrase we arrive at a name for an artistic style in which the definite
form is continually broken, thrust aside and transferred to the realm of
the indefinite, so that it signifies one and the other at the same time.
Sterne is the great master of _double entendre_, this phrase being
naturally used in a far wider sense than is commonly done when one applies
it to sexual relations. We may give up for lost the reader who always
wants to know exactly what Sterne thinks about a matter, and whether he be
making a serious or a smiling face (for he can do both with one wrinkling
of his features; he can be and even wishes to be right and wrong at the
same moment, to interweave profundity and farce). His digressions are at
once continuations and further developments of the story, his maxims
contain a satire on all that is sententious, his dislike of seriousness is
bound up with a disposition to take no matter merely externally and on the
surface. So in the proper reader he arouses a feeling of uncertainty
whether he be walking, lying, or standing, a feeling most closely akin to
that of floating in the air. He, the most versatile of writers,
communicates something of this versatility to his reader. Yes, Sterne
unexpectedly changes the parts, and is often as much reader as author, his
book being like a play within a play, a theatre audience before another
theatre audience. We must surrender at discretion to the mood of Sterne,
although we can always expect it to be gracious. It is strangely
instructive to see how so great a writer as Diderot has affected this
_double entendre_ of Sterne’s—to be equally ambiguous throughout is just
the Sternian super-humour. Did Diderot imitate, admire, ridicule, or
parody Sterne in his _Jacques le Fataliste_? One cannot be exactly
certain, and this uncertainty was perhaps intended by the author. This
very doubt makes the French unjust to the work of one of their first
masters, one who need not be ashamed of comparison with any of the
ancients or moderns. For humour (and especially for this humorous attitude
towards humour itself) the French are too serious. Is it necessary to add
that of all great authors Sterne is the worst model, in fact the
inimitable author, and that even Diderot had to pay for his daring? What
the worthy Frenchmen and before them some Greeks and Romans aimed at and
attained in prose is the very opposite of what Sterne aims at and attains.
He raises himself as a masterly exception above all that artists in
writing demand of themselves—propriety, reserve, character, steadfastness
of purpose, comprehensiveness, perspicuity, good deportment in gait and
feature. Unfortunately Sterne the man seems to have been only too closely
related to Sterne the writer. His squirrel-soul sprang with insatiable
unrest from branch to branch; he knew what lies between sublimity and
rascality; he had sat on every seat, always with unabashed watery eyes and
mobile play of feature. He was—if language does not revolt from such a
combination—of a hard-hearted kindness, and in the midst of the joys of a
grotesque and even corrupt imagination he showed the bashful grace of
innocence. Such a carnal and spiritual hermaphroditism, such untrammelled
wit penetrating into every vein and muscle, was perhaps never possessed by
any other man.




114.


A CHOICE REALITY.—Just as the good prose writer only takes words that
belong to the language of daily intercourse, though not by a long way all
its words—whence arises a choice style—so the good poet of the future will
only represent the real and turn his eyes away from all fantastic,
superstitious, half-voiced, forgotten stories, to which earlier poets
devoted their powers. Only reality, though by a long way not every
reality—but a choice reality.




115.


DEGENERATE SPECIES OF ART.—Side by side with the genuine species of art,
those of great repose and great movement, there are degenerate
species—weary, blasé art and excited art. Both would have their weakness
taken for strength and wish to be confounded with the genuine species.




116.


A HERO IMPOSSIBLE FROM LACK OF COLOUR.—The typical poets and artists of
our age like to compose their pictures upon a background of shimmering
red, green, grey, and gold, on the background of nervous sensuality—a
condition well understood by the children of this century. The drawback
comes when we do _not_ look at these pictures with the eyes of our
century. Then we see that the great figures painted by these artists have
something flickering, tremulous, and dizzy about them, and accordingly we
do not ascribe to them heroic deeds, but at best mock-heroic, swaggering
_mis_deeds.




117.


OVERLADEN STYLE.—The overladen style is a consequence of the
impoverishment of the organising force together with a lavish stock of
expedients and intentions. At the beginnings of art the very reverse
conditions sometimes appear.




118.


_PULCHRUM EST PAUCORUM HOMINUM._—History and experience tell us that the
significant grotesqueness that mysteriously excites the imagination and
carries one beyond everyday reality, is older and grows more luxuriantly
than the beautiful and reverence for the beautiful in art: and that it
begins to flourish exceedingly when the sense for beauty is on the wane.
For the vast majority of mankind this grotesque seems to be a higher need
than the beautiful, presumably because it contains a coarser narcotic.




119.


ORIGINS OF TASTE IN WORKS OF ART.—If we consider the primary germs of the
artistic sense, and ask ourselves what are the various kinds of joy
produced by the firstlings of art—as, for example, among savage tribes—we
find first of all the joy of understanding what another means. Art in this
case is a sort of conundrum, which causes its solver pleasure in his own
quick and keen perceptions.—Then the roughest works of art remind us of
the pleasant things we have actually experienced, and so give joy—as, for
example, when the artist alludes to a chase, a victory, a wedding.—Again,
the representation may cause us to feel excited, touched, inflamed, as for
instance in the glorification of revenge and danger. Here the enjoyment
lies in the excitement itself, in the victory over tedium.—The memory,
too, of unpleasant things, so far as they have been overcome or make us
appear interesting to the listener as subjects for art (as when the singer
describes the mishaps of a daring seaman), can inspire great joy, the
credit for which is given to art.—A more subtle variety is the joy that
arises at the sight of all that is regular and symmetrical in lines,
points, and rhythms. For by a certain analogy is awakened the feeling for
all that is orderly and regular in life, which one has to thank alone for
all well-being. So in the cult of symmetry we unconsciously do homage to
rule and proportion as the source of our previous happiness, and the joy
in this case is a kind of hymn of thanksgiving. Only when a certain
satiety of the last-mentioned joy arises does a more subtle feeling step
in, that enjoyment might even lie in a violation of the symmetrical and
regular. This feeling, for example, impels us to seek reason in apparent
unreason, and the sort of æsthetic riddle-guessing that results is in a
way the higher species of the first-named artistic joy.—He who pursues
this speculation still further will know what kind of hypotheses for the
explanation of æsthetic phenomena are hereby fundamentally rejected.




120.


NOT TOO NEAR.—It is a disadvantage for good thoughts when they follow too
closely on one another, for they hide the view from each other. That is
why great artists and writers have made an abundant use of the mediocre.




121.


ROUGHNESS AND WEAKNESS.—Artists of all periods have made the discovery
that in roughness lies a certain strength, and that not every one can be
rough who wants to be: also that many varieties of weakness have a
powerful effect on the emotions. From this source are derived many
artistic substitutes, which not even the greatest and most conscientious
artists can abstain from using.




122.


GOOD MEMORY.—Many a man fails to become a thinker for the sole reason that
his memory is too good.




123.


AROUSING INSTEAD OF APPEASING HUNGER.—Great artists fancy that they have
taken full possession of a soul. In reality, and often to their painful
disappointment, that soul has only been made more capacious and
insatiable, so that a dozen greater artists could plunge into its depths
without filling it up.




124.


ARTISTS’ ANXIETY.—The anxiety lest people may not believe that their
figures are _alive_ can mislead many artists of declining taste to portray
these figures so that they appear as if mad. From the same anxiety, on the
other hand, Greek artists of the earliest ages gave even dead and sorely
wounded men that smile which they knew as the most vivid sign of
life—careless of the actual forms bestowed by nature on life at its last
gasp.




125.


THE CIRCLE MUST BE COMPLETED.—He who follows a philosophy or a genre of
art to the end of its career and beyond, understands from inner experience
why the masters and disciples who come after have so often turned, with a
depreciatory gesture, into a new groove. The circle must be described—but
the individual, even the greatest, sits firm on his point of the
circumference, with an inexorable look of obstinacy, as if the circle
ought never to be completed.




126.


THE OLDER ART AND THE SOUL OF THE PRESENT.—Since every art becomes more
and more adapted to the expression of spiritual states, of the more
lively, delicate, energetic, and passionate states, the later masters,
spoilt by these means of expression, do not feel at their ease in the
presence of the old-time works of art. They feel as if the ancients had
merely been lacking in the means of making their souls speak clearly, also
perhaps in some necessary technical preliminaries. They think that they
must render some assistance in this quarter, for they believe in the
similarity or even unity of all souls. In truth, however, measure,
symmetry, a contempt for graciousness and charm, an unconscious severity
and morning chilliness, an evasion of passion, as if passion meant the
death of art—such are the constituents of sentiment and morality in all
old masters, who selected and arranged their means of expression not at
random but in a necessary connection with their morality. Knowing this,
are we to deny those that come after the right to animate the older works
with their soul? No, for these works can only survive through our giving
them our soul, and our blood alone enables them to speak to _us_. The real
“historic” discourse would talk ghostly speech to ghosts. We honour the
great artists less by that barren timidity that allows every word, every
note to remain intact than by energetic endeavours to aid them continually
to a new life.—True, if Beethoven were suddenly to come to life and hear
one of his works performed with that modern animation and nervous
refinement that bring glory to our masters of execution, he would probably
be silent for a long while, uncertain whether he should raise his hand to
curse or to bless, but perhaps say at last: “Well, well! That is neither I
nor not-I, but a third thing—it seems to me, too, something right, if not
just _the_ right thing. But you must know yourselves what to do, as in any
case it is you who have to listen. As our Schiller says, ‘the living man
is right.’ So have it your own way, and let me go down again.”




127.


AGAINST THE DISPARAGERS OF BREVITY.—A brief dictum may be the fruit and
harvest of long reflection. The reader, however, who is a novice in this
field and has never considered the case in point, sees something embryonic
in all brief dicta, not without a reproachful hint to the author,
requesting him not to serve up such raw and ill-prepared food.




128.


AGAINST THE SHORT-SIGHTED.—Do you think it is piece-work because it is
(and must be) offered you in pieces?




129.


READERS OF APHORISMS.—The worst readers of aphorisms are the friends of
the author, if they make a point of referring the general to the
particular instance to which the aphorism owes its origin. This
namby-pamby attitude brings all the author’s trouble to naught, and
instead of a philosophic lesson and a philosophic frame of mind, they
deservedly gain nothing but the satisfaction of a vulgar curiosity.




130.


READERS’ INSULTS.—The reader offers a two-fold insult to the author by
praising his second book at the expense of his first (or _vice versa_) and
by expecting the author to be grateful to him on that account.




131.


THE EXCITING ELEMENT IN THE HISTORY OF ART.—We fall into a state of
terrible tension when we follow the history of an art—as, for example,
that of Greek oratory—and, passing from master to master, observe their
increasing precautions to obey the old and the new laws and all these
self-imposed limitations. We see that the bow _must_ snap, and that the
so-called “loose” composition, with the wonderful means of expression
smothered and concealed (in this particular case the florid style of
Asianism), was once necessary and almost _beneficial_.




132.


TO THE GREAT IN ART.—That enthusiasm for some object which you, O great
man, introduce into this world causes the intelligence of the many to be
stunted. The knowledge of this fact spells humiliation. But the enthusiast
wears his hump with pride and pleasure, and you have the consolation of
feeling that you have increased the world’s happiness.




133.


CONSCIENCELESS ÆSTHETES.—The real fanatics of an artistic school are
perhaps those utterly inartistic natures that are not even grounded in the
elements of artistic study and creation, but are impressed with the
strongest of all the elementary influences of an art. For them there is no
æsthetic conscience—hence nothing to hold them back from fanaticism.




134.


HOW THE SOUL SHOULD BE MOVED BY THE NEW MUSIC.—The artistic purpose
followed by the new music, in what is now forcibly but none too lucidly
termed “endless melody,” can be understood by going into the sea,
gradually losing one’s firm tread on the bottom, and finally surrendering
unconditionally to the fluid element. One has to _swim_. In the previous,
older music one was forced, with delicate or stately or impassioned
movement, to _dance_. The measure necessary for dancing, the observance of
a distinct balance of time and force in the soul of the hearer, imposed a
continual self-control. Through the counteraction of the cooler draught of
air which came from this caution and the warmer breath of musical
enthusiasm, that music exercised its spell.—Richard Wagner aimed at a
different excitation of the soul, allied, as above said, to swimming and
floating. This is perhaps the most essential of his innovations. His
famous method, originating from this aim and adapted to it—the “endless
melody”—strives to break and sometimes even to despise all mathematical
equilibrium of time and force. He is only too rich in the invention of
such effects, which sound to the old school like rhythmic paradoxes and
blasphemies. He dreads petrifaction, crystallisation, the development of
music into the architectural. He accordingly sets up a three-time rhythm
in opposition to the double-time, not infrequently introduces five-time
and seven-time, immediately repeats a phrase, but with a prolation, so
that its time is again doubled and trebled. From an easy-going imitation
of such art may arise a great danger to music, for by the side of the
superabundance of rhythmic emotion demoralisation and decadence lurk in
ambush. The danger will become very great if such music comes to associate
itself more and more closely with a quite naturalistic art of acting and
pantomime, trained and dominated by no higher plastic models; an art that
knows no measure in itself and can impart no measure to the kindred
element, the all-too-womanish nature of music.




135.


POET AND REALITY.—The Muse of the poet who is not in love with reality
will not be reality, and will bear him children with hollow eyes and all
too tender bones.




136.


MEANS AND END.—In art the end does not justify the means, but holy means
can justify the end.




137.


THE WORST READERS.—The worst readers are those who act like plundering
soldiers. They take out some things that they might use, cover the rest
with filth and confusion, and blaspheme about the whole.




138.


SIGNS OF A GOOD WRITER.—Good writers have two things in common: they
prefer being understood to being admired, and they do not write for the
critical and over-shrewd reader.




139.


THE MIXED SPECIES.—The mixed species in art bear witness to their authors’
distrust of their own strength. They seek auxiliary powers, advocates,
hiding-places—such is the case with the poet who calls in philosophy, the
musician who calls in the drama, and the thinker who calls in rhetoric to
his aid.




140.


SHUTTING ONE’S MOUTH.—When his book opens its mouth, the author must shut
his.




141.


BADGES OF RANK.—All poets and men of letters who are in love with the
superlative want to do more than they can.




142.


COLD BOOKS.—The deep thinker reckons on readers who feel with him the
happiness that lies in deep thinking. Hence a book that looks cold and
sober, if seen in the right light, may seem bathed in the sunshine of
spiritual cheerfulness and become a genuine soul-comforter.




143.


A KNACK OF THE SLOW-WITTED.—The slow-witted thinker generally allies
himself with loquacity and ceremoniousness. By the former he thinks he is
gaining mobility and fluency, by the latter he gives his peculiarity the
appearance of being a result of free will and artistic purpose, with a
view to dignity, which needs slow movement.




144.


_LE STYLE BAROQUE._(11)—He who as thinker and writer is not born or
trained to dialectic and the consecutive arrangement of ideas, will
unconsciously turn to the rhetoric and dramatic forms. For, after all, his
object is to make himself understood and to carry the day by force, and he
is indifferent whether, as shepherd, he honestly guides to himself the
hearts of his fellow-men, or, as robber, he captures them by surprise.
This is true of the plastic arts as of music: where the feeling of
insufficient dialectic or a deficiency in expression or narration,
together with an urgent, over-powerful impulse to form, gives birth to
that species of style known as “baroque.” Only the ill-educated and the
arrogant will at once find a depreciatory force in this word. The baroque
style always arises at the time of decay of a great art, when the demands
of art in classical expression have become too great. It is a natural
phenomenon which will be observed with melancholy—for it is a forerunner
of the night—but at the same time with admiration for its peculiar
compensatory arts of expression and narration. To this style belongs
already a choice of material and subjects of the highest dramatic tension,
at which the heart trembles even when there is no art, because heaven and
hell are all too near the emotions: then, the oratory of strong passion
and gestures, of ugly sublimity, of great masses, in fact of absolute
quantity _per se_ (as is shown in Michael Angelo, the father or
grandfather of the Italian baroque stylists): the lights of dusk,
illumination and conflagration playing upon those strongly moulded forms:
ever-new ventures in means and aims, strongly underscored by artists for
artists, while the layman must fancy he sees an unconscious overflowing of
all the horns of plenty of an original nature-art: all these
characteristics that constitute the greatness of that style are neither
possible nor permitted in the earlier ante-classical and classical periods
of a branch of art. Such luxuries hang long on the tree like forbidden
fruit. Just now, when music is passing into this last phase, we may learn
to know the phenomenon of the baroque style in peculiar splendour, and, by
comparison, find much that is instructive for earlier ages. For from Greek
times onward there has often been a baroque style, in poetry, oratory,
prose writing, sculpture, and, as is well known, in architecture. This
style, though wanting in the highest nobility,—the nobility of an
innocent, unconscious, triumphant perfection,—has nevertheless given
pleasure to many of the best and most serious minds of their time. Hence,
as aforesaid, it is presumptuous to depreciate it without reserve, however
happy we may feel because our taste for it has not made us insensible to
the purer and greater style.




145.


THE VALUE OF HONEST BOOKS.—Honest books make the reader honest, at least
by exciting his hatred and aversion, which otherwise cunning cleverness
knows so well how to conceal. Against a book, however, we let ourselves
go, however restrained we may be in our relations with men.




146.


HOW ART MAKES PARTISANS.—Individual fine passages, an exciting general
tenor, a moving and absorbing finale—so much of a work of art is
accessible even to most laymen. In an art period when it is desired to win
over the great majority of the laymen to the side of the artists and to
make a party perhaps for the very preservation of art, the creative artist
will do well to offer nothing more than the above. Then he will not be a
squanderer of his strength, in spheres where no one is grateful to him.
For to perform the remaining functions, the imitation of Nature in her
organic development and growth, would in that case be like sowing seeds in
water.




147.


BECOMING GREAT TO THE DETRIMENT OF HISTORY.—Every later master who leads
the taste of art-lovers into his channel unconsciously gives rise to a
selection and revaluation of the older masters and their works. Whatever
in them is conformable and akin to him, and anticipates and foreshadows
him, appears henceforth as the only important element in them and their
works—a fruit in which a great error usually lies hidden like a worm.




148.


HOW AN EPOCH BECOMES LURED TO ART.—If we teach people by all the
enchantments of artists and thinkers to feel reverence for their defects,
their intellectual poverty, their absurd infatuations and passions (as it
is quite possible to do); if we show them only the lofty side of crime and
folly, only the touching and appealing element in weakness and flabbiness
and blind devotion (that too has often enough been done):—we have employed
the means for inspiring even an unphilosophical and inartistic age with an
ecstatic love of philosophy and art (especially of thinkers and artists as
personalities) and, in the worst case, perhaps with the only means of
defending the existence of such tender and fragile beings.




149.


CRITICISM AND JOY.—Criticism, one-sided and unjust as well as intelligent
criticism, gives so much pleasure to him who exercises it that the world
is indebted to every work and every action that inspires much criticism
and many critics. For criticism draws after it a glittering train of
joyousness, wit, self-admiration, pride, instruction, designs of
improvement.—The God of joy created the bad and the mediocre for the same
reason that he created the good.




150.


BEYOND HIS LIMITS.—When an artist wants to be more than an artist—for
example, the moral awakener of his people—he at last falls in love, as a
punishment, with a monster of moral substance. The Muse laughs, for,
though a kind-hearted Goddess, she can also be malignant from jealousy.
Milton and Klopstock are cases in point.




151.


A GLASS EYE.—The tendency of a talent towards moral subjects, characters,
motives, towards the “beautiful soul” of the work of art, is often only a
glass eye put on by the artist who lacks a beautiful soul. It may result,
though rarely, that his eye finally becomes living Nature, if indeed it be
Nature with a somewhat troubled look. But the ordinary result is that the
whole world thinks it sees Nature where there is only cold glass.




152.


WRITING AND DESIRE FOR VICTORY.—Writing should always indicate a victory,
indeed a conquest of oneself which must be communicated to others for
their behoof. There are, however, dyspeptic authors who only write when
they cannot digest something, or when something has remained stuck in
their teeth. Through their anger they try unconsciously to disgust the
reader too, and to exercise violence upon him—that is, they desire
victory, but victory over others.




153.


A GOOD BOOK NEEDS TIME.—Every good book tastes bitter when it first comes
out, for it has the defect of newness. Moreover, it suffers damage from
its living author, if he is well known and much talked about. For all the
world is accustomed to confuse the author with his work. Whatever of
profundity, sweetness, and brilliance the work may contain must be
developed as the years go by, under the care of growing, then old, and
lastly traditional reverence. Many hours must pass, many a spider must
have woven its web about the book. A book is made better by good readers
and clearer by good opponents.




154.


EXTRAVAGANCE AS AN ARTISTIC MEANS.—Artists well understand the idea of
using extravagance as an artistic means in order to convey an impression
of wealth. This is one of those innocent wiles of soul-seduction that the
artist must know, for in his world, which has only appearance in view, the
means to appearance need not necessarily be genuine.




155.


THE HIDDEN BARREL-ORGAN.—Genius, by virtue of its more ample drapery,
knows better than talent how to hide its barrel-organ. Yet after all it
too can only play its seven old pieces over and over again.




156.


THE NAME ON THE TITLE-PAGE.—It is now a matter of custom and almost of
duty for the author’s name to appear on the book, and this is a main cause
of the fact that books have so little influence. If they are good, they
are worth more than the personalities of their authors, of which they are
the quintessences. But as soon as the author makes himself known on the
title-page, the quintessence, from the reader’s point of view, becomes
diluted with the personal, the most personal element, and the aim of the
book is frustrated. It is the ambition of the intellect no longer to
appear individual.




157.


THE MOST CUTTING CRITICISM.—We make the most cutting criticism of a man or
a book when we indicate his or its ideal.




158.


LITTLE OR NO LOVE.—Every good book is written for a particular reader and
men of his stamp, and for that very reason is looked upon unfavourably by
all other readers, by the vast majority. Its reputation accordingly rests
on a narrow basis and must be built up by degrees.—The mediocre and bad
book is mediocre and bad because it seeks to please, and does please, a
great number.




159.


MUSIC AND DISEASE.—The danger of the new music lies in the fact that it
puts the cup of rapture and exaltation to the lips so invitingly, and with
such a show of moral ecstasy, that even the noble and temperate man always
drinks a drop too much. This minimum of intemperance, constantly repeated,
can in the end bring about a deeper convulsion and destruction of mental
health than any coarse excess could do. Hence nothing remains but some day
to fly from the grotto of the nymph, and through perils and billowy seas
to forge one’s way to the smoke of Ithaca and the embraces of a simpler
and more human spouse.




160.


ADVANTAGE FOR OPPONENTS.—A book full of intellect communicates something
thereof even to its opponents.




161.


YOUTH AND CRITICISM.—To criticise a book means, for the young, not to let
oneself be touched by a single productive thought therefrom, and to
protect one’s skin with hands and feet. The youngster lives in opposition
to all novelty that he cannot love in the lump, in a position of
self-defence, and in this connection he commits, as often as he can, a
superfluous sin.




162.


EFFECT OF QUANTITY.—The greatest paradox in the history of poetic art lies
in this: that in all that constitutes the greatness of the old poets a man
may be a barbarian, faulty and deformed from top to toe, and still remain
the greatest of poets. This is the case with Shakespeare, who, as compared
with Sophocles, is like a mine of immeasurable wealth in gold, lead, and
rubble, whereas Sophocles is not merely gold, but gold in its noblest
form, one that almost makes us forget the money-value of the metal. But
quantity in its highest intensity has the same effect as quality. That is
a good thing for Shakespeare.




163.


ALL BEGINNING IS DANGEROUS.—The Poet can choose whether to raise emotion
from one grade to another, and so finally to exalt it to a great height—or
to try a surprise attack, and from the start to pull the bell-rope with
might and main. Both processes have their danger—in the first case his
hearer may run away from him through boredom, in the second through
terror.




164.


IN FAVOUR OF CRITICS.—Insects sting, not from malice, but because they too
want to live. It is the same with our critics—they desire our blood, not
our pain.




165.


SUCCESS OF APHORISMS.—The inexperienced, when an aphorism at once
illuminates their minds with its naked truth, always think that it is old
and well known. They look askance at the author, as if he had wanted to
steal the common property of all, whereas they enjoy highly spiced
half-truths, and give the author to understand as much. He knows how to
appreciate the hint, and easily guesses thereby where he has succeeded and
failed.




166.


THE DESIRE FOR VICTORY.—An artist who exceeds the limit of his strength in
all that he undertakes will end by carrying the multitude along with him
through the spectacle of violent wrestling that he affords. Success is not
always the accompaniment only of victory, but also of the desire for
victory.




167.


_SIBI SCRIBERE._—The sensible author writes for no other posterity than
his own—that is, for his age—so as to be able even then to take pleasure
in himself.




168.


PRAISE OF THE APHORISM.—A good aphorism is too hard for the tooth of time,
and is not worn away by all the centuries, although it serves as food for
every epoch. Hence it is the greatest paradox in literature, the
imperishable in the midst of change, the nourishment which always remains
highly valued, as salt does, and never becomes stupid like salt.




169.


THE ART-NEED OF THE SECOND ORDER.—The people may have something of what
can be called art-need, but it is small, and can be cheaply satisfied. On
the whole, the remnant of art (it must be honestly confessed) suffices for
this need. Let us consider, for example, the kind of melodies and songs in
which the most vigorous, unspoiled, and true-hearted classes of the
population find genuine delight; let us live among shepherds, cowherds,
peasants, huntsmen, soldiers, and sailors, and give ourselves the answer.
And in the country town, just in the houses that are the homes of
inherited civic virtue, is it not the worst music at present produced that
is loved and, one might say, cherished? He who speaks of deeper needs and
unsatisfied yearnings for art among the people, as it is, is a crank or an
impostor. Be honest! Only in exceptional men is there now an art-need in
the highest sense—because art is once more on the down-grade, and human
powers and hopes are for the time being directed to other matters.—Apart
from this, outside the populace, there exists indeed, in the higher and
highest strata of society, a broader and more comprehensive art-need, but
_of the second order_. Here there is a sort of artistic commune, which
possibly means to be sincere. But let us look at the elements! They are in
general the more refined malcontents, who attain no genuine pleasure in
themselves; the cultured, who have not become free enough to dispense with
the consolations of religion, and yet do not find its incense sufficiently
fragrant; the half-aristocratic, who are too weak to combat by a heroic
conversion or renunciation the one fundamental error of their lives or the
pernicious bent of their characters; the highly gifted, who think
themselves too dignified to be of service by modest activity, and are too
lazy for real, self-sacrificing work; girls who cannot create for
themselves a satisfactory sphere of duties; women who have tied themselves
by a light-hearted or nefarious marriage, and know that they are not tied
securely enough; scholars, physicians, merchants, officials who
specialised too early and never gave their lives a free enough scope—who
do their work efficiently, it is true, but with a worm gnawing at their
hearts; finally, all imperfect artists—these are nowadays the true needers
of art! What do they really desire from art? Art is to drive away hours
and moments of discomfort, boredom, half-bad conscience, and, if possible,
transform the faults of their lives and characters into faults of
world-destiny. Very different were the Greeks, who realised in their art
the outflow and overflow of their own sense of well-being and health, and
loved to see their perfection once more from a standpoint outside
themselves. They were led to art by delight in themselves; our
contemporaries—by disgust of themselves.




170.


THE GERMANS IN THE THEATRE.—The real theatrical talent of the Germans was
Kotzebue. He and his Germans, those of higher as well as those of
middle-class society, were necessarily associated, and his contemporaries
should have said of him in all seriousness, “in him we live and move and
have our being.” Here was nothing—no constraint, pretence, or
half-enjoyment: what he could and would do was understood. Yes, until now
the honest theatrical success on the German stage has been in the hands of
the shamefaced or unashamed heirs of Kotzebue’s methods and influence—that
is, as far as comedy still flourishes at all. The result is that much of
the Germanism of that age, sometimes far off from the great towns, still
survives. Good-natured; incontinent in small pleasures; always ready for
tears; with the desire, in the theatre at any rate, to be able to get rid
of their innate sobriety and strict attention to duty and exercise; a
smiling, nay, a laughing indulgence; confusing goodness and sympathy and
welding them into one, as is the essential characteristic of German
sentimentality; exceedingly happy at a noble, magnanimous action; for the
rest, submissive towards superiors, envious of each other, and yet in
their heart of hearts thoroughly self-satisfied—such were they and such
was he.—The second dramatic talent was Schiller. He discovered a class of
hearers which had hitherto never been taken into consideration: among the
callow German youth of both sexes. His poetry responded to their higher,
nobler, more violent if more confused emotions, their delight in the
jingle of moral words (a delight that begins to disappear when we reach
the thirties). Thus he won for himself, by virtue of the passionateness
and partisanship of the young, a success which gradually reacted with
advantage upon those of riper years. Generally speaking, Schiller
rejuvenated the Germans. Goethe stood and still stands above the Germans
in every respect. To them he will never belong. How could a nation in
well-being and well-wishing come up to the intellectuality of Goethe?
Beethoven composed and Schopenhauer philosophised above the heads of the
Germans, and it was above their heads, in the same way, that Goethe wrote
his _Tasso_, his _Iphigenie_. He was followed by a small company of highly
cultured persons, who were educated by antiquity, life, and travel, and
had grown out of German ways of thought. He himself did not wish it to be
otherwise.—When the Romantics set up their well-conceived Goethe cult;
when their amazing skill in appreciation was passed on to the disciples of
Hegel, the real educators of the Germans of this century; when the
awakening national ambition turned out advantageous to the fame of the
German poets; when the real standard of the nation, as to whether it could
honestly find enjoyment in anything, became inexorably subordinated to the
judgment of individuals and to that national ambition,—that is, when
people began to enjoy by compulsion,—then arose that false, spurious
German culture which was ashamed of Kotzebue; which brought Sophocles,
Calderon, and even the Second Part of Goethe’s _Faust_ on the stage; and
which, on account of its foul tongue and congested stomach, no longer
knows now what it likes and what it finds tedious.—Happy are those who
have taste, even if it be a bad taste! Only by this characteristic can one
be wise as well as happy. Hence the Greeks, who were very refined in such
matters, designated the sage by a word that means “man of taste,” and
called wisdom, artistic as well as scientific, “taste” (_sophia_).




171.


MUSIC AS A LATE-COMER IN EVERY CULTURE.—Among all the arts that are
accustomed to grow on a definite culture-soil and under definite social
and political conditions, music is the last plant to come up, arising in
the autumn and fading-season of the culture to which it belongs. At the
same time, the first signs and harbingers of a new spring are usually
already noticeable, and sometimes music, like the language of a forgotten
age, rings out into a new, astonished world, and comes too late. In the
art of the Dutch and Flemish musicians the soul of the Christian middle
ages at last found its fullest tone: their sound-architecture is the
posthumous but legitimate and equal sister of Gothic. Not until Handel’s
music was heard the note of the best in the soul of Luther and his kin,
the great Judæo-heroical impulse that created the whole Reformation
movement. Mozart first expressed in golden melody the age of Louis XIV.
and the art of Racine and Claude Lorrain. The eighteenth century—that
century of rhapsody, of broken ideals and transitory happiness—only sang
itself out in the music of Beethoven and Rossini. A lover of sentimental
similes might say that all really important music was a swan-song.—Music
is, in fact, not a universal language for all time, as is so often said in
its praise, but responds exactly to a particular period and warmth of
emotion which involves a quite definite, individual culture, determined by
time and place, as its inner law. The music of Palestrina would be quite
unintelligible to a Greek; and again, what would the music of Rossini
convey to Palestrina?—It may be that our most modern German music, with
all its pre-eminence and desire of pre-eminence, will soon be no longer
understood. For this music sprang from a culture that is undergoing a
rapid decay, from the soil of that epoch of reaction and restoration in
which a certain Catholicism of feeling, as well as a delight in all
indigenous, national, primitive manners, burst into bloom and scattered a
blended perfume over Europe. These two emotional tendencies, adopted in
their greatest strength and carried to their farthest limits, found final
expression in the music of Wagner. Wagner’s predilection for the old
native sagas, his free idealisation of their unfamiliar gods and
heroes,—who are really sovereign beasts of prey with occasional fits of
thoughtfulness, magnanimity, and boredom,—his re-animation of those
figures, to which he gave in addition the mediæval Christian thirst for
ecstatic sensuality and spiritualisation—all this Wagnerian give-and-take
with regard to materials, souls, figures, and words—would clearly express
the spirit of his music, if it could not, like all music, speak quite
unambiguously of itself. This spirit wages the last campaign of reaction
against the spirit of illumination which passed into this century from the
last, and also against the super-national ideas of French revolutionary
romanticism and of English and American insipidity in the reconstruction
of state and society.—But is it not evident that the spheres of thought
and emotion apparently suppressed by Wagner and his school have long since
acquired fresh strength, and that his late musical protest against them
generally rings into ears that prefer to hear different and opposite
notes; so that one day that high and wonderful art will suddenly become
unintelligible and will be covered by the spider’s web of oblivion?—In
considering this state of affairs we must not let ourselves be led astray
by those transitory fluctuations which arise like a reaction within a
reaction, as a temporary sinking of the mountainous wave in the midst of
the general upheaval. Thus, this decade of national war, ultramontane
martyrdom, and socialistic unrest may, in its remoter after-effect, even
aid the Wagnerian art to acquire a sudden halo, without guaranteeing that
it “has a future” or that it has _the_ future. It is in the very nature of
music that the fruits of its great culture-vintage should lose their taste
and wither earlier than the fruits of the plastic arts or those that grow
on the tree of knowledge. Among all the products of the human artistic
sense ideas are the most solid and lasting.




172.


THE POET NO LONGER A TEACHER.—Strange as it may sound to our time, there
were once poets and artists whose soul was above the passions with their
delights and convulsions, and who therefore took their pleasure in purer
materials, worthier men, more delicate complications and dénouements. If
the artists of our day for the most part unfetter the will, and so are
under certain circumstances for that very reason emancipators of life,
those were tamers of the will, enchanters of animals, creators of men. In
fact, they moulded, re-moulded, and new-moulded life, whereas the fame of
poets of our day lies in unharnessing, unchaining, and shattering.—The
ancient Greeks demanded of the poet that he should be the teacher of grown
men. How ashamed the poet would be now if this demand were made of him! He
is not even a good student of himself, and so never himself becomes a good
poem or a fine picture. Under the most favourable circumstances he remains
the shy, attractive ruin of a temple, but at the same time a cavern of
cravings, overgrown like a ruin with flowers, nettles, and poisonous
weeds, inhabited and haunted by snakes, worms, spiders, and birds; an
object for sad reflection as to why the noblest and most precious must
grow up at once like a ruin, without the past and future of perfection.




173.


LOOKING FORWARD AND BACKWARD.—An art like that which streams out of Homer,
Sophocles, Theocritus, Calderon, Racine, Goethe, as the superabundance of
a wise and harmonious conduct of life—that is the true art, at which we
grasp when we have ourselves become wiser and more harmonious. It is not
that barbaric, if ever so delightful, outpouring of hot and highly
coloured things from an undisciplined, chaotic soul, which is what we
understood by “art” in our youth. It is obvious from the nature of the
case that for certain periods of life an art of overstrain, excitement,
antipathy to the orderly, monotonous, simple, logical, is an inevitable
need, to which artists must respond, lest the soul of such periods should
unburden itself in other ways, through all kinds of disorder and
impropriety. Hence youths as they generally are, full, fermenting,
tortured above all things by boredom, and women who lack work that fully
occupies their soul, require that art of delightful disorder. All the more
violently on that account are they inflamed with a desire for satisfaction
without change, happiness without stupor and intoxication.




174.


AGAINST THE ART OF WORKS OF ART.—Art is above all and first of all meant
to embellish life, to make us ourselves endurable and if possible
agreeable in the eyes of others. With this task in view, art moderates us
and holds us in restraint, creates forms of intercourse, binds over the
uneducated to laws of decency, cleanliness, politeness, well-timed speech
and silence. Hence art must conceal or transfigure everything that is
ugly—the painful, terrible, and disgusting elements which in spite of
every effort will always break out afresh in accordance with the very
origin of human nature. Art has to perform this duty especially in regard
to the passions and spiritual agonies and anxieties, and to cause the
significant factor to shine through unavoidable or unconquerable ugliness.
To this great, super-great task the so-called art proper, that of works of
art, is a mere accessary. A man who feels within himself a surplus of such
powers of embellishment, concealment, and transfiguration will finally
seek to unburden himself of this surplus in works of art. The same holds
good, under special circumstances, of a whole nation.—But as a rule we
nowadays begin art at the end, hang on to its tail, and think that works
of art constitute art proper, and that life should be improved and
transformed by this means—fools that we are! If we begin a dinner with
dessert, and try sweet after sweet, small wonder that we ruin our
digestions and even our appetites for the good, hearty, nourishing meal to
which art invites us!




175.


CONTINUED EXISTENCE OF ART.—Why, really, does a creative art nowadays
continue to exist? Because the majority who have hours of leisure (and
such an art is for them only) think that they cannot fill up their time
without music, theatres and picture-galleries, novels and poetry. Granted
that one could keep them from this indulgence, either they would strive
less eagerly for leisure, and the invidious sight of the rich would be
less common (a great gain for the stability of society), or they would
have leisure, but would learn to reflect on what can be learnt and
unlearnt: on their work, for instance, their associations, the pleasure
they could bestow. All the world, with the exception of the artist, would
in both cases reap the advantage.—Certainly, there are many vigorous,
sensible readers who could take objection to this. Still, it must be said
on behalf of the coarse and malignant that the author himself is concerned
with this protest, and that there is in his book much to be read that is
not actually written down therein.




176.


THE MOUTHPIECE OF THE GODS.—The poet expresses the universal higher
opinions of the nation, he is its mouthpiece and flute; but by virtue of
metre and all other artistic means he so expresses them that the nation
regards them as something quite new and wonderful, and believes in all
seriousness that he is the mouthpiece of the Gods. Yes, under the clouds
of creation the poet himself forgets whence he derives all his
intellectual wisdom—from father and mother, from teachers and books of all
kinds, from the street and particularly from the priest. He is deceived by
his own art, and really believes, in a naïve period, that a God is
speaking through him, that he is creating in a state of religious
inspiration. As a matter of fact, he is only saying what he has learnt, a
medley of popular wisdom and popular foolishness. Hence, so far as a poet
is really _vox populi_ he is held to be _vox dei_.




177.


WHAT ALL ART WANTS TO DO AND CANNOT.—The last and hardest task of the
artist is the presentment of what remains the same, reposes in itself, is
lofty and simple and free from the bizarre. Hence the noblest forms of
moral perfection are rejected as inartistic by weaker artists, because the
sight of these fruits is too painful for their ambition. The fruit gleams
at them from the topmost branches of art, but they lack the ladder, the
courage, the grip to venture so high. In himself a Phidias is quite
possible as a poet, but, if modern strength be taken into consideration,
almost solely in the sense that to God nothing is impossible. The desire
for a poetical Claude Lorrain is already an immodesty at present, however
earnestly one man’s heart may yearn for such a consummation.—The
presentment of the highest man, the most simple and at the same time the
most complete, has hitherto been beyond the scope of all artists. Perhaps,
however, the Greeks, in the ideal of Athene, saw farther than any men did
before or after their time.




178.


ART AND RESTORATION.—The retrograde movements in history, the so-called
periods of restoration, which try to revive intellectual and social
conditions that existed before those immediately preceding,—and seem
really to succeed in giving them a brief resurrection,—have the charm of
sentimental recollection, ardent longing for what is almost lost, hasty
embracing of a transitory happiness. It is on account of this strange
trend towards seriousness that in such transient and almost dreamy periods
art and poetry find a natural soil, just as the tenderest and rarest
plants grow on mountain-slopes of steep declivity.—Thus many a good artist
is unwittingly impelled to a “restoration” way of thinking in politics and
society, for which, on his own account, he prepares a quiet little corner
and garden. Here he collects about himself the human remains of the
historical epoch that appeals to him, and plays his lyre to many who are
dead, half-dead, and weary to death, perhaps with the above-mentioned
result of a brief resurrection.




179.


HAPPINESS OF THE AGE.—In two respects our age is to be accounted happy.
With respect to the _past_, we enjoy all cultures and their productions,
and nurture ourselves on the noblest blood of all periods. We stand
sufficiently near to the magic of the forces from whose womb these periods
are born to be able in passing to submit to their spell with pleasure and
terror; whereas earlier cultures could only enjoy themselves, and never
looked beyond themselves, but were rather overarched by a bell of broader
or narrower dome, through which indeed light streamed down to them, but
which their gaze could not pierce. With respect to the _future_, there
opens out to us for the first time a mighty, comprehensive vista of human
and economic purposes engirdling the whole inhabited globe. At the same
time, we feel conscious of a power ourselves to take this new task in hand
without presumption, without requiring supernatural aids. Yes, whatever
the result of our enterprise, however much we may have overestimated our
strength, at any rate we need render account to no one but ourselves, and
mankind can henceforth begin to do with itself what it will.—There are, it
is true, peculiar human bees, who only know how to suck the bitterest and
worst elements from the chalice of every flower. It is true that all
flowers contain something that is not honey, but these bees may be allowed
to feel in their own way about the happiness of our time, and continue to
build up their hive of discomfort.




180.


A VISION.—Hours of instruction and meditation for adults, even the most
mature, and such institutions visited without compulsion but in accordance
with the moral injunction of the whole community; the churches as the
meeting-places most worthy and rich in memories for the purpose; at the
same time daily festivals in honour of the reason that is attained and
attainable by man; a newer and fuller budding and blooming of the ideal of
the teacher, in which the clergyman, the artist and the physician, the man
of science and the sage are blended, and their individual virtues should
come to the fore as a collective virtue in their teaching itself, in their
discourses, in their method—this is my ever-recurring vision, of which I
firmly believe that it has raised a corner of the veil of the future.




181.


EDUCATION A DISTORTION.—The extraordinary haphazardness of the whole
system of education, which leads every adult to say nowadays that his sole
educator was chance, and the weathercock-nature of educational methods and
aims, may be explained as follows. The oldest and the newest
culture-powers, as in a turbulent mass-meeting, would rather be heard than
understood, and wish to prove at all costs by their outcries and
clamourings that they still exist or already exist. The poor teachers and
educators are first dazed by this senseless noise, then become silent and
finally apathetic, allowing anything to be done to them just as they in
their turn allow anything to be done to their pupils. They are not trained
themselves, so how are they to train others? They are themselves no
straight-growing, vigorous, succulent trees, and he who wishes to attach
himself to them must wind and bend himself and finally become distorted
and deformed as they.




182.


PHILOSOPHERS AND ARTISTS OF THE AGE.—Rhapsody and frigidity, burning
desires and waning of the heart’s glow—this wretched medley is to be found
in the picture of the highest European society of the present day. There
the artist thinks that he is achieving a great deal when through his art
he lights the torch of the heart as well as the torch of desire. The
philosopher has the same notion, when in the chilliness of his heart,
which he has in common with his age, he cools hot desires in himself and
his following by his world-denying judgments.




183.


NOT TO BE A SOLDIER OF CULTURE WITHOUT NECESSITY.—At last people are
learning what it costs us so dear not to know in our youth—that we must
first do superior actions and secondly seek the superior wherever and
under whatever names it is to be found; that we must at once go out of the
way of all badness and mediocrity _without fighting it_; and that even
doubt as to the excellence of a thing (such as quickly arises in one of
practised taste) should rank as an argument against it and a reason for
completely avoiding it. We must not shrink from the danger of occasionally
making a mistake and confounding the less accessible good with the bad and
imperfect. Only he who can do nothing better should attack the world’s
evils as the soldier of culture. But those who should support culture and
spread its teachings ruin themselves if they go about armed, and by
precautions, night-watches, and bad dreams turn the peace of their
domestic and artistic life into sinister unrest.




184.


HOW NATURAL HISTORY SHOULD BE EXPOUNDED.—Natural history, like the history
of the war and victory of moral and intellectual forces in the campaign
against anxiety, self-delusion, laziness, superstition, folly, should be
so expounded that every reader or listener may be continually aroused to
strive after mental and physical health and soundness, after the feeling
of joy, and be awakened to the desire to be the heir and continuator of
mankind, to an ever nobler adventurous impulse. Hitherto natural history
has not found its true language, because the inventive and eloquent
artists—who are needed for this purpose—never rid themselves of a secret
mistrust of it, and above all never wish to learn from it a thorough
lesson. Nevertheless it must be conceded to the English that their
scientific manuals for the lower strata of the people have made admirable
strides towards that ideal. But then such books are written by their
foremost men of learning, full, complete, and inspiring natures, and not,
as among us, by mediocre investigators.




185.


GENIUS IN HUMANITY.—If genius, according to Schopenhauer’s observation,
lies in the coherent and vivid recollection of our own experience, a
striving towards genius in humanity collectively might be deduced from the
striving towards knowledge of the whole historic past—which is beginning
to mark off the modern age more and more as compared with earlier ages and
has for the first time broken down the barriers between nature and spirit,
men and animals, morality and physics. A perfectly conceived history would
be cosmic self-consciousness.




186.


THE CULT OF CULTURE.—On great minds is bestowed the terrifying
all-too-human of their natures, their blindnesses, deformities, and
extravagances, so that their more powerful, easily all-too-powerful
influence may be continually held within bounds through the distrust
aroused by such qualities. For the sum-total of all that humanity needs
for its continued existence is so comprehensive, and demands powers so
diverse and so numerous, that for every one-sided predilection, whether in
science or politics or art or commerce, to which such natures would
persuade us, mankind as a whole has to pay a heavy price. It has always
been a great disaster to culture when human beings are worshipped. In this
sense we may understand the precept of Mosaic law which forbids us to have
any other gods but God.—Side by side with the cult of genius and violence
we must always place, as its complement and remedy, the cult of culture.
This cult can find an intelligent appreciation even for the material, the
inferior, the mean, the misunderstood, the weak, the imperfect, the
one-sided, the incomplete, the untrue, the apparent, even the wicked and
horrible, and can grant them the concession that _all this is necessary_.
For the continued harmony of all things human, attained by amazing toil
and strokes of luck, and just as much the work of Cyclopes and ants as of
geniuses, shall never be lost. How, indeed, could we dispense with that
deep, universal, and often uncanny bass, without which, after all, melody
cannot be melody?




187.


THE ANTIQUE WORLD AND PLEASURE.—The man of the antique world understood
better how to rejoice, we understand better how to grieve less. They
continually found new motives for feeling happy, for celebrating
festivals, being inventive with all their wealth of shrewdness and
reflection. We, on the other hand, concentrate our intellect rather on the
solving of problems which have in view painlessness and the removal of
sources of discomfort. With regard to suffering existence, the ancients
sought to forget or in some way to convert the sensation into a pleasant
one, thus trying to supply palliatives. We attack the causes of suffering,
and on the whole prefer to use prophylactics.—Perhaps we are only building
upon a foundation whereon a later age will once more set up the temple of
joy.




188.


THE MUSES AS LIARS.—“We know how to tell many lies,” so sang the Muses
once, when they revealed themselves to Hesiod.—The conception of the
artist as deceiver, once grasped, leads to important discoveries.




189.


HOW PARADOXICAL HOMER CAN BE.—Is there anything more desperate, more
horrible, more incredible, shining over human destiny like a winter sun,
than that idea of Homer’s:

“So the decree of the Gods willed it, and doomed man to perish, that it
might be a matter for song even to distant generations”?

In other words, we suffer and perish so that poets may not lack material,
and this is the dispensation of those very Gods of Homer who seem much
concerned about the joyousness of generations to come, but very little
about us men of the present. To think that such ideas should ever have
entered the head of a Greek!




190.


SUPPLEMENTARY JUSTIFICATION OF EXISTENCE.—Many ideas have come into the
world as errors and fancies but have turned out truths, because men have
afterwards given them a genuine basis to rest upon.




191.


PRO AND CON NECESSARY.—He who has not realised that every great man must
not only be encouraged but also, for the sake of the common welfare,
opposed, is certainly still a great child—or himself a great man.




192.


INJUSTICE OF GENIUS.—Genius is most unjust towards geniuses, if they be
contemporary. Either it thinks it has no need of them and considers them
superfluous (for it can do without them), or their influence crosses the
path of its electric current, in which case it even calls them pernicious.




193.


THE SADDEST DESTINY OF A PROPHET.—He has worked twenty years to convince
his contemporaries, and succeeds at last, but in the meantime his
adversaries have also succeeded—he is no longer convinced of himself.




194.


THREE THINKERS LIKE ONE SPIDER.—In every philosophical school three
thinkers follow one another in this relation: the first produces from
himself sap and seed, the second draws it out in threads and spins a
cunning web, the third waits in this web for the victims who are caught in
it—and tries to live upon this philosophy.




195.


FROM ASSOCIATION WITH AUTHORS.—It is as bad a habit to go about with an
author grasping him by the nose as grasping him by the horn (and every
author has his horn).




196.


A TEAM OF TWO.—Vagueness of thought and outbursts of sentimentality are as
often wedded to the reckless desire to have one’s own way by hook or by
crook, to make oneself alone of any consequence, as a genuinely helpful,
gracious, and kindly spirit is wedded to the impulse towards clearness and
purity of thought and towards emotional moderation and self-restraint.




197.


BINDING AND SEPARATING FORCES.—Surely it is in the heads of men that there
arises the force that binds them—an understanding of their common interest
or the reverse; and in their hearts the force that separates them—a blind
choosing and groping in love and hate, a devotion to one at the expense of
all, and a consequent contempt for the common utility.




198.


MARKSMEN AND THINKERS.—There are curious marksmen who miss their mark, but
leave the shooting-gallery with secret pride in the fact that their bullet
at any rate flew very far (beyond the mark, it is true), or that it did
not hit the mark but hit something else. There are thinkers of the same
stamp.




199.


ATTACK FROM TWO SIDES.—We act as enemies towards an intellectual tendency
or movement when we are superior to it and disapprove of its aim, or when
its aim is too high and unrecognisable to our eye—in other words, when it
is superior to us. So the same party may be attacked from two sides, from
above and from below. Not infrequently the assailants, from common hatred,
form an alliance which is more repulsive than all that they hate.




200.


ORIGINAL.—Original minds are distinguished not by being the first to see a
new thing, but by seeing the old, well-known thing, which is seen and
overlooked by every one, as something new. The first discoverer is usually
that quite ordinary and unintellectual visionary—chance.




201.


ERROR OF PHILOSOPHERS.—The philosopher believes that the value of his
philosophy lies in the whole, in the structure. Posterity finds it in the
stone with which he built and with which, from that time forth, men will
build oftener and better—in other words, in the fact that the structure
may be destroyed and yet have value as material.




202.


WIT.—Wit is the epitaph of an emotion.




203.


THE MOMENT BEFORE SOLUTION.—In science it occurs every day and every hour
that a man, immediately before the solution, remains stuck, being
convinced that his efforts have been entirely in vain—like one who, in
untying a noose, hesitates at the moment when it is nearest to coming
loose, because at that very moment it looks most like a knot.




204.


AMONG THE VISIONARIES.—The thoughtful man, and he who is sure of his
intelligence, may profitably consort with visionaries for a decade and
abandon himself in their torrid zone to a moderate insanity. He will thus
have travelled a good part of the road towards that cosmopolitanism of the
intellect which can say without presumption, “Nothing intellectual is
alien to me.”




205.


KEEN AIR.—The best and healthiest element in science as amid the mountains
is the keen air that plays about it.—Intellectual molly-coddles (such as
artists) dread and abuse science on account of this atmosphere.




206.


WHY SAVANTS ARE NOBLER THAN ARTISTS.—Science requires nobler natures than
does poetry; natures that are more simple, less ambitious, more
restrained, calmer, that think less of posthumous fame and can bury
themselves in studies which, in the eye of the many, scarcely seem worthy
of such a sacrifice of personality. There is another loss of which they
are conscious. The nature of their occupation, its continual exaction of
the greatest sobriety, weakens their will; the fire is not kept up so
vigorously as on the hearths of poetic minds. As such, they often lose
their strength and prime earlier than artists do—and, as has been said,
they are aware of their danger. Under all circumstances they seem less
gifted because they shine less, and thus they will always be rated below
their value.




207.


HOW FAR PIETY OBSCURES.—In later centuries the great man is credited with
all the great qualities and virtues of his century. Thus all that is best
is continually obscured by piety, which treats the picture as a sacred
one, to be surrounded with all manner of votive offerings. In the end the
picture is completely veiled and covered by the offerings, and thenceforth
is more an object of faith than of contemplation.




208.


STANDING ON ONE’S HEAD.—If we make truth stand on its head, we generally
fail to notice that our own head, too, is not in its right position.




209.


ORIGIN AND UTILITY OF FASHION.—The obvious satisfaction of the individual
with his own form excites imitation and gradually creates the form of the
many—that is, fashion. The many desire, and indeed attain, that same
comforting satisfaction with their own form. Consider how many reasons
every man has for anxiety and shy self-concealment, and how, on this
account, three-fourths of his energy and goodwill is crippled and may
become unproductive! So we must be very grateful to fashion for
unfettering that three-fourths and communicating self-confidence and the
power of cheerful compromise to those who feel themselves bound to each
other by its law. Even foolish laws give freedom and calm of the spirit,
so long as many persons have submitted to their sway.




210.


LOOSENERS OF TONGUES.—The value of many men and books rests solely on
their faculty for compelling all to speak out the most hidden and intimate
things. They are looseners of tongues and crowbars to open the most
stubborn teeth. Many events and misdeeds which are apparently only sent as
a curse to mankind possess this value and utility.




211.


INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM OF DOMICILE.(12)—Who of us could dare to call himself
a “free spirit” if he could not render homage after his fashion, by taking
on his own shoulders a portion of that burden of public dislike and abuse,
to men to whom this name is attached as a reproach? We might as well call
ourselves in all seriousness “spirits free of domicile” (_Freizügig_) (and
without that arrogant or high-spirited defiance) because we feel the
impulse to freedom (_Zug zur Freiheit_) as the strongest instinct of our
minds and, in contrast to fixed and limited minds, practically see our
ideal in an intellectual nomadism—to use a modest and almost depreciatory
expression.




212.


YES, THE FAVOUR OF THE MUSES!—What Homer says on this point goes right to
our heart, so true, so terrible is it:

“The Muse loved him with all her heart and gave him good and evil, for she
took away his eyes and vouchsafed him sweet song.”

This is an endless text for thinking men: she gives good and evil, that is
_her_ manner of loving with all her heart and soul! And each man will
interpret specially for himself why we poets and thinkers have to give up
our eyes in her service.(13)




213.


AGAINST THE CULTIVATION OF MUSIC.—The artistic training of the eye from
childhood upwards by means of drawing, painting, landscape-sketching,
figures, scenes, involves an estimable gain in life, making the eyesight
keen, calm, and enduring in the observation of men and circumstances. No
similar secondary advantage arises from the artistic cultivation of the
ear, whence public schools will generally do well to give the art of the
eye a preference over that of the ear.




214.


THE DISCOVERERS OF TRIVIALITIES.—Subtle minds, from which nothing is
farther than trivialities, often discover a triviality after taking all
manner of circuitous routes and mountain paths, and, to the astonishment
of the non-subtle, rejoice exceedingly.




215.


MORALS OF SAVANTS.—A regular and rapid advance in the sciences is only
possible when the individual is compelled to be not so distrustful as to
test every calculation and assertion of others, in fields which are remote
from his own. A necessary condition, however, is that every man should
have competitors in his own sphere, who are extremely distrustful and keep
a sharp eye upon him. From this juxtaposition of “not too distrustful” and
“extremely distrustful” arises sincerity in the republic of learning.




216.


REASONS FOR STERILITY.—There are highly gifted minds which are always
sterile only because, from temperamental weakness, they are too impatient
to wait for their pregnancy.




217.


THE PERVERTED WORLD OF TEARS.—The manifold discomforts which the demands
of higher culture cause to man finally pervert his nature to such an
extent that he usually keeps himself stoical and unbending. Thus he has
tears in reserve only for rare occasions of happiness, so that many must
weep even at the enjoyment of painlessness—only when happy does his heart
still beat.




218.


THE GREEKS AS INTERPRETERS.—When we speak of the Greeks we unwittingly
speak of to-day and yesterday; their universally known history is a blank
mirror, always reflecting something that is not in the mirror itself. We
enjoy the freedom of speaking about them in order to have the right of
being silent about others—so that these Greeks themselves may whisper
something in the ear of the reflective reader. Thus the Greeks facilitate
to modern men the communication of much that is debatable and hard to
communicate.




219.


OF THE ACQUIRED CHARACTER OF THE GREEKS.—We are easily led astray by the
renowned Greek clearness, transparency, simplicity, and order, by their
crystal-like naturalness and crystal-like art, into believing that all
these gifts were bestowed on the Greeks—for instance, that they could not
but write well, as Lichtenberg expressed it on one occasion. Yet no
statement could be more hasty and more untenable. The history of prose
from Gorgias to Demosthenes shows a course of toiling and wrestling
towards light from the obscure, overloaded, and tasteless, reminding one
of the labour of heroes who had to construct the first roads through
forest and bog. The dialogue of tragedy was the real achievement of the
dramatist, owing to its uncommon clearness and precision, whereas the
national tendency was to riot in symbolism and innuendo, a tendency
expressly fostered by the great choral lyric. Similarly it was the
achievement of Homer to liberate the Greeks from Asiatic pomp and gloom,
and to have attained the clearness of architecture in details great and
small. Nor was it by any means thought easy to say anything in a pure and
illuminating style. How else should we account for the great admiration
for the epigram of Simonides, which shows itself so simple, with no gilded
points or arabesques of wit, but says all that it has to say plainly and
with the calm of the sun, not with the straining after effect of the
lightning. Since the struggle towards light from an almost native twilight
is Greek, a thrill of jubilation runs through the people when they hear a
laconic sentence, the language of elegy or the maxims of the Seven Wise
Men. Hence they were so fond of giving precepts in verse, a practice that
we find objectionable. This was the true Apolline task of the Hellenic
spirit, with the aim of rising superior to the perils of metre and the
obscurity which is otherwise characteristic of poetry. Simplicity,
flexibility, and sobriety were wrestled for and not given by nature to
this people. The danger of a relapse into Asianism constantly hovered over
the Greeks, and really overtook them from time to time like a murky,
overflowing tide of mystical impulses, primitive savagery and darkness. We
see them plunge in; we see Europe, as it were, flooded, washed away—for
Europe was very small then; but they always emerge once more to the light,
good swimmers and divers that they are, those fellow-countrymen of
Odysseus.




220.


THE PAGAN CHARACTERISTIC.—Perhaps there is nothing more astonishing to the
observer of the Greek world than to discover that the Greeks from time to
time held festivals, as it were, for all their passions and evil
tendencies alike, and in fact even established a kind of series of
festivals, by order of the State, for their “all-too-human.” This is the
pagan characteristic of their world, which Christianity has never
understood and never can understand, and has always combated and
despised.—They accepted this all-too-human as unavoidable, and preferred,
instead of railing at it, to give it a kind of secondary right by grafting
it on to the usages of society and religion. All in man that has power
they called divine, and wrote it on the walls of their heaven. They do not
deny this natural instinct that expresses itself in evil characteristics,
but regulate and limit it to definite cults and days, so as to turn those
turbulent streams into as harmless a course as possible, after devising
sufficient precautionary measures. That is the root of all the moral
broad-mindedness of antiquity. To the wicked, the dubious, the backward,
the animal element, as to the barbaric, pre-Hellenic and Asiatic, which
still lived in the depths of Greek nature, they allowed a moderate
outflow, and did not strive to destroy it utterly. The whole system was
under the domain of the State, which was built up not on individuals or
castes, but on common human qualities. In the structure of the State the
Greeks show that wonderful sense for typical facts which later on enabled
them to become investigators of Nature, historians, geographers, and
philosophers. It was not a limited moral law of priests or castes, which
had to decide about the constitution of the State and State worship, but
the most comprehensive view of the reality of all that is human. Whence do
the Greeks derive this freedom, this sense of reality? Perhaps from Homer
and the poets who preceded him. For just those poets whose nature is
generally not the most wise or just possess, in compensation, that delight
in reality and activity of every kind, and prefer not to deny even evil.
It suffices for them if evil moderates itself, does not kill or inwardly
poison everything—in other words, they have similar ideas to those of the
founders of Greek constitutions, and were their teachers and forerunners.




221.


EXCEPTIONAL GREEKS.—In Greece, deep, thorough, serious minds were the
exception. The national instinct tended rather to regard the serious and
thorough as a kind of grimace. To borrow forms from a foreign source, not
to create but to transform into the fairest shapes—that is Greek. To
imitate, not for utility but for artistic illusion, ever and anon to gain
the mastery over forced seriousness, to arrange, beautify, simplify—that
is the continual task from Homer to the Sophists of the third and fourth
centuries of our era, who are all outward show, pompous speech,
declamatory gestures, and address themselves to shallow souls that care
only for appearance, sound, and effect. And now let us estimate the
greatness of those exceptional Greeks, who created science! Whoever tells
of them, tells the most heroic story of the human mind!




222.


SIMPLICITY NOT THE FIRST NOR THE LAST THING IN POINT OF TIME.—In the
history of religious ideas many errors about development and false
gradations are made in matters which in reality are not consecutive
outgrowths but contemporary yet separate phenomena. In particular,
simplicity has still far too much the reputation of being the oldest, the
initial thing. Much that is human arises by subtraction and division, and
not merely by doubling, addition, and unification.—For instance, men still
believe in a gradual development of the idea of God from those unwieldy
stones and blocks of wood up to the highest forms of anthropomorphism. Yet
the fact is that so long as divinity was attributed to and felt in trees,
logs of wood, stones, and beasts, people shrank from humanising their
forms as from an act of godlessness. First of all, poets, apart from all
considerations of cult and the ban of religious shame, have had to make
the inner imagination of man accustomed and compliant to this notion.
Wherever more pious periods and phases of thought gained the upper hand,
this liberating influence of poets fell into the background, and sanctity
remained, after as before, on the side of the monstrous, uncanny, quite
peculiarly inhuman. And then, much of what the inner imagination ventures
to picture to itself would exert a painful influence if externally and
corporeally represented. The inner eye is far bolder and more shameless
than the outer (whence the well-known difficulty and, to some extent,
impossibility, of working epic material into dramatic form). The religious
imagination for a long time entirely refuses to believe in the identity of
God with an image: the image is meant to fix the _numen_ of the Deity,
actually and specifically, although in a mysterious and not altogether
intelligible way. The oldest image of the Gods is meant to shelter and at
the same time to hide(14) the God—to indicate him but not to expose him to
view. No Greek really looked upon his Apollo as a pointed pillar of wood,
his Eros as a lump of stone. These were symbols, which were intended to
inspire dread of the manifestation of the God. It was the same with those
blocks of wood out of which individual limbs, generally in excessive
number, were fashioned with the scantiest of carving—as, for instance, a
Laconian Apollo with four hands and four ears. In the incomplete,
symbolical, or excessive lies a terrible sanctity, which is meant to
prevent us from thinking of anything human or similar to humanity. It is
not an embryonic stage of art in which such things are made—as if they
were not _able_ to speak more plainly and portray more sensibly in the age
when such images were honoured! Rather, men are afraid of just one
thing—direct speaking out. Just as the cella hides and conceals in a
mysterious twilight, yet not completely, the holy of holies, the real
_numen_ of the Deity; just as, again, the peripteric temple hides the
cella, protecting it from indiscreet eyes as with a screen and a veil, yet
not completely—so it is with the image of the Deity, and at the same time
the concealment of the Deity.—Only when outside the cult, in the profane
world of athletic contest, the joy in the victor had risen so high that
the ripples thus started reacted upon the lake of religious emotion, was
the statue of the victor set up before the temple. Then the pious pilgrim
had to accustom his eye and his soul, whether he would or no, to the
inevitable sight of human beauty and super-strength, so that the worship
of men and Gods melted into each other from physical and spiritual
contact. Then too for the first time the fear of really humanising the
figures of the Gods is lost, and the mighty arena for great plastic art is
opened—even now with the limitation that wherever there is to be adoration
the primitive form and ugliness are carefully preserved and copied. But
the Hellene, as he dedicates and makes offerings, may now with religious
sanction indulge in his delight in making God become a man.




223.


WHITHER WE MUST TRAVEL.—Immediate self-observation is not enough, by a
long way, to enable us to learn to know ourselves. We need history, for
the past continues to flow through us in a hundred channels. We ourselves
are, after all, nothing but our own sensation at every moment of this
continued flow. Even here, when we wish to step down into the stream of
our apparently most peculiar and personal development, Heraclitus’
aphorism, “You cannot step twice into the same river,” holds good.—This is
a piece of wisdom which has, indeed, gradually become trite, but
nevertheless has remained as strong and true as it ever was. It is the
same with the saying that, in order to understand history, we must
scrutinise the living remains of historical periods; that we must travel,
as old Herodotus travelled, to other nations, especially to those
so-called savage or half-savage races in regions where man has doffed or
not yet donned European garb. For they are ancient and firmly established
steps of culture on which we can stand. There is, however, a more subtle
art and aim in travelling, which does not always necessitate our passing
from place to place and going thousands of miles away. Very probably the
last three centuries, in all their colourings and refractions of culture,
survive even in our vicinity, only they have to be discovered. In some
families, or even in individuals, the strata are still superimposed on
each other, beautifully and perceptibly; in other places there are
dispersions and displacements of the structure which are harder to
understand. Certainly in remote districts, in less known mountain valleys,
circumscribed communities have been able more easily to maintain an
admirable pattern of a far older sentiment, a pattern that must here be
investigated. On the other hand, it is improbable that such discoveries
will be made in Berlin, where man comes into the world washed-out and
sapless. He who after long practice of this art of travel has become a
hundred-eyed Argus will accompany his Io—I mean his ego—everywhere, and in
Egypt and Greece, Byzantium and Rome, France and Germany, in the age of
wandering or settled races, in Renaissance or Reformation, at home and
abroad, in sea, forest, plant, and mountain, will again light upon the
travel-adventure of this ever-growing, ever-altered ego.—Thus
self-knowledge becomes universal knowledge as regards the entire past,
and, by another chain of observation, which can only be indicated here,
self-direction and self-training in the freest and most far-seeing spirits
might become universal direction as regards all future humanity.




224.


BALM AND POISON.—We cannot ponder too deeply on this fact: Christianity is
the religion of antiquity grown old; it presupposes degenerate old
culture-stocks, and on them it had, and still has, power to work like
balm. There are periods when ears and eyes are full of slime, so that they
can no longer hear the voice of reason and philosophy or see the wisdom
that walks in bodily shape, whether it bears the name of Epictetus or of
Epicurus. Then, perhaps, the erection of the martyr’s cross and the
“trumpet of the last judgment” may have the effect of still inspiring such
races to end their lives decently. If we think of Juvenal’s Rome, of that
poisonous toad with the eyes of Venus, we understand what it means to make
the sign of the Cross before the world, we honour the silent Christian
community and are grateful for its having stifled the Greco-Roman Empire.
If, indeed, most men were then born in spiritual slavery, with the
sensuality of old men, what a pleasure to meet beings who were more soul
than body, and who seemed to realise the Greek idea of the shades of the
under-world—shy, scurrying, chirping, kindly creatures, with a reversion
on the “better life,” and therefore so unassuming, so secretly scornful,
so proudly patient!—This Christianity, as the evening chime of the _good_
antiquity, with cracked, weary and yet melodious bell, is balm in the ears
even to one who only now traverses those centuries historically. What must
it have been to those men themselves!—To young and fresh barbarian
nations, on the other hand, Christianity is a poison. For to implant the
teaching of sinfulness and damnation in the heroic, childlike, and animal
soul of the old Germans is nothing but poisoning. An enormous chemical
fermentation and decomposition, a medley of sentiments and judgments, a
rank growth of adventurous legend, and hence in the long run a fundamental
weakening of such barbarian peoples, was the inevitable result. True,
without this weakening what should we have left of Greek culture, of the
whole cultured past of the human race? For the barbarians untouched by
Christianity knew very well how to make a clean sweep of old cultures, as
was only too clearly shown by the heathen conquerors of Romanised Britain.
Thus Christianity, against its will, was compelled to aid in making “the
antique world” immortal.—There remains, however, a counter-question and
the possibility of a counter-reckoning. Without this weakening through the
poisoning referred to, would any of those fresh stocks—the Germans, for
instance—have been in a position gradually to find by themselves a higher,
a peculiar, a new culture, of which the most distant conception would
therefore have been lost to humanity?—In this, as in every case, we do not
know, Christianly speaking, whether God owes the devil or the devil God
more thanks for everything having turned out as it has.




225.


FAITH MAKES HOLY AND CONDEMNS.—A Christian who happened upon forbidden
paths of thought might well ask himself on some occasion whether it is
really necessary that there should be a God, side by side with a
representative Lamb, if faith in the existence of these beings suffices to
produce the same influences? If they do exist after all, are they not
superfluous beings? For all that is given by the Christian religion to the
human soul, all that is beneficent, consoling, and edifying, just as much
as all that depresses and crushes, emanates from that faith and not from
the objects of that faith. It is here as in another well-known case—there
were indeed no witches, but the terrible effects of the belief in witches
were the same as if they really had existed. For all occasions where the
Christian awaits the immediate intervention of a God, though in vain (for
there is no God), his religion is inventive enough to find subterfuges and
reasons for tranquillity. In so far Christianity is an ingenious
religion.—Faith, indeed, has up to the present not been able to move real
mountains, although I do not know who assumed that it could. But it can
put mountains where there are none.




226.


THE TRAGI-COMEDY OF REGENSBURG.—Here and there we see with terrible
clearness the harlequinade of Fortune, how she fastens the rope, on which
she wills that succeeding centuries should dance, on to a few days, one
place, the condition and opinions of one brain. Thus the fate of modern
German history lies in the days of that disputation at Regensburg: the
peaceful settlement of ecclesiastical and moral affairs, without religious
wars or a counter-reformation, and also the unity of the German nation,
seemed assured: the deep, gentle spirit of Contarini hovered for one
moment over the theological squabble, victorious, as representative of the
riper Italian piety, reflecting the morning glory of intellectual freedom.
But Luther’s hard head, full of suspicions and strange misgivings, showed
resistance. Because justification by grace appeared to him _his_ greatest
motto and discovery, he did not believe the phrase in the mouth of
Italians; whereas, in point of fact, as is well known, they had invented
it much earlier and spread it throughout Italy in deep silence. In this
apparent agreement Luther saw the tricks of the devil, and hindered the
work of peace as well as he could, thereby advancing to a great extent the
aims of the Empire’s foes.—And now, in order to have a still stronger idea
of the dreadful farcicality of it all, let us add that none of the
principles about which men then disputed in Regensburg—neither that of
original sin, nor that of redemption by proxy, nor that of justification
by faith—is in any way true or even has any connection with truth: that
they are now all recognised as incapable of being discussed. Yet on this
account the world was set on fire—that is to say, by opinions which
correspond to no things or realities; whereas as regards purely
philological questions—as, for instance, that of the sacramental words in
the Eucharist—discussion at any rate is permitted, because in this case
the truth can be said. But “where nothing is, even truth has lost her
right.”(15)—Lastly, it only remains to be said that it is true these
principles give rise to sources of power so mighty that without them all
the mills of the modern world could not be driven with such force. And it
is primarily a matter of force, only secondarily of truth (and perhaps not
even secondarily)—is it not so, my dear up-to-date friends?




227.


GOETHE’S ERRORS.—Goethe is a signal exception among great artists in that
he did not live within the limited confines of his real capacity, as if
that must be the essential, the distinctive, the unconditional, and the
last thing in him and for all the world. Twice he intended to possess
something higher than he really possessed—and went astray in the second
half of his life, where he seems quite convinced that he is one of the
great scientific discoverers and illuminators. So too in the first half of
his life he demanded of himself something higher than the poetic art
seemed to him—and here already he made a mistake. That nature wished to
make him a plastic artist,—_this_ was his inwardly glowing and scorching
secret, which finally drove him to Italy, that he might give vent to his
mania in this direction and make to it every possible sacrifice. At last,
shrewd as he was, and honestly averse to any mental perversion in himself,
he discovered that a tricksy elf of desire had attracted him to the belief
in this calling, and that he must free himself of the greatest passion of
his heart and bid it farewell. The painful conviction, tearing and gnawing
at his vitals, that it was necessary to bid farewell, finds full
expression in the character of Tasso. Over Tasso, that Werther
intensified, hovers the premonition of something worse than death, as when
one says: “Now it is over, after this farewell: how shall I go on living
without going mad?” These two fundamental errors of his life gave Goethe,
in face of a purely literary attitude towards poetry (the only attitude
then known to the world), such an unembarrassed and apparently almost
arbitrary position. Not to speak of the period when Schiller (poor
Schiller, who had no time himself and left no time to others) drove away
his shy dread of poetry, his fear of all literary life and craftsmanship,
Goethe appears like a Greek who now and then visits his beloved, doubting
whether she be not a Goddess to whom he can give no proper name. In all
his poetry one notices the inspiring neighbourhood of plastic art and
Nature. The features of these figures that floated before him—and perhaps
he always thought he was on the track of the metamorphoses of one
Goddess—became, without his will or knowledge, the features of all the
children of his art. Without the extravagances of error he would not have
been Goethe—that is, the only German artist in writing who has not yet
become out of date—just because he desired as little to be a writer as a
German by vocation.




228.


TRAVELLERS AND THEIR GRADES.—Among travellers we may distinguish five
grades. The first and lowest grade is of those who travel and are
seen—they become really travelled and are, as it were, blind. Next come
those who really see the world. The third class experience the results of
their seeing. The fourth weave their experience into their life and carry
it with them henceforth. Lastly, there are some men of the highest
strength who, as soon as they have returned home, must finally and
necessarily work out in their lives and productions all the things seen
that they have experienced and incorporated in themselves.—Like these five
species of travellers, all mankind goes through the whole pilgrimage of
life, the lowest as purely passive, the highest as those who act and live
out their lives without keeping back any residue of inner experiences.




229.


IN CLIMBING HIGHER.—So soon as we climb higher than those who hitherto
admired us, we appear to them as sunken and fallen. For they imagined that
under all circumstances they were on the heights in our company (maybe
also through our agency).




230.


MEASURE AND MODERATION.—Of two quite lofty things, measure and moderation,
it is best never to speak. A few know their force and significance, from
the mysterious paths of inner experiences and conversions: they honour in
them something quite godlike, and are afraid to speak aloud. All the rest
hardly listen when they are spoken about, and think the subjects under
discussion are tedium and mediocrity. We must perhaps except those who
have once heard a warning note from that realm but have stopped their ears
against the sound. The recollection of it makes them angry and
exasperated.




231.


HUMANITY OF FRIENDSHIP AND COMRADESHIP.—“If thou wilt take the left hand,
then I will go to the right,”(16) that feeling is the hall-mark of
humanity in intimate intercourse, and without that feeling every
friendship, every band of apostles or disciples, sooner or later becomes a
fraud.




232.


THE PROFOUND.—Men of profound thought appear to themselves in intercourse
with others like comedians, for in order to be understood they must always
simulate superficiality.




233.


FOR THE SCORNERS OF “HERD-HUMANITY.”—He who regards human beings as a
herd, and flies from them as fast as he can, will certainly be caught up
by them and gored upon their horns.




234.


THE MAIN TRANSGRESSION AGAINST THE VAIN.—In society, he who gives another
an opportunity of favourably setting forth his knowledge, sentiments, and
experience sets himself above him. Unless he is felt by the other to be a
superior being without limitation, he is guilty of an attack upon his
vanity, while what he aimed at was the gratification of the other man’s
vanity.




235.


DISAPPOINTMENT.—When a long life of action distinguished by speeches and
writings gives publicity to a man’s personality, personal intercourse with
him is generally disappointing on two grounds. Firstly, one expects too
much from a brief period of intercourse (namely, all that the thousand and
one opportunities of life can alone bring out). Secondly, no recognised
person gives himself the trouble to woo recognition in individual cases.
He is too careless, and we are at too high a tension.




236.


TWO SOURCES OF KINDNESS.—To treat all men with equal good-humour, and to
be kind without distinction of persons, may arise as much from a profound
contempt for mankind as from an ingrained love of humanity.




237.


THE WANDERER IN THE MOUNTAINS TO HIMSELF.—There are certain signs that you
have gone farther and higher. There is a freer, wider prospect before you,
the air blows cooler yet milder in your face (you have unlearned the folly
of confounding mildness with warmth), your gait is more firm and vigorous,
courage and discretion have waxed together. On all these grounds your
journey may now be more lonely and in any case more perilous than
heretofore, if indeed not to the extent believed by those who from the
misty valley see you, the roamer, striding on the mountains.




238.


WITH THE EXCEPTION OF OUR NEIGHBOUR.—I admit that my head is set wrong on
my neck only, for every other man, as is well known, knows better than I
what I should do or leave alone. The only one who cannot help me is
myself, poor beggar! Are we not all like statues on which false heads have
been placed? Eh, dear neighbour?—Ah no; you, just you, are the exception!




239.


CAUTION.—We must either not go about at all with people who are lacking in
the reverence for personalities, or inexorably fetter them beforehand with
the manacles of convention.




240.


THE WISH TO APPEAR VAIN.—In conversation with strangers or little-known
acquaintances, to express only selected thoughts, to speak of one’s famous
acquaintances, and important experiences and travels, is a sign that one
is not proud, or at least would not like to appear proud. Vanity is the
polite mask of pride.




241.


GOOD FRIENDSHIP.—A good friendship arises when the one man deeply respects
the other, more even than himself; loves him also, though not so much as
himself; and finally, to facilitate intercourse, knows how to add the
delicate bloom and veneer of intimacy, but at the same time wisely
refrains from a true, real intimacy, from the confounding of _meum_ and
_tuum_.




242.


FRIENDS AS GHOSTS.—If we change ourselves vitally, our friends, who have
not changed, become ghosts of our own past: their voice sounds shadowy and
dreadful to us, as if we heard our own voice speaking, but younger,
harder, less mellow.




243.


ONE EYE AND TWO GLANCES.—The same people whose eyes naturally plead for
favours and indulgences are accustomed, from their frequent humiliations
and cravings for revenge, to assume a shameless glance as well.




244.


THE HAZE OF DISTANCE.—A child throughout life—that sounds very touching,
but is only the verdict from the distance. Seen and known close at hand,
he is always called “puerile throughout life.”




245.


ADVANTAGE AND DISADVANTAGE IN THE SAME MISUNDERSTANDING.—The mute
perplexity of the subtle brain is usually understood by the non-subtle as
a silent superiority, and is much dreaded whereas the perception of
perplexity would produce good will.




246.


THE SAGE GIVING HIMSELF OUT TO BE A FOOL.—The philanthropy of the sage
sometimes makes him decide to pretend to be excited, enraged, or
delighted, so that he may not hurt his surroundings by the coldness and
rationality of his true nature.




247.


FORCING ONESELF TO ATTENTION.—So soon as we note that any one in
intercourse and conversation with us has to force himself to attention, we
have adequate evidence that he loves us not, or loves us no longer.




248.


THE WAY TO A CHRISTIAN VIRTUE.—Learning from one’s enemies is the best way
to love them, for it inspires us with a grateful mood towards them.




249.


STRATAGEM OF THE IMPORTUNATE.—The importunate man gives us gold coins as
change for our convention coins, and thereby tries to force us afterwards
to treat our convention as an oversight and him as an exception.




250.


REASON FOR DISLIKE.—We become hostile to many an artist or writer, not
because we notice in the end that he has duped us, but because he did not
find more subtle means necessary to entrap us.




251.


IN PARTING.—Not by the way one soul approaches another, but by the way it
separates, do I recognise its relationship and homogeneity with the other.




252.


SILENTIUM.—We must not speak about our friends, or we renounce the
sentiment of friendship.




253.


IMPOLITENESS.—Impoliteness is often the sign of a clumsy modesty, which
when taken by surprise loses its head and would fain hide the fact by
means of rudeness.




254.


HONESTY’S MISCALCULATION.—Our newest acquaintances are sometimes the first
to learn what we have hitherto kept dark. We have the foolish notion that
our proof of confidence is the strongest fetter wherewith to hold them
fast. But _they_ do not know enough about us to feel so strongly the
sacrifice involved in our speaking out, and betray our secrets to others
without any idea of betrayal. Hereby we possibly lose our old friends.




255.


IN THE ANTE-CHAMBER OF FAVOUR.—All men whom we let stand long in the
ante-chamber of our favour get into a state of fermentation or become
bitter.




256.


WARNING TO THE DESPISED.—When we have sunk unmistakably in the estimation
of mankind we should cling tooth and nail to modesty in intercourse, or we
shall betray to others that we have sunk in our own estimation as well.
Cynicism in intercourse is a sign that a man, when alone, treats himself
too as a dog.




257.


IGNORANCE OFTEN ENNOBLES.—With regard to the respect of those who pay
respect, it is an advantage ostensibly not to understand certain things.
Ignorance, too, confers privileges.




258.


THE OPPONENT OF GRACE.—The impatient and arrogant man does not care for
grace, feeling it to be a corporeal, visible reproach against himself. For
grace is heartfelt toleration in movement and gesture.




259.


ON SEEING AGAIN.—When old friends see each other again after a long
separation, it often happens that they affect an interest in matters to
which they have long since become indifferent. Sometimes both remark this,
but dare not raise the veil—from a mournful doubt. Hence arise
conversations as in the realm of the dead.




260.


MAKING FRIENDS ONLY WITH THE INDUSTRIOUS.—The man of leisure is dangerous
to his friends, for, having nothing to do, he talks of what his friends
are doing or not doing, interferes, and finally makes himself a nuisance.
The clever man will only make friends with the industrious.




261.


ONE WEAPON TWICE AS MUCH AS TWO.—It is an unequal combat when one man
defends his cause with head and heart, the other with head alone. The
first has sun and wind against him, as it were, and his two weapons
interfere with each other: he loses the prize—in the eyes of truth. True,
the victory of the second, with his one weapon, is seldom a victory after
the hearts of all the other spectators, and makes him unpopular.




262.


DEPTH AND TROUBLED WATERS.—The public easily confounds him who fishes in
troubled waters with him who pumps up from the depths.




263.


DEMONSTRATING ONE’S VANITY TO FRIEND AND FOE.—Many a man, from vanity,
maltreats even his friends, when in the presence of witnesses to whom he
wishes to make his own preponderance clear. Others exaggerate the merits
of their enemies, in order to point proudly to the fact that they are
worthy of such foes.




264.


COOLING OFF.—The over-heating of the heart is generally allied with
illness of the head and judgment. He who is concerned for a time with the
health of his head must know what he has to cool, careless of the future
of his heart. For if we are capable at all of giving warmth, we are sure
to become warm again and then have our summer.




265.


MINGLED FEELINGS.—Towards science women and self-seeking artists entertain
a feeling that is composed of envy and sentimentality.




266.


WHERE DANGER IS GREATEST.—We seldom break our leg so long as life
continues a toilsome upward climb. The danger comes when we begin to take
things easily and choose the convenient paths.




267.


NOT TOO EARLY.—We must beware of becoming sharp too early, or we shall
also become thin too early.




268.


JOY IN REFRACTORINESS.—The good teacher knows cases where he is proud that
his pupil remains true to himself in opposition to him—at times when the
youth must not understand the man or would be harmed by understanding him.




269.


THE EXPERIMENT OF HONESTY.—Young men, who wish to be more honest than they
have been, seek as victim some one acknowledged to be honest, attacking
him first with an attempt to reach his height by abuse—with the underlying
notion that this first experiment at any rate is void of danger. For just
such a one has no right to chastise the impudence of the honest man.




270.


THE ETERNAL CHILD.—We think, short-sighted that we are, that fairy-tales
and games belong to childhood. As if at any age we should care to live
without fairy-tales and games! Our words and sentiments are indeed
different, but the essential fact remains the same, as is proved by the
child himself looking on games as his work and fairy-tales as his truth.
The shortness of life ought to preserve us from a pedantic distinction
between the different ages—as if every age brought something new—and a
poet ought one day to portray a man of two hundred, who really lives
without fairy-tales and games.




271.


EVERY PHILOSOPHY IS THE PHILOSOPHY OF A PERIOD OF LIFE.—The period of life
in which a philosopher finds his teaching is manifested by his teaching;
he cannot avoid that, however elevated above time and hour he may feel
himself. Thus, Schopenhauer’s philosophy remains a mirror of his hot and
melancholy youth—it is no mode of thought for older men. Plato’s
philosophy reminds one of the middle thirties, when a warm and a cold
current generally rush together, so that spray and delicate clouds and,
under favourable circumstances and glimpses of sunshine, enchanting
rainbow-pictures result.




272.


OF THE INTELLECT OF WOMEN.—The intellectual strength of a woman is best
proved by the fact that she offers her own intellect as a sacrifice out of
love for a man and his intellect, and that nevertheless in the new domain,
which was previously foreign to her nature, a second intellect at once
arises as an aftergrowth, to which the man’s mind impels her.




273.


RAISING AND LOWERING IN THE SEXUAL DOMAIN.—The storm of desire will
sometimes carry a man up to a height where all desire is silenced, where
he really loves and lives in a better state of being rather than in a
better state of choice. On the other hand, a good woman, from true love,
often climbs down to desire, and lowers herself in her own eyes. The
latter action in particular is one of the most pathetic sensations which
the idea of a good marriage can involve.




274.


MAN PROMISES, WOMAN FULFILS.—By woman Nature shows how far she has
hitherto achieved her task of fashioning humanity, by man she shows what
she has had to overcome and what she still proposes to do for
humanity.—The most perfect woman of every age is the holiday-task of the
Creator on every seventh day of culture, the recreation of the artist from
his work.




275.


TRANSPLANTING.—If we have spent our intellect in order to gain mastery
over the intemperance of the passions, the sad result often follows that
we transfer the intemperance to the intellect, and from that time forth
are extravagant in thought and desire of knowledge.




276.


LAUGHTER AS TREACHERY.—How and when a woman laughs is a sign of her
culture, but in the ring of laughter her nature reveals itself, and in
highly cultured women perhaps even the last insoluble residue of their
nature. Hence the psychologist will say with Horace, though from different
reasons: “Ridete puellae.”




277.


FROM THE YOUTHFUL SOUL.—Youths varyingly show devotion and impudence
towards the same person, because at bottom they only despise or admire
themselves in that other person, and between the two feelings but stagger
to and fro in themselves, so long as they have not found in experience the
measure of their will and ability.




278.


FOR THE AMELIORATION OF THE WORLD.—If we forbade the discontented, the
sullen, and the atrabilious to propagate, we might transform the world
into a garden of happiness.—This aphorism belongs to a practical
philosophy for the female sex.




279.


NOT TO DISTRUST YOUR EMOTIONS.—The feminine phrase “Do not distrust your
emotions” does not mean much more than “Eat what tastes good to you.” This
may also, especially for moderate natures, be a good everyday rule. But
other natures must live according to another maxim: “You must eat not only
with your mouth but also with your brain, in order that the greediness of
your mouth may not prove your undoing.”




280.


A CRUEL FANCY OF LOVE.—Every great love involves the cruel thought of
killing the object of love, so that it may be removed once for all from
the mischievous play of change. For love is more afraid of change than of
destruction.




281.


DOORS.—In everything that is learnt or experienced, the child, just like
the man, sees doors; but for the former they are places to go _to_, for
the latter to go _through_.




282.


SYMPATHETIC WOMEN.—The sympathy of women, which is talkative, takes the
sick-bed to market.




283.


EARLY MERIT.—He who acquires merit early in life tends to forget all
reverence for age and old people, and accordingly, greatly to his
disadvantage, excludes himself from the society of the mature, those who
confer maturity. Thus in spite of his early merit he remains green,
importunate, and boyish longer than others.




284.


SOULS ALL OF A PIECE.—Women and artists think that where we do not
contradict them we cannot. Reverence on ten counts and silent disapproval
on ten others appears to them an impossible combination, because their
souls are all of a piece.




285.


YOUNG TALENTS.—With respect to young talents we must strictly follow
Goethe’s maxim, that we should often avoid harming error in order to avoid
harming truth. Their condition is like the diseases of pregnancy, and
involves strange appetites. These appetites should be satisfied and
humoured as far as possible, for the sake of the fruit they may be
expected to produce. It is true that, as nurse of these remarkable
invalids, one must learn the difficult art of voluntary self-abasement.




286.


DISGUST WITH TRUTH.—Women are so constituted that all truth (in relation
to men, love, children, society, aim of life) disgusts them—and that they
try to be revenged on every one who opens their eyes.




287.


THE SOURCE OF GREAT LOVE.—Whence arises the sudden passion of a man for a
woman, a passion so deep, so vital? Least of all from sensuality only: but
when a man finds weakness, need of help, and high spirits united in the
same creature, he suffers a sort of overflowing of soul, and is touched
and offended at the same moment. At this point arises the source of great
love.




288.


CLEANLINESS.—In the child, the sense for cleanliness should be fanned into
a passion, and then later on he will raise himself, in ever new phases, to
almost every virtue, and will finally appear, in compensation for all
talent, as a shining cloud of purity, temperance, gentleness, and
character, happy in himself and spreading happiness around.




289.


OF VAIN OLD MEN.—Profundity of thought belongs to youth, clarity of
thought to old age. When, in spite of this, old men sometimes speak and
write in the manner of the profound, they do so from vanity, imagining
that they thereby assume the charm of juvenility, enthusiasm, growth,
apprehensiveness, hopefulness.




290.


ENJOYMENT OF NOVELTY.—Men use a new lesson or experience later on as a
ploughshare or perhaps also as a weapon, women at once make it into an
ornament.




291.


HOW BOTH SEXES BEHAVE WHEN IN THE RIGHT.—If it is conceded to a woman that
she is right, she cannot deny herself the triumph of setting her heel on
the neck of the vanquished; she must taste her victory to the full. On the
other hand, man towards man in such a case is ashamed of being right. But
then man is accustomed to victory; with woman it is an exception.




292.


ABNEGATION IN THE WILL TO BEAUTY.—In order to become beautiful, a woman
must not desire to be considered pretty. That is to say, in ninety-nine
out of a hundred cases where she could please she must scorn and put aside
all thoughts of pleasing. Only then can she ever reap the delight of him
whose soul’s portal is wide enough to admit the great.




293.


UNINTELLIGIBLE, UNENDURABLE.—A youth cannot understand that an old man has
also had his delights, his dawns of feeling, his changings and soarings of
thought. It offends him to think that such things have existed before. But
it makes him very bitter to hear that, to become fruitful, he must lose
those buds and dispense with their fragrance.




294.


THE PARTY WITH THE AIR OF MARTYRDOM.—Every party that can assume an air of
martyrdom wins good-natured souls over to its side and thereby itself
acquires an air of good nature—greatly to its advantage.




295.


ASSERTIONS SURER THAN ARGUMENTS.—An assertion has, with the majority of
men at any rate, more effect than an argument, for arguments provoke
mistrust. Hence demagogues seek to strengthen the arguments of their party
by assertions.




296.


THE BEST CONCEALERS.—All regularly successful men are profoundly cunning
in making their faults and weaknesses look like manifestations of
strength. This proves that they must know their defects uncommonly well.




297.


FROM TIME TO TIME.—He sat in the city gateway and said to one who passed
through that this was the city gate. The latter replied that this was
true, but that one must not be too much in the right if one expected to be
thanked for it. “Oh,” answered the other, “I don’t want thanks, but from
time to time it is very pleasant not merely to be in the right but to
remain in the right.”




298.


VIRTUE WAS NOT INVENTED BY THE GERMANS.—Goethe’s nobleness and freedom
from envy, Beethoven’s fine hermitical resignation, Mozart’s cheerfulness
and grace of heart, Handel’s unbending manliness and freedom under the
law, Bach’s confident and luminous inner life, such as does not even need
to renounce glamour and success—are these qualities peculiarly German?—If
they are not, they at least prove to what goal Germans should strive and
to what they can attain.




299.


_PIA FRAUS_ OR SOMETHING ELSE.—I hope I am mistaken, but I think that in
Germany of to-day a twofold sort of hypocrisy is set up as the duty of the
moment for every one. From imperial-political misgivings Germanism is
demanded, and from social apprehensions Christianity—but both only in
words and gestures, and particularly in ability to keep silent. It is the
veneer that nowadays costs so much and is paid for so highly; and for the
benefit of the spectators the face of the nation assumes German and
Christian wrinkles.




300.


HOW FAR EVEN IN THE GOOD THE HALF MAY BE MORE THAN THE WHOLE.—In all
things that are constructed to last and demand the service of many hands,
much that is less good must be made a rule, although the organiser knows
what is better and harder very well. He will calculate that there will
never be a lack of persons who _can_ correspond to the rule, and he knows
that the middling good is the rule.—The youth seldom sees this point, and
as an innovator thinks how marvellously he is in the right and how strange
is the blindness of others.




301.


THE PARTISAN.—The true partisan learns nothing more, he only experiences
and judges. It is significant that Solon, who was never a partisan but
pursued his aims above and apart from parties or even against them, was
the father of that simple phrase wherein lies the secret of the health and
vitality of Athens: “I grow old, but I am always learning.”




302.


WHAT IS GERMAN ACCORDING TO GOETHE.—They are really intolerable people of
whom one cannot even accept the good, who have freedom of disposition but
do not remark that they are lacking in freedom of taste and spirit. Yet
just this, according to Goethe’s well-weighed judgment, is German.—His
voice and his example indicate that the German should be more than a
German if he wishes to be useful or even endurable to other nations—and
which direction his striving should take, in order that he may rise above
and beyond himself.




303.


WHEN IT IS NECESSARY TO REMAIN STATIONARY.—When the masses begin to rage,
and reason is under a cloud, it is a good thing, if the health of one’s
soul is not quite assured, to go under a doorway and look out to see what
the weather is like.




304.


THE REVOLUTION-SPIRIT AND THE POSSESSION-SPIRIT.—The only remedy against
Socialism that still lies in your power is to avoid provoking Socialism—in
other words, to live in moderation and contentment, to prevent as far as
possible all lavish display, and to aid the State as far as possible in
its taxing of all superfluities and luxuries. You do not like this remedy?
Then, you rich bourgeois who call yourselves “Liberals,” confess that it
is your own inclination that you find so terrible and menacing in
Socialists, but allow to prevail in yourselves as unavoidable, as if with
you it were something different. As you are constituted, if you had not
your fortune and the cares of maintaining it, this bent of yours would
make Socialists of you. Possession alone differentiates you from them. If
you wish to conquer the assailants of your prosperity, you must first
conquer yourselves.—And if that prosperity only meant well-being, it would
not be so external and provocative of envy; it would be more generous,
more benevolent, more compensatory, more helpful. But the spurious,
histrionic element in your pleasures, which lie more in the feeling of
contrast (because others have them not, and feel envious) than in feelings
of realised and heightened power—your houses, dresses, carriages, shops,
the demands of your palates and your tables, your noisy operatic and
musical enthusiasm; lastly your women, formed and fashioned but of base
metal, gilded but without the ring of gold, chosen by you for show and
considering themselves meant for show—these are the things that spread the
poison of that national disease, which seizes the masses ever more and
more as a Socialistic heart-itch, but has its origin and breeding-place in
you. Who shall now arrest this epidemic?




305.


PARTY TACTICS.—When a party observes that a previous member has changed
from an unqualified to a qualified adherent, it endures it so ill that it
irritates and mortifies him in every possible way with the object of
forcing him to a decisive break and making him an opponent. For the party
suspects that the intention of finding a relative value in its faith, a
value which admits of pro and con, of weighing and discarding, is more
dangerous than downright opposition.




306.


FOR THE STRENGTHENING OF PARTIES.—Whoever wishes to strengthen a party
internally should give it an opportunity of being forcibly treated with
obvious injustice. The party thus acquires a capital of good conscience,
which hitherto it perhaps lacked.




307.


TO PROVIDE FOR ONE’S PAST.—As men after all only respect the
old-established and slowly developed, he who would survive after his death
must not only provide for posterity but still more for the past. Hence
tyrants of every sort (including tyrannical artists and politicians) like
to do violence to history, so that history may seem a preparation and a
ladder up to them.




308.


PARTY WRITERS.—The beating of drums, which delights young writers who
serve a party, sounds to him who does not belong to the party like a
rattling of chains, and excites sympathy rather than admiration.




309.


TAKING SIDES AGAINST OURSELVES.—Our followers never forgive us for taking
sides against ourselves, for we seem in their eyes not only to be spurning
their love but to be exposing them to the charge of lack of intelligence.




310.


DANGER IN WEALTH.—Only a man of intellect should hold property: otherwise
property is dangerous to the community. For the owner, not knowing how to
make use of the leisure which his possessions might secure to him, will
continue to strive after more property. This strife will be his
occupation, his strategy in the war with ennui. So in the end real wealth
is produced from the moderate property that would be enough for an
intellectual man. Such wealth, then, is the glittering outcrop of
intellectual dependence and poverty, but it looks quite different from
what its humble origin might lead one to expect, because it can mask
itself with culture and art—it can, in fact, purchase the mask. Hence it
excites envy in the poor and uncultured—who at bottom always envy culture
and see no mask in the mask—and gradually paves the way for a social
revolution. For a gilded coarseness and a histrionic blowing of trumpets
in the pretended enjoyment of culture inspires that class with the
thought, “It is only a matter of money,” whereas it is indeed to some
extent a matter of money, but far more of intellect.




311.


JOY IN COMMANDING AND OBEYING.—Commanding is a joy, like obeying; the
former when it has not yet become a habit, the latter just when it has
become a habit. Old servants under new masters advance each other mutually
in giving pleasure.




312.


AMBITION FOR A FORLORN HOPE.—There is an ambition for a forlorn hope which
forces a party to place itself at the post of extreme danger.




313.


WHEN ASSES ARE NEEDED.—We shall not move the crowd to cry “Hosanna!” until
we have ridden into the city upon an ass.




314.


PARTY USAGE.—Every party attempts to represent the important elements that
have sprung up outside it as unimportant, and if it does not succeed, it
attacks those elements the more bitterly, the more excellent they are.




315.


BECOMING EMPTY.—Of him who abandons himself to the course of events, a
smaller and smaller residue is continually left. Great politicians may
therefore become quite empty men, although they were once full and rich.




316.


WELCOME ENEMIES.—The Socialistic movements are nowadays becoming more and
more agreeable rather than terrifying to the dynastic governments, because
by these movements they are provided with a right and a weapon for making
exceptional rules, and can thus attack their real bogies, democrats and
anti-dynasts.—Towards all that such governments professedly detest they
feel a secret cordiality and inclination. But they are compelled to draw
the veil over their soul.




317.


POSSESSION POSSESSES.—Only up to a certain point does possession make men
feel freer and more independent; one step farther, and possession becomes
lord, the possessor a slave. The latter must sacrifice his time, his
thoughts to the former, and feels himself compelled to an intercourse,
nailed to a spot, incorporated with the State—perhaps quite in conflict
with his real and essential needs.




318.


OF THE MASTERY OF THEM THAT KNOW.—It is easy, ridiculously easy, to set up
a model for the choice of a legislative body. First of all the honest and
reliable men of the nation, who at the same time are masters and experts
in some one branch, have to become prominent by mutual scenting-out and
recognition. From these, by a narrower process of selection, the learned
and expert of the first rank in each individual branch must again be
chosen, also by mutual recognition and guarantee. If the legislative body
be composed of these, it will finally be necessary, in each individual
case, that only the voices and judgments of the most specialised experts
should decide; the honesty of all the rest should have become so great
that it is simply a matter of decency to leave the voting also in the
hands of these men. The result would be that the law, in the strictest
sense, would emanate from the intelligence of the most intelligent.—As
things now are, voting is done by parties, and at every division there
must be hundreds of uneasy consciences among the ill-taught, the incapable
of judgment, among those who merely repeat, imitate, and go with the tide.
Nothing lowers the dignity of a new law so much as this inherent
shamefaced feeling of insincerity that necessarily results at every party
division. But, as has been said, it is easy, ridiculously easy, to set up
such a model: no power on earth is at present strong enough to realise
such an ideal—unless the belief in the highest utility of knowledge, and
of those that know, at last dawns even upon the most hostile minds and is
preferred to the prevalent belief in majorities. In the sense of such a
future may our watchword be: “More reverence for them that know, and down
with all parties!”




319.


OF THE “NATION OF THINKERS” (OR OF BAD THINKING).—The vague, vacillating,
premonitory, elementary, intuitive elements—to choose obscure names for
obscure things—that are attributed to the German nature would be, if they
really still existed, a proof that our culture has remained several stages
behind and is still surrounded by the spell and atmosphere of the Middle
Ages.—It is true that in this backwardness there are certain advantages:
by these qualities the Germans (if, as has been said before, they still
possess them) would possess the capacity, which other nations have now
lost, for doing certain things and particularly for understanding certain
things. Much undoubtedly is lost if the lack of sense—which is just the
common factor in all those qualities—is lost. Here too, however, there are
no losses without the highest compensatory gains, so that no reason is
left for lamenting, granting that we do not, like children, and gourmands,
wish to enjoy at once the fruits of all seasons of the year.




320.


CARRYING COALS TO NEWCASTLE.—The governments of the great States have two
instruments for keeping the people dependent, in fear and obedience: a
coarser, the army, and a more refined, the school. With the aid of the
former they win over to their side the ambition of the higher strata and
the strength of the lower, so far as both are characteristic of active and
energetic men of moderate or inferior gifts. With the aid of the latter
they win over gifted poverty, especially the intellectually pretentious
semi-poverty of the middle classes. Above all, they make teachers of all
grades into an intellectual court looking unconsciously “towards the
heights.” By putting obstacle after obstacle in the way of private schools
and the wholly distasteful individual tuition they secure the disposal of
a considerable number of educational posts, towards which numerous hungry
and submissive eyes are turned to an extent five times as great as can
ever be satisfied. These posts, however, must support the holder but
meagrely, so that he maintains a feverish thirst for promotion and becomes
still more closely attached to the views of the government. For it is
always more advantageous to foster moderate discontent than contentment,
the mother of courage, the grandmother of free thought and exuberance. By
means of this physically and mentally bridled body of teachers, the youth
of the country is as far as possible raised to a certain level of culture
that is useful to the State and arranged on a suitable sliding-scale.
Above all, the immature and ambitious minds of all classes are almost
imperceptibly imbued with the idea that only a career which is recognised
and hall-marked by the State can lead immediately to social distinction.
The effect of this belief in government examinations and titles goes so
far that even men who have remained independent and have risen by trade or
handicraft still feel a pang of discontent in their hearts until their
position too is marked and acknowledged by a gracious bestowal of rank and
orders from above—until one becomes a “somebody.” Finally the State
connects all these hundreds of offices and posts in its hands with the
obligation of being trained and hallmarked in these State schools if one
ever wishes to enter this charmed circle. Honour in society, daily bread,
the possibility of a family, protection from above, the feeling of
community in a common culture—all this forms a network of hopes into which
every young man walks: how should he feel the slightest breath of
mistrust? In the end, perhaps, the obligation of being a soldier for one
year has become with every one, after the lapse of a few generations, an
unreflecting habit, an understood thing, with an eye to which we construct
the plan of our lives quite early. Then the State can venture on the
master-stroke of weaving together school and army, talent, ambition and
strength by means of common advantages—that is, by attracting the more
highly gifted on favourable terms to the army and inspiring them with the
military spirit of joyful obedience; so that finally, perhaps, they become
attached permanently to the flag and endow it by their talents with an
ever new and more brilliant lustre. Then nothing more is wanted but an
opportunity for great wars. These are provided from professional reasons
(and so in all innocence) by diplomats, aided by newspapers and Stock
Exchanges. For “the nation,” as a nation of soldiers, need never be
supplied with a good conscience in war—it has one already.




321.


THE PRESS.—If we consider how even to-day all great political transactions
glide upon the stage secretly and stealthily; how they are hidden by
unimportant events, and seem small when close at hand; how they only show
their far-reaching effect, and leave the soil still quaking, long after
they have taken place;—what significance can we attach to the Press in its
present position, with its daily expenditure of lung-power in order to
bawl, to deafen, to excite, to terrify? Is it anything more than an
everlasting false alarm, which tries to lead our ears and our wits into a
false direction?




322.


AFTER A GREAT EVENT.—A nation and a man whose soul has come to light
through some great event generally feel the immediate need of some act of
childishness or coarseness, as much from shame as for purposes of
recreation.




323.


TO BE A GOOD GERMAN MEANS TO DE-GERMANISE ONESELF.—National differences
consist, far more than has hitherto been observed, only in the differences
of various grades of culture, and are only to a very small extent
permanent (nor even that in a strict sense). For this reason all arguments
based on national character are so little binding on one who aims at the
alteration of convictions—in other words, at culture. If, for instance, we
consider all that has already been German, we shall improve upon the
hypothetical question, “What is German?” by the counter-question, “What is
_now_ German?” and every good German will answer it practically, by
overcoming his German characteristics. For when a nation advances and
grows, it bursts the girdle previously given to it by its national
outlook. When it remains stationary or declines, its soul is surrounded by
a fresh girdle, and the crust, as it becomes harder and harder, builds a
prison around, with walls growing ever higher. Hence if a nation has much
that is firmly established, this is a sign that it wishes to petrify and
would like to become nothing but a monument. This happened, from a
definite date, in the case of Egypt. So he who is well-disposed towards
the Germans may for his part consider how he may more and more grow out of
what is German. The tendency to be un-German has therefore always been a
mark of efficient members of our nation.




324.


FOREIGNISMS.—A foreigner who travelled in Germany found favour or the
reverse by certain assertions of his, according to the districts in which
he stayed. All intelligent Suabians, he used to say, are coquettish.—The
other Suabians still believed that Uhland was a poet and Goethe
immoral.—The best about German novels now in vogue was that one need not
read them, for one knew already what they contained.—The native of Berlin
seemed more good-humoured than the South German, for he was all too fond
of mocking, and so could endure mockery himself, which the South German
could not.—The intellect of the Germans was kept down by their beer and
their newspapers: he recommended them tea and pamphlets, of course as a
cure.—He advised us to contemplate the different nations of worn-out
Europe and see how well each displayed some particular quality of old age,
to the delight of those who sit before the great spectacle: how the French
successfully represent the cleverness and amiability of old age, the
English the experience and reserve, the Italians the innocence and
candour. Can the other masks of old age be wanting? Where is the proud old
man, the domineering old man, the covetous old man?—The most dangerous
region in Germany was Saxony and Thuringia: nowhere else was there more
mental nimbleness, more knowledge of men, side by side with freedom of
thought; and all this was so modestly veiled by the ugly dialect and the
zealous officiousness of the inhabitants that one hardly noticed that one
here had to deal with the intellectual drill-sergeants of Germany, her
teachers for good or evil.—The arrogance of the North Germans was kept in
check by their tendency to obey, that of the South Germans by their
tendency—to make themselves comfortable.—It appeared to him that in their
women German men possessed awkward but self-opinionated housewives, who
belauded themselves so perseveringly that they had almost persuaded the
world, and at any rate their husbands, of their peculiarly German
housewifely virtue.—When the conversation turned on Germany’s home and
foreign policy, he used to say (he called it “betray the secret”) that
Germany’s greatest statesman did not believe in great statesmen.—The
future of Germany he found menaced and menacing, for Germans had forgotten
how to enjoy themselves (an art that the Italians understood so well),
but, by the great games of chance called wars and dynastic revolutions,
had accustomed themselves to emotionalism, and consequently would one day
have an _émeute_. For that is the strongest emotion that a nation can
procure for itself.—The German Socialist was all the more dangerous
because impelled by no definite necessity: his trouble lay in not knowing
what he wanted; so, even if he attained many of his objects, he would
still pine away from desire in the midst of delights, just like Faust, but
presumably like a very vulgar Faust. “For the Faust-Devil,” he finally
exclaimed, “by whom cultured Germans were so much plagued, was exorcised
by Bismarck; but now the Devil has entered into the swine,(17) and is
worse than ever!”




325.


OPINIONS.—Most men are nothing and count for nothing until they have
arrayed themselves in universal convictions and public opinions. This is
in accordance with the tailors’ philosophy, “The apparel makes the man.”
Of exceptional men, however, it must be said, “The wearer primarily makes
the apparel.” Here opinions cease to be public, and become something else
than masks, ornament, and disguise.




326.


TWO KINDS OF SOBRIETY.—In order not to confound the sobriety arising from
mental exhaustion with that arising from moderation, one must remark that
the former is peevish, the latter cheerful.




327.


DEBASEMENT OF JOY.—To call a thing good not a day longer than it appears
to us good, and above all not a day earlier—that is the only way to keep
joy pure. Otherwise, joy all too easily becomes insipid and rotten to the
taste, and counts, for whole strata of the people, among the adulterated
foodstuffs.




328.


THE SCAPEGOAT OF VIRTUE.—When a man does his very best, those who mean
well towards him, but are not capable of appreciating him, speedily seek a
scapegoat to immolate, thinking it is the scapegoat of sin—but it is the
scapegoat of virtue.




329.


SOVEREIGNTY.—To honour and acknowledge even the bad, when it _pleases_
one, and to have no conception of how one could be ashamed of being
pleased thereat, is the mark of sovereignty in things great and small.




330.


INFLUENCE A PHANTOM, NOT A REALITY.—The man of mark gradually learns that
so far as he has influence he is a phantom in other brains, and perhaps he
falls into a state of subtle vexation of soul, in which he asks himself
whether he must not maintain this phantom of himself for the benefit of
his fellow-men.




331.


GIVING AND TAKING.—When one takes away (or anticipates) the smallest thing
that another possesses, the latter is blind to the fact that he has been
given something greater, nay, even the greatest thing.




332.


GOOD PLOUGHLAND.—All rejection and negation betoken a deficiency in
fertility. If we were good ploughland, we should allow nothing to be
unused or lost, and in every thing, event, or person we should welcome
manure, rain, or sunshine.




333.


INTERCOURSE AS AN ENJOYMENT.—If a man renounces the world and
intentionally lives in solitude, he may come to regard intercourse with
others, which he enjoys but seldom, as a special delicacy.




334.


TO KNOW HOW TO SUFFER IN PUBLIC.—We must advertise our misfortunes and
from time to time heave audible sighs and show visible marks of
impatience. For if we could let others see how assured and happy we are in
spite of pain and privation, how envious and ill-tempered they would
become at the sight!—But we must take care not to corrupt our fellow-men;
besides, if they knew the truth, they would levy a heavy toll upon us. At
any rate our public misfortune is our private advantage.




335.


WARMTH ON THE HEIGHTS.—On the heights it is warmer than people in the
valleys suppose, especially in winter. The thinker recognises the full
import of this simile.




336.


TO WILL THE GOOD AND BE CAPABLE OF THE BEAUTIFUL.—It is not enough to
practise the good one must have willed it, and, as the poet says, include
the Godhead in our will. But the beautiful we must not will, we must be
capable of it, in innocence and blindness, without any psychical
curiosity. He that lights his lantern to find perfect men should remember
the token by which to know them. They are the men who always act for the
sake of the good and in so doing always attain to the beautiful without
thinking of the beautiful. Many better and nobler men, from impotence or
from want of beauty in their souls, remain unrefreshing and ugly to
behold, with all their good will and good works. They rebuff and injure
even virtue through the repulsive garb in which their bad taste arrays
her.




337.


DANGER OF RENUNCIATION.—We must beware of basing our lives on too narrow a
foundation of appetite. For if we renounce all the joys involved in
positions, honours, associations, revels, creature comforts, and arts, a
day may come when we perceive that this repudiation has led us not to
wisdom but to satiety of life.




338.


FINAL OPINION ON OPINIONS.—Either we should hide our opinions or hide
ourselves behind our opinions. Whoever does otherwise, does not know the
way of the world, or belongs to the order of pious fire-eaters.




339.


“_GAUDEAMUS IGITUR._”—Joy must contain edifying and healing forces for the
moral nature of man. Otherwise, how comes it that our soul, as soon as it
basks in the sunshine of joy, unconsciously vows to itself, “I will be
good!” “I will become perfect!” and is at once seized by a premonition of
perfection that is like a shudder of religious awe?




340.


TO ONE WHO IS PRAISED.—So long as you are praised, believe that you are
not yet on your own course but on that of another.




341.


LOVING THE MASTER.—The apprentice and the master love the master in
different ways.




342.


ALL-TOO-BEAUTIFUL AND HUMAN.—“Nature is too beautiful for thee, poor
mortal,” one often feels. But now and then, at a profound contemplation of
all that is human, in its fulness, vigour, tenderness, and complexity, I
have felt as if I must say, in all humility, “Man also is too beautiful
for the contemplation of man!” Nor did I mean the moral man alone, but
every one.




343.


REAL AND PERSONAL ESTATE.—When life has treated us in true robber fashion,
and has taken away all that it could of honour, joys, connections, health,
and property of every kind, we perhaps discover in the end, after the
first shock, that we are richer than before. For now we know for the first
time what is so peculiarly ours that no robber hand can touch it, and
perhaps, after all the plunder and devastation, we come forward with the
airs of a mighty real estate owner.




344.


INVOLUNTARILY IDEALISED.—The most painful feeling that exists is finding
out that we are always taken for something higher than we really are. For
we must thereby confess to ourselves, “There is in you some element of
fraud—your speech, your expression, your bearing, your eye, your dealings;
and this deceitful something is as necessary as your usual honesty, but
constantly destroys its effect and its value.”




345.


IDEALIST AND LIAR.—We must not let ourselves be tyrannised even by that
finest faculty of idealising things: otherwise, truth will one day part
company from us with the insulting remark: “Thou arch-liar, what have I to
do with thee?”




346.


BEING MISUNDERSTOOD.—When one is misunderstood generally, it is impossible
to remove a particular misunderstanding. This point must be recognised, to
save superfluous expenditure of energy in self-defence.




347.


THE WATER-DRINKER SPEAKS.—Go on drinking your wine, which has refreshed
you all your life—what affair is it of yours if I have to be a
water-drinker? Are not wine and water peaceable, brotherly elements, that
can live side by side without mutual recriminations?




348.


FROM CANNIBAL COUNTRY.—In solitude the lonely man is eaten up by himself,
among crowds by the many. Choose which you prefer.




349.


THE FREEZING-POINT OF THE WILL.—“Some time the hour will come at last, the
hour that will envelop you in the golden cloud of painlessness; when the
soul enjoys its own weariness and, happy in patient playing with patience,
resembles the waves of a lake, which on a quiet summer day, in the
reflection of a many-hued evening sky, sip and sip at the shore and again
are hushed—without end, without purpose, without satiety, without need—all
calm rejoicing in change, all ebb and flow of Nature’s pulse.” Such is the
feeling and talk of all invalids, but if they attain that hour, a brief
period of enjoyment is followed by ennui. But this is the thawing-wind of
the frozen will, which awakes, stirs, and once more begets desire upon
desire.—Desire is a sign of convalescence or recovery.




350.


THE DISCLAIMED IDEAL.—It happens sometimes by an exception that a man only
reaches the highest when he disclaims his ideal. For this ideal previously
drove him onward too violently, so that in the middle of the track he
regularly got out of breath and had to rest.




351.


A TREACHEROUS INCLINATION.—It should be regarded as a sign of an envious
but aspiring man, when he feels himself attracted by the thought that with
regard to the eminent there is but one salvation—love.




352.


STAIRCASE HAPPINESS.—Just as the wit of many men does not keep pace with
opportunity (so that opportunity has already passed through the door while
wit still waits on the staircase outside), so others have a kind of
staircase happiness, which walks too slowly to keep pace with swift-footed
Time. The best that it can enjoy of an experience, of a whole span of
life, falls to its share long afterwards, often only as a weak, spicy
fragrance, giving rise to longing and sadness—as if “it might have been
possible”—some time or other—to drink one’s fill of this element: but now
it is too late.




353.


WORMS.—The fact that an intellect contains a few worms does not detract
from its ripeness.




354.


THE SEAT OF VICTORY.—A good seat on horseback robs an opponent of his
courage, the spectator of his heart—why attack such a man? Sit like one
who has been victorious!




355.


DANGER IN ADMIRATION.—From excessive admiration for the virtues of others
one can lose the sense of one’s own, and finally, through lack of
practice, lose these virtues themselves, without retaining the alien
virtues as compensation.




356.


USES OF SICKLINESS.—He who is often ill not only has a far greater
pleasure in health, on account of his so often getting well, but acquires
a very keen sense of what is healthy or sickly in actions and
achievements, both his own and others’. Thus, for example, it is just the
writers of uncertain health—among whom, unfortunately, nearly all great
writers must be classed—who are wont to have a far more even and assured
tone of health in their writings, because they are better versed than are
the physically robust in the philosophy of psychical health and
convalescence and in their teachers—morning, sunshine, forest, and
fountain.




357.


DISLOYALTY A CONDITION OF MASTERY.—It cannot be helped—every master has
but one pupil, and _he_ becomes disloyal to him, for he also is destined
for mastery.




358.


NEVER IN VAIN.—In the mountains of truth you never climb in vain. Either
you already reach a higher point to-day, or you exercise your strength in
order to be able to climb higher to-morrow.




359.


THROUGH GREY WINDOW-PANES.—Is what you see through this window of the
world so beautiful that you do not wish to look through any other
window—ay, and even try to prevent others from so doing?




360.


A SIGN OF RADICAL CHANGES.—When we dream of persons long forgotten or
dead, it is a sign that we have suffered radical changes, and that the
soil on which we live has been completely undermined. The dead rise again,
and our antiquity becomes modernity.




361.


MEDICINE OF THE SOUL.—To lie still and think little is the cheapest
medicine for all diseases of the soul, and, with the aid of good-will,
becomes pleasanter every hour that it is used.




362.


INTELLECTUAL ORDER OF PRECEDENCE.—You rank far below others when you try
to establish the exception and they the rule.




363.


THE FATALIST.—You must believe in fate—science can compel you thereto. All
that develops in you out of that belief—cowardice, devotion or loftiness,
and uprightness—bears witness to the soil in which the grain was sown, but
not to the grain itself, for from that seed anything and everything can
grow.




364.


THE REASON FOR MUCH FRETFULNESS.—He that prefers the beautiful to the
useful in life will undoubtedly, like children who prefer sweetmeats to
bread, destroy his digestion and acquire a very fretful outlook on the
world.




365.


EXCESS AS A REMEDY.—We can make our own talent once more acceptable to
ourselves by honouring and enjoying the opposite talent for some time to
excess.—Using excess as a remedy is one of the more refined devices in the
art of life.




366.


“WILL A SELF.”—Active, successful natures act, not according to the maxim,
“Know thyself,” but as if always confronted with the command, “Will a
self, so you will become a self.”—Fate seems always to have left them a
choice. Inactive, contemplative natures, on the other hand, reflect on how
they have chosen their self “once for all” at their entry into life.




367.


TO LIVE AS FAR AS POSSIBLE WITHOUT A FOLLOWING.—How small is the
importance of followers we first grasp when we have ceased to be the
followers of our followers.




368.


OBSCURING ONESELF.—We must understand how to obscure ourselves in order to
get rid of the gnat-swarms of pestering admirers.




369.


ENNUI.—There is an ennui of the most subtle and cultured brains, to which
the best that the world can offer has become stale. Accustomed to eat ever
more and more recherché fare and to feel disgust at coarser diet, they are
in danger of dying of hunger. For the very best exists but in small
quantities, and has sometimes become inaccessible or hard as stone, so
that even good teeth can no longer bite it.




370.


THE DANGER IN ADMIRATION.—The admiration of a quality or of an art may be
so strong as to deter us from aspiring to possess that quality or art.




371.


WHAT IS REQUIRED OF ART.—One man wants to enjoy himself by means of art,
another for a time to get out of or above himself.—To meet both
requirements there exists a twofold species of artists.




372.


SECESSIONS.—Whoever secedes from us offends not us, perhaps, but certainly
our adherents.




373.


AFTER DEATH.—It is only long after the death of a man that we find it
inconceivable that he should be missed—in the case of really great men,
only after decades. Those who are honest usually think when any one dies
that he is not much missed, and that the pompous funeral oration is a
piece of hypocrisy. Necessity first teaches the necessariness of an
individual, and the proper epitaph is a belated sigh.




374.


LEAVING IN HADES.—We must leave many things in the Hades of half-conscious
feeling, and not try to release them from their shadow-existence, or else
they will become, as thoughts and words, our demoniacal tyrants, with
cruel lust after our blood.




375.


NEAR TO BEGGARY.—Even the richest intellect sometimes mislays the key to
the room in which his hoarded treasures repose. He is then like the
poorest of the poor, who must beg to get a living.




376.


CHAIN-THINKERS.—To him who has thought a great deal, every new thought
that he hears or reads at once assumes the form of a chain.




377.


PITY.—In the gilded sheath of pity is sometimes hidden the dagger of envy.




378.


WHAT IS GENIUS?—To aspire to a lofty aim and to will the means to that
aim.




379.


VANITY OF COMBATANTS.—He who has no hope of victory in a combat, or who is
obviously worsted, is all the more desirous that his style of fighting
should be admired.




380.


THE PHILOSOPHIC LIFE MISINTERPRETED.—At the moment when one is beginning
to take philosophy seriously, the whole world fancies that one is doing
the reverse.




381.


IMITATION.—By imitation, the bad gains, the good loses credit—especially
in art.




382.


FINAL TEACHING OF HISTORY.—“Oh that I had but lived in those times!” is
the exclamation of foolish and frivolous men. At every period of history
that we seriously review, even if it be the most belauded era of the past,
we shall rather cry out at the end, “Anything but a return to that! The
spirit of that age would oppress you with the weight of a hundred
atmospheres, the good and beautiful in it you would not enjoy, its evil
you could not digest.” Depend upon it, posterity will pass the same
verdict on our own epoch, and say that it was unbearable, that life under
such conditions was intolerable. “And yet every one can endure his own
times?” Yes, because the spirit of his age not only lies _upon_ him but is
_in_ him. The spirit of the age offers resistance to itself and can bear
itself.




383.


GREATNESS AS A MASK.—By greatness in our comportment we embitter our foes;
by envy that we do not conceal we almost reconcile them to us. For envy
levels and makes equal; it is an unconscious, plaintive variety of
modesty.—It may be indeed that here and there, for the sake of the
above-named advantage, envy has been assumed as a mask by those who are
not envious. Certainly, however, greatness in comportment is often used as
the mask of envy by ambitious men who would rather suffer drawbacks and
embitter their foes than let it be seen that they place them on an equal
footing with themselves.




384.


UNPARDONABLE.—You gave him an opportunity of displaying the greatness of
his character, and he did not make use of the opportunity. He will never
forgive you for that.




385.


CONTRASTS.—The most senile thought ever conceived about men lies in the
famous saying, “The ego is always hateful,” the most childish in the still
more famous saying, “Love thy neighbour as thyself.”—With the one
knowledge of men has ceased, with the other it has not yet begun.




386.


A DEFECTIVE EAR.—“We still belong to the mob so long as we always shift
the blame on to others; we are on the track of wisdom when we always make
ourselves alone responsible; but the wise man finds no one to blame,
neither himself nor others.”—Who said that? Epictetus, eighteen hundred
years ago.—The world has heard but forgotten the saying.—No, the world has
not heard and not forgotten it: everything is not forgotten. But we had
not the necessary ear, the ear of Epictetus.—So he whispered it into his
own ear?—Even so: wisdom is the whispering of the sage to himself in the
crowded market-place.




387.


A DEFECT OF STANDPOINT, NOT OF VISION.—We always stand a few paces too
near ourselves and a few paces too far from our neighbour. Hence we judge
him too much in the lump, and ourselves too much by individual,
occasional, insignificant features and circumstances.




388.


IGNORANCE ABOUT WEAPONS.—How little we care whether another knows a
subject or not!—whereas he perhaps sweats blood at the bare idea that he
may be considered ignorant on the point. Yes, there are exquisite fools,
who always go about with a quiverful of mighty, excommunicatory
utterances, ready to shoot down any one who shows freely that there are
matters in which their judgment is not taken into account.




389.


AT THE DRINKING-TABLE OF EXPERIENCE.—People whose innate moderation leads
them to drink but the half of every glass, will not admit that everything
in the world has its lees and sediment.




390.


SINGING-BIRDS.—The followers of a great man often put their own eyes out,
so that they may be the better able to sing his praise.




391.


BEYOND OUR KEN.—The good generally displeases us when it is beyond our
ken.




392.


RULE AS MOTHER OR AS CHILD.—There is one condition that gives birth to
rules, another to which rules give birth.




393.


COMEDY.—We sometimes earn honour or love for actions and achievements
which we have long since sloughed as the snake sloughs his skin. We are
hereby easily seduced into becoming the comic actors of our own past, and
into throwing the old skin once more about our shoulders—and that not
merely from vanity, but from good-will towards our admirers.




394.


A MISTAKE OF BIOGRAPHERS.—The small force that is required to launch a
boat into the stream must not be confounded with the force of the stream
that carries the boat along. Yet this mistake is made in nearly all
biographies.




395.


NOT BUYING TOO DEAR.—The things that we buy too dear we generally turn to
bad use, because we have no love for them but only a painful recollection.
Thus they involve a twofold drawback.




396.


THE PHILOSOPHY THAT SOCIETY ALWAYS NEEDS.—The pillars of the social
structure rest upon the fundamental fact that every one cheerfully
contemplates all that he is, does, and attempts, his sickness or health,
his poverty or affluence, his honour or insignificance, and says to
himself, “After all, I would not change places with any one!”—Whoever
wishes to add a stone to the social structure should always try to implant
in mankind this cheerful philosophy of contentment and refusal to change
places.




397.


THE MARK OF A NOBLE SOUL.—A noble soul is not that which is capable of the
highest flights, but that which rises little and falls little, living
always in a free and bright atmosphere and altitude.




398.


GREATNESS AND ITS CONTEMPLATOR.—The noblest effect of greatness is that it
gives the contemplator a power of vision that magnifies and embellishes.




399.


BEING SATISFIED.—We show that we have attained maturity of understanding
when we no longer go where rare flowers lurk under the thorniest hedges of
knowledge, but are satisfied with gardens, forests, meadows, and
ploughlands, remembering that life is too short for the rare and uncommon.




400.


ADVANTAGE IN PRIVATION.—He who always lives in the warmth and fulness of
the heart, and, as it were, in the summer air of the soul, cannot form an
idea of that fearful delight which seizes more wintry natures, who for
once in a way are kissed by the rays of love and the milder breath of a
sunny February day.




401.


RECIPE FOR THE SUFFERER.—You find the burden of life too heavy? Then you
must increase the burden of your life. When the sufferer finally thirsts
after and seeks the river of Lethe, then he must become a _hero_ to be
certain of finding it.




402.


THE JUDGE.—He who has seen another’s ideal becomes his inexorable judge,
and as it were his evil conscience.




403.


THE UTILITY OF GREAT RENUNCIATION.—The useful thing about great
renunciation is that it invests us with that youthful pride through which
we can thenceforth easily demand of ourselves small renunciations.




404.


HOW DUTY ACQUIRES A GLAMOUR.—You can change a brazen duty into gold in the
eyes of all by always performing something more than you have promised.




405.


PRAYER TO MANKIND.—“Forgive us our virtues”—so should we pray to mankind.




406.


THEY THAT CREATE AND THEY THAT ENJOY.—Every one who enjoys thinks that the
principal thing to the tree is the fruit, but in point of fact the
principal thing to it is the seed.—Herein lies the difference between them
that create and them that enjoy.




407.


THE GLORY OF ALL GREAT MEN.—What is the use of genius if it does not
invest him who contemplates and reveres it with such freedom and loftiness
of feeling that he no longer has need of genius?—To make themselves
superfluous is the glory of all great men.




408.


THE JOURNEY TO HADES.—I too have been in the underworld, even as Odysseus,
and I shall often be there again. Not sheep alone have I sacrificed, that
I might be able to converse with a few dead souls, but not even my own
blood have I spared. There were four pairs who responded to me in my
sacrifice: Epicurus and Montaigne, Goethe and Spinoza, Plato and Rousseau,
Pascal and Schopenhauer. With them I have to come to terms. When I have
long wandered alone, I will let them prove me right or wrong; to them will
I listen, if they prove each other right or wrong. In all that I say,
conclude, or think out for myself and others, I fasten my eyes on those
eight and see their eyes fastened on mine.—May the living forgive me if I
look upon them at times as shadows, so pale and fretful, so restless and,
alas! so eager for life. Those eight, on the other hand, seem to me so
living that I feel as if even now, after their death, they could never
become weary of life. But eternal vigour of life is the important point:
what matters “eternal life,” or indeed life at all?





PART II. THE WANDERER AND HIS SHADOW.


_The Shadow_: It is so long since I heard you speak that I should like to
give you an opportunity of talking.

_The Wanderer_: I hear a voice—where? whose? I almost fancied that I heard
myself speaking, but with a voice yet weaker than my own.

_The Shadow_ (after a pause): Are you not glad to have an opportunity of
speaking?

_The Wanderer_: By God and everything else in which I disbelieve, it is my
shadow that speaks. I hear it, but I do not believe it.

_The Shadow_: Let us assume that it exists, and think no more about it. In
another hour all will be over.

_The Wanderer_: That is just what I thought when in a forest near Pisa I
saw first two and then five camels.

_The Shadow_: It is all the better if we are both equally forbearing
towards each other when for once our reason is silent. Thus we shall avoid
losing our tempers in conversation, and shall not at once apply mutual
thumb-screws in the event of any word sounding for once unintelligible to
us. If one does not know exactly how to answer, it is enough to say
_something_. Those are the reasonable terms on which I hold conversation
with any person. During a long talk the wisest of men becomes a fool once
and a simpleton thrice.

_The Wanderer_: Your moderation is not flattering to those to whom you
confess it.

_The Shadow_: Am I, then, to flatter?

_The Wanderer_: I thought a man’s shadow was his vanity. Surely vanity
would never say, “Am I, then, to flatter?”

_The Shadow_: Nor does human vanity, so far as I am acquainted with it,
ask, as I have done twice, whether it may speak. It simply speaks.

_The Wanderer_: Now I see for the first time how rude I am to you, my
beloved shadow. I have not said a word of my supreme _delight_ in hearing
and not merely seeing you. You must know that I love shadows even as I
love light. For the existence of beauty of face, clearness of speech,
kindliness and firmness of character, the shadow is as necessary as the
light. They are not opponents—rather do they hold each other’s hands like
good friends; and when the light vanishes, the shadow glides after it.

_The Shadow_: Yes, and I hate the same thing that you hate—night. I love
men because they are votaries of life. I rejoice in the gleam of their
eyes when they recognise and discover, they who never weary of recognising
and discovering. That shadow which all things cast when the sunshine of
knowledge falls upon them—that shadow too am I.

_The Wanderer_: I think I understand you, although you have expressed
yourself in somewhat shadowy terms. You are right. Good friends give to
each other here and there, as a sign of mutual understanding, an obscure
phrase which to any third party is meant to be a riddle. And we are good
friends, you and I. So enough of preambles! Some few hundred questions
oppress my soul, and the time for you to answer them is perchance but
short. Let us see how we may come to an understanding as quickly and
peaceably as possible.

_The Shadow_: But shadows are more shy than men. You will not reveal to
any man the manner of our conversation?

_The Wanderer_: _The manner_ of our conversation? Heaven preserve me from
wire-drawn, literary dialogues! If Plato had found less pleasure in
spinning them out, his readers would have found more pleasure in Plato. A
dialogue that in real life is a source of delight, when turned into
writing and read, is a picture with nothing but false perspectives.
Everything is too long or too short.—Yet perhaps I may reveal the _points
on which_ we have come to an understanding?

_The Shadow_: With that I am content. For every one will only recognise
your views once more, and no one will think of the shadow.

_The Wanderer_: Perhaps you are wrong, my friend! Hitherto they have
observed in my views more of the shadow than of me.

_The Shadow_: More of the shadow than of the light? Is that possible?

_The Wanderer_: Be serious, dear fool! My very first question demands
seriousness.




1.


OF THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE.—Probability, but no truth; the semblance of
freedom, but no freedom—these are the two fruits by virtue of which the
tree of knowledge cannot be confounded with the tree of life.




2.


THE WORLD’S REASON.—That the world is _not_ the abstract essence of an
eternal reasonableness is sufficiently proved by the fact that that _bit
of the world_ which we know—I mean our human reason—is none too
reasonable. And if _this_ is not eternally and wholly wise and reasonable,
the rest of the world will not be so either. Here the conclusion _a minori
ad majus, a parte ad totum_ holds good, and that with decisive force.




3.


“IN THE BEGINNING WAS.”—To glorify the origin—that is the metaphysical
after-shoot which sprouts again at the contemplation of history, and
absolutely makes us imagine that _in the beginning_ of things lies all
that is most valuable and essential.




4.


STANDARD FOR THE VALUE OF TRUTH.—The difficulty of climbing mountains is
no gauge of their height. Yet in the case of science it is different!—we
are told by certain persons who wish to be considered “the initiated,”—the
difficulty in finding truth is to determine the value of truth! This
insane morality originates in the idea that “truths” are really nothing
more than gymnastic appliances, with which we have to exercise ourselves
until we are thoroughly tired. It is a morality for the athletes and
gymnasts of the intellect.




5.


USE OF WORDS AND REALITY.—There exists a simulated contempt for all the
things that mankind actually holds most important, for all everyday
matters. For instance, we say “we only eat to live”—an abominable _lie_,
like that which speaks of the procreation of children as the real purpose
of all sexual pleasure. Conversely, the reverence for “the most important
things” is hardly ever quite genuine. The priests and metaphysicians have
indeed accustomed us to a hypocritically exaggerated _use of words_
regarding these matters, but they have not altered the feeling that these
most important things are not so important as those despised “everyday
matters.” A fatal consequence of this twofold hypocrisy is that we never
make these everyday matters (such as eating, housing, clothes, and
intercourse) the object of a constant unprejudiced and _universal_
reflection and revision, but, as such a process appears degrading, we
divert from them our serious intellectual and artistic side. Hence in such
matters habit and frivolity win an easy victory over the thoughtless,
especially over inexperienced youth. On the other hand, our continual
transgressions of the simplest laws of body and mind reduce us all, young
and old, to a disgraceful state of dependence and servitude—I mean to that
fundamentally superfluous dependence upon physicians, teachers and
clergymen, whose dead-weight still lies heavy upon the whole of society.




6.


EARTHLY INFIRMITIES AND THEIR MAIN CAUSE.—If we look about us, we are
always coming across men who have eaten eggs all their lives without
observing that the oblong-shaped taste the best; who do not know that a
thunder-storm is beneficial to the stomach; that perfumes are most
fragrant in cold, clear air; that our sense of taste varies in different
parts of our mouths; that every meal at which we talk well or listen well
does harm to the digestion. If we are not satisfied with these examples of
defective powers of observation, we shall concede all the more readily
that the everyday matters are very imperfectly seen and rarely observed by
the majority. Is this a matter of indifference?—Let us remember, after
all, that from this defect are derived _nearly all the bodily and
spiritual infirmities_ of the individual. Ignorance of what is good and
bad for us, in the arrangement of our mode of life, the division of our
day, the selection of our friends and the time we devote to them, in
business and leisure, commanding and obeying, our feeling for nature and
for art, our eating, sleeping, and meditation; ignorance and lack of keen
perceptions _in the smallest and most ordinary details_—this it is that
makes the world “a vale of tears” for so many. Let us not say that here as
everywhere the fault lies with human _unreason_. Of reason there is enough
and to spare, but it is _wrongly directed_ and _artificially diverted_
from these little intimate things. Priests and teachers, and the sublime
ambition of all idealists, coarser and subtler, din it even into the
child’s ears that the means of serving mankind at large depend upon
altogether different _things_—upon the salvation of the soul, the service
of the State, the advancement of science, or even upon social position and
property; whereas the needs of the individual, his requirements great and
small during the twenty-four hours of the day, are quite paltry or
indifferent.—Even Socrates attacked with all his might this arrogant
neglect of the human for the benefit of humanity, and loved to indicate by
a quotation from Homer the true sphere and conception of all anxiety and
reflection: “All that really matters,” he said, “is the good and evil hap
I find at home.”




7.


TWO MEANS OF CONSOLATION.—Epicurus, the soul-comforter of later antiquity,
said, with that marvellous insight which to this very day is so rarely to
be found, that for the calming of the spirit the solution of the final and
ultimate theoretical problems is by no means necessary. Hence, instead of
raising a barren and remote discussion of the final question, whether the
Gods existed, it sufficed him to say to those who were tormented by “fear
of the Gods”: “If there are Gods, they do not concern themselves with us.”
The latter position is far stronger and more favourable, for, by conceding
a few points to the other, one makes him readier to listen and to take to
heart. But as soon as he sets about proving the opposite (that the Gods do
concern themselves with us), into what thorny jungles of error must the
poor man fall, quite of his own accord, and without any cunning on the
part of his interlocutor! The latter must only have enough subtlety and
humanity to conceal his sympathy with this tragedy. Finally, the other
comes to feel disgust—the strongest argument against any
proposition—disgust with his own hypothesis. He becomes cold, and goes
away in the same frame of mind as the pure atheist who says, “What do the
Gods matter to me? The devil take them!”—In other cases, especially when a
half-physical, half-moral assumption had cast a gloom over his spirit,
Epicurus did not refute the assumption. He agreed that it might be true,
but that there was _a second assumption_ to explain the same phenomenon,
and that it could perhaps be maintained in other ways. The plurality of
hypotheses (for example, that concerning the origin of conscientious
scruples) suffices even in our time to remove from the soul the shadows
that arise so easily from pondering over a hypothesis which is isolated,
merely visible, and hence overvalued a hundredfold.—Thus whoever wishes to
console the unfortunate, the criminal, the hypochondriac, the dying, may
call to mind the two soothing suggestions of Epicurus, which can be
applied to a great number of problems. In their simplest form they would
run: firstly, granted the thing is so, it does not concern us; secondly,
the thing may be so, but it may also be otherwise.




8.


IN THE NIGHT.—So soon as night begins to fall our sensations concerning
everyday matters are altered. There is the wind, prowling as if on
forbidden paths, whispering as if in search of something, fretting because
he cannot find it. There is the lamplight, with its dim red glow, its
weary look, unwillingly fighting against night, a sullen slave to wakeful
man. There are the breathings of the sleeper, with their terrible rhythm,
to which an ever-recurring care seems to blow the trumpet-melody—we do not
hear it, but when the sleeper’s bosom heaves we feel our heart-strings
tighten; and when the breath sinks and almost dies away into a deathly
stillness, we say to ourselves, “Rest awhile, poor troubled spirit!” All
living creatures bear so great a burden that we wish them an eternal rest;
night invites to death.—If human beings were deprived of the sun and
resisted night by means of moonlight and oil-lamps, what a philosophy
would cast its veil over them! We already see only too plainly how a
shadow is thrown over the spiritual and intellectual nature of man by that
moiety of darkness and sunlessness that envelops life.




9.


ORIGIN OF THE DOCTRINE OF FREE WILL.—Necessity sways one man in the shape
of his passions, another as a habit of hearing and obeying, a third as a
logical conscience, a fourth as a caprice and a mischievous delight in
evasions. These four, however, seek the freedom of their will at the very
point where they are most securely fettered. It is as if the silkworm
sought freedom of will in spinning. What is the reason? Clearly this, that
every one thinks himself most free where his vitality is strongest; hence,
as I have said, now in passion, now in duty, now in knowledge, now in
caprice. A man unconsciously imagines that where he is strong, where he
feels most thoroughly alive, the element of his freedom must lie. He
thinks of dependence and apathy, independence and vivacity as forming
inevitable pairs.—Thus an experience that a man has undergone in the
social and political sphere is wrongly transferred to the ultimate
metaphysical sphere. There the strong man is also the free man, there the
vivid feeling of joy and sorrow, the high hopes, the keen desires, the
powerful hates are the attributes of the ruling, independent natures,
while the thrall and the slave live in a state of dazed oppression.—The
doctrine of free will is an invention of the ruling classes.




10.


ABSENCE OF FEELING OF NEW CHAINS.—So long as we do not feel that we are in
some way dependent, we consider ourselves independent—a false conclusion
that shows how proud man is, how eager for dominion. For he hereby assumes
that he would always be sure to observe and recognise dependence so soon
as he suffered it, the preliminary hypothesis being that he generally
lives in independence, and that, should he lose that independence for once
in a way, he would immediately detect a contrary sensation.—Suppose,
however, the reverse to be true—that he is always living in a complex
state of dependence, but thinks himself free where, through long habit, he
no longer feels the weight of the chain? He only suffers from new chains,
and “free will” really means nothing more than an absence of feeling of
new chains.




11.


FREEDOM OF THE WILL AND THE ISOLATION OF FACTS.—Our ordinary inaccurate
observation takes a group of phenomena as one and calls them a fact.
Between this fact and another we imagine a vacuum, we isolate each fact.
In reality, however, the sum of our actions and cognitions is no series of
facts and intervening vacua, but a continuous stream. Now the belief in
free will is incompatible with the idea of a continuous, uniform,
undivided, indivisible flow. This belief presupposes that every single
action is isolated and indivisible; it is an atomic theory as regards
volition and cognition.—We misunderstand facts as we misunderstand
characters, speaking of similar characters and similar facts, whereas both
are non-existent. Further, we bestow praise and blame only on this false
hypothesis, that there are similar facts, that a graduated order of
species of facts exists, corresponding to a graduated order of values.
Thus we isolate not only the single fact, but the groups of apparently
equal facts (good, evil, compassionate, envious actions, and so forth). In
both cases we are wrong.—The word and the concept are the most obvious
reason for our belief in this isolation of groups of actions. We do not
merely thereby designate the things; the thought at the back of our minds
is that by the word and the concept we can grasp the essence of the
actions. We are still constantly led astray by words and actions, and are
induced to think of things as simpler than they are, as separate,
indivisible, existing in the absolute. Language contains a hidden
philosophical mythology, which, however careful we may be, breaks out
afresh at every moment. The belief in free will—that is to say, in similar
facts and isolated facts—finds in language its continual apostle and
advocate.




12.


THE FUNDAMENTAL ERRORS.—A man cannot feel any psychical pleasure or pain
unless he is swayed by one of two illusions. Either he believes in the
identity of certain facts, certain sensations, and in that case finds
spiritual pleasure and pain in comparing present with past conditions and
in noting their similarity or difference (as is invariably the case with
recollection); or he believes in the freedom of the will, perhaps when he
reflects, “I ought not to have done this,” “This might have turned out
differently,” and from these reflections likewise he derives pleasure and
pain. Without the errors that are rife in every psychical pain and
pleasure, humanity would never have developed. For the root idea of
humanity is that man is free in a world of bondage—man, the eternal
wonder-worker, whether his deeds be good or evil—man, the amazing
exception, the super-beast, the quasi-God, the mind of creation, the
indispensable, the key-word to the cosmic riddle, the mighty lord of
nature and despiser of nature, the creature that calls _its_ history “the
history of the world”! _Vanitas vanitatum homo._




13.


REPETITION.—It is an excellent thing to express a thing consecutively in
two ways, and thus provide it with a right and a left foot. Truth can
stand indeed on one leg, but with two she will walk and complete her
journey.




14.


MAN AS THE COMIC ACTOR OF THE WORLD.—It would require beings more
intellectual than men to relish to the full the humorous side of man’s
view of himself as the goal of all existence and of his serious
pronouncement that he is satisfied only with the prospect of fulfilling a
world-mission. If a God created the world, he created man to be his ape,
as a perpetual source of amusement in the midst of his rather tedious
eternities. The music of the spheres surrounding the world would then
presumably be the mocking laughter of all the other creatures around
mankind. God in his boredom uses pain for the tickling of his favourite
animal, in order to enjoy his proudly tragic gestures and expressions of
suffering, and, in general, the intellectual inventiveness of the vainest
of his creatures—as inventor of this inventor. For he who invented man as
a joke had more intellect and more joy in intellect than has man.—Even
here, where our human nature is willing to humble itself, our vanity again
plays us a trick, in that we men should like in this vanity at least to be
quite marvellous and incomparable. Our uniqueness in the world! Oh, what
an improbable thing it is! Astronomers, who occasionally acquire a horizon
outside our world, give us to understand that the drop of life on the
earth is without significance for the total character of the mighty ocean
of birth and decay; that countless stars present conditions for the
generation of life similar to those of the earth—and yet these are but a
handful in comparison with the endless number that have never known, or
have long been cured, of the eruption of life; that life on each of these
stars, measured by the period of its existence, has been but an instant, a
flicker, with long, long intervals afterwards—and thus in no way the aim
and final purpose of their existence. Possibly the ant in the forest is
quite as firmly convinced that it is the aim and purpose of the existence
of the forest, as we are convinced in our imaginations (almost
unconsciously) that the destruction of mankind involves the destruction of
the world. It is even modesty on our part to go no farther than this, and
not to arrange a universal twilight of the world and the Gods as the
funeral ceremony of the last man. Even to the eye of the most unbiassed
astronomer a lifeless world can scarcely appear otherwise than as a
shining and swinging star wherein man lies buried.




15.


THE MODESTY OF MAN.—How little pleasure is enough for the majority to make
them feel that life is good! How modest is man!




16.


WHERE INDIFFERENCE IS NECESSARY.—Nothing would be more perverse than to
wait for the truths that science will finally establish concerning the
first and last things, and until then to think (and especially to believe)
in the traditional way, as one is so often advised to do. The impulse that
bids us seek nothing but _certainties_ in this domain is a religious
offshoot, nothing better—a hidden and only apparently sceptical variety of
the “metaphysical need,” the underlying idea being that for a long time no
view of these ultimate certainties will be obtainable, and that until then
the “believer” has the right not to trouble himself about the whole
subject. We have no need of these certainties about the farthermost
horizons in order to live a full and efficient human life, any more than
the ant needs them in order to be a good ant. Rather must we ascertain the
origin of that troublesome significance that we have attached to these
things for so long. For this we require the history of ethical and
religious sentiments, since it is only under the influence of such
sentiments that these most acute problems of knowledge have become so
weighty and terrifying. Into the outermost regions to which the mental eye
can penetrate (without ever penetrating _into_ them), we have smuggled
such concepts as guilt and punishment (everlasting punishment, too!). The
darker those regions, the more careless we have been. For ages men have
let their imaginations run riot where they could establish nothing, and
have induced posterity to accept these fantasies as something serious and
true, with this abominable lie as their final trump-card: that faith is
worth more than knowledge. What we need now in regard to these ultimate
things is not knowledge as against faith, but indifference as against
faith and pretended knowledge in these matters!—Everything must lie nearer
to us than what has hitherto been preached to us as the most important
thing, I mean the questions: “What end does man serve?” “What is his fate
after death?” “How does he make his peace with God?” and all the rest of
that bag of tricks. The problems of the dogmatic philosophers, be they
idealists, materialists, or realists, concern us as little as do these
religious questions. They all have the same object in view—to force us to
a decision in matters where neither faith nor knowledge is needed. It is
better even for the most ardent lover of knowledge that the territory open
to investigation and to reason should be encircled by a belt of fog-laden,
treacherous marshland, a strip of ever watery, impenetrable, and
indeterminable country. It is just by the comparison with the realm of
darkness on the edge of the world of knowledge that the bright, accessible
region of that world rises in value.—We must once more become good friends
of the “everyday matters,” and not, as hitherto, despise them and look
beyond them at clouds and monsters of the night. In forests and caverns,
in marshy tracts and under dull skies, on the lowest rungs of the ladder
of culture, man has lived for æons, and lived in poverty. There he has
learnt to despise the present, his neighbours, his life, and himself, and
we, the inhabitants of the brighter fields of Nature and mind, still
inherit in our blood some taint of this contempt for everyday matters.




17.


PROFOUND INTERPRETATIONS.—He who has interpreted a passage in an author
“more profoundly” than was intended, has not interpreted the author but
has obscured him. Our metaphysicians are in the same relation, or even in
a worse relation, to the text of Nature. For, to apply their profound
interpretations, they often alter the text to suit their purpose—or, in
other words, corrupt the text. A curious example of the corruption and
obscuration of an author’s text is furnished by the ideas of Schopenhauer
on the pregnancy of women. “The sign of a continuous will to life in
time,” he says, “is copulation; the sign of the light of knowledge which
is associated anew with this will and holds the possibility of a
deliverance, and that too in the highest degree of clearness, is the
renewed incarnation of the will to life. This incarnation is betokened by
pregnancy, which is therefore frank and open, and even proud, whereas
copulation hides itself like a criminal.” He declares that every woman, if
surprised in the sexual act, would be likely to die of shame, but
“displays her pregnancy without a trace of shame, nay even with a sort of
pride.” Now, firstly, this condition cannot easily be displayed more
aggressively than it displays itself, and when Schopenhauer gives
prominence only to the intentional character of the display, he is
fashioning his text to suit the interpretation. Moreover, his statement of
the universality of the phenomenon is not true. He speaks of “every
woman.” Many women, especially the younger, often appear painfully ashamed
of their condition, even in the presence of their nearest kinsfolk. And
when women of riper years, especially in the humbler classes, do actually
appear proud of their condition, it is because they would give us to
understand that they are still desirable to their husbands. That a
neighbour on seeing them or a passing stranger should say or think “Can it
be possible?”—that is an alms always acceptable to the vanity of women of
low mental capacity. In the reverse instance, to conclude from
Schopenhauer’s proposition, the cleverest and most intelligent women would
tend more than any to exult openly in their condition. For they have the
best prospect of giving birth to an intellectual prodigy, in whom “the
will” can once more “negative” itself for the universal good. Stupid
women, on the other hand, would have every reason to hide their pregnancy
more modestly than anything they hide.—It cannot be said that this view
corresponds to reality. Granted, however, that Schopenhauer was right on
the general principle that women show more self-satisfaction when pregnant
than at any other time, a better explanation than this lies to hand. One
might imagine the clucking of a hen even before she lays an egg, saying,
“Look! look! I shall lay an egg! I shall lay an egg!”




18.


THE MODERN DIOGENES.—Before we look for man, we must have found the
lantern.—Will it have to be the Cynic’s lantern?




19.


IMMORALISTS.—Moralists must now put up with being rated as immoralists,
because they dissect morals. He, however, who would dissect must kill, but
only in order that we may know more, judge better, live better, not in
order that all the world may dissect. Unfortunately, men still think that
every moralist in his every action must be a pattern for others to
imitate. They confound him with the preacher of morality. The older
moralists did not dissect enough and preached too often, whence that
confusion and the unpleasant consequences for our latter-day moralists are
derived.




20.


A CAUTION AGAINST CONFUSION.—There are moralists who treat the strong,
noble, self-denying attitude of such beings as the heroes of Plutarch, or
the pure, enlightened, warmth-giving state of soul peculiar to truly good
men and women, as difficult scientific problems. They investigate the
origin of such phenomena, indicating the complex element in the apparent
simplicity, and directing their gaze to the tangled skein of motives, the
delicate web of conceptual illusions, and the sentiments of individuals or
of groups, that are a legacy of ancient days gradually increased. Such
moralists are very different from those with whom they are most commonly
confounded, from those petty minds that do not believe at all in these
modes of thought and states of soul, and imagine their own poverty to be
hidden somewhere behind the glamour of greatness and purity. The moralists
say, “Here are problems,” and these pitiable creatures say, “Here are
impostors and deceptions.” Thus the latter deny the existence of the very
things which the former are at pains to explain.




21.


_Man as the Measurer._—Perhaps all human morality had its origin in the
tremendous excitement that seized primitive man when he discovered measure
and measuring, scales and weighing (for the word _Mensch_ [man] means “the
measurer”—he wished to _name_ himself after his greatest discovery!). With
these ideas they mounted into regions that are quite beyond all measuring
and weighing, but did not appear to be so in the beginning.




22.


_The Principle of Equilibrium._—The robber and the man of power who
promises to protect a community from robbers are perhaps at bottom beings
of the same mould, save that the latter attains his ends by other means
than the former—that is to say, through regular imposts paid to him by the
community, and no longer through forced contributions. (The same relation
exists between merchant and pirate, who for a long period are one and the
same person: where the one function appears to them inadvisable, they
exercise the other. Even to-day mercantile morality is really nothing but
a refinement on piratical morality—buying in the cheapest market, at prime
cost if possible, and selling in the dearest.) The essential point is that
the man of power promises to maintain the equilibrium against the robber,
and herein the weak find a possibility of living. For either they must
group themselves into an equivalent power, or they must subject themselves
to some one of equivalent power (_i.e._ render service in return for his
efforts). The latter course is generally preferred, because it really
keeps two dangerous beings in check—the robber through the man of power,
and the man of power through the standpoint of advantage; for the latter
profits by treating his subjects with graciousness and tolerance, in order
that they may support not only themselves but their ruler. As a matter of
fact, conditions may still be hard and cruel enough, yet in comparison
with the complete annihilation that was formerly always a possibility, men
breathe freely.—The community is at first the organisation of the weak to
counterbalance menacing forces. An organisation to outweigh those forces
would be more advisable, if its members grew strong enough to destroy the
adverse power: and when it is a question of one mighty oppressor, the
_attempt will_ certainly be made. But if the one man is the head of a
clan, or if he has a large following, a rapid and decisive annihilation is
improbable, and a long or permanent feud is only to be expected. This
feud, however, involves the least desirable condition for the community,
for it thereby loses the time to provide for its means of subsistence with
the necessary regularity, and sees the product of all work hourly
threatened. Hence the community prefers to raise its power of attack and
defence to the exact plane on which the power of its dangerous neighbour
stands, and to give him to understand that an equal weight now lies in its
own side of the scales—so why not be good friends?—Thus equilibrium is a
most important conception for the understanding of the ancient doctrines
of law and morals. Equilibrium is, in fact, the basis of justice. When
justice in ruder ages says, “An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth,” it
presupposes the attainment of this equilibrium and tries to maintain it by
means of this compensation; so that, when crime is committed, the injured
party will not take the revenge of blind anger. By means of the _jus
talionis_ the equilibrium of the disturbed relations of power is restored,
for in such primitive times an eye or an arm more means a bit more power,
more weight.—In a community where all consider themselves equal, disgrace
and punishment await crime—that is, violations of the principle of
equilibrium. Disgrace is thrown into the scale as a counter-weight against
the encroaching individual, who has gained profit by his encroachment, and
now suffers losses (through disgrace) which annul and outweigh the
previous profits. Punishment, in the same way, sets up a far greater
counter-weight against the preponderance which every criminal hopes to
obtain—imprisonment as against a deed of violence, restitution and fines
as against theft. Thus the sinner is reminded that his action has excluded
him from the community and from its moral advantages, since the community
treats him as an inferior, a weaker brother, an outsider. For this reason
punishment is not merely retaliation, but has something more, something of
the cruelty of the state of nature, and of this it would serve as a
reminder.




23.


WHETHER THE ADHERENTS OF THE DOCTRINE OF FREE WILL HAVE A RIGHT TO
PUNISH?—Men whose vocation it is to judge and punish try to establish in
every case whether an evil-doer is really responsible for his act, whether
he was able to apply his reasoning powers, whether he acted with motives
and not unconsciously or under constraint. If he is punished, it is
because he preferred the worse to the better motives, which he must
consequently have known. Where this knowledge is wanting, man is,
according to the prevailing view, not responsible—unless his ignorance,
_e.g._ his _ignorantia legis_, be the consequence of an intentional
neglect to learn what he ought: in that case he already preferred the
worse to the better motives at the time when he refused to learn, and must
now pay the penalty of his unwise choice. If, on the other hand, perhaps
through stupidity or shortsightedness, he has never seen the better
motives, he is generally not punished, for people say that he made a wrong
choice, he acted like a brute beast. The intentional rejection of the
better reason is now needed before we treat the offender as fit to be
punished. But how can any one be intentionally more unreasonable than he
ought to be? Whence comes the decision, if the scales are loaded with good
and bad motives? So the origin is not error or blindness, not an internal
or external constraint? (It should furthermore be remembered that every
so-called “external constraint” is nothing more than the internal
constraint of fear and pain.) Whence? is the repeated question. So reason
is not to be the cause of action, because reason cannot decide against the
better motives? Thus we call “free will” to our aid. Absolute discretion
is to decide, and a moment is to intervene when no motive exercises an
influence, when the deed is done as a miracle, resulting from nothing.
This assumed discretion is punished in a case where no discretion should
rule. Reason, which knows law, prohibition, and command, should have left
no choice, they say, and should have acted as a constraint and a higher
power. Hence the offender is punished because he makes use of “free
will”—in other words, has acted without motive where he should have been
guided by motives. But why did he do it? This question must not even be
asked; the deed was done without a “Why?” without motive, without origin,
being a thing purposeless, unreasoned.—However, according to the
above-named preliminary condition of punishability, such a deed should not
be punished at all! Moreover, even this reason for punishing should not
hold good, that in this case something had _not_ been done, had been
omitted, that reason had not been used at all: for at any rate the
omission was unintentional, and only intentional omission is considered
punishable. The offender has indeed preferred the worse to the better
motives, but without motive and purpose: he has indeed failed to apply his
reason, but not exactly with the object of not applying it. The very
assumption made in the case of punishable crime, that the criminal
intentionally renounced his reason, is removed by the hypothesis of “free
will.” According to your own principles, you must not punish, you
adherents of the doctrine of free will!—These principles are, however,
nothing but a very marvellous conceptual mythology, and the hen that
hatched them has brooded on her eggs far away from all reality.




24.


JUDGING THE CRIMINAL AND HIS JUDGE.—The criminal, who knows the whole
concatenation of circumstances, does not consider his act so far beyond
the bounds of order and comprehension as does his judge. His punishment,
however, is measured by the degree of astonishment that seizes the judge
when he finds the crime incomprehensible.—If the defending counsel’s
knowledge of the case and its previous history extends far enough, the
so-called extenuating circumstances which he duly pleads must end by
absolving his client from all guilt. Or, to put it more plainly, the
advocate will, step by step, tone down and finally remove the astonishment
of the judge, by forcing every honest listener to the tacit avowal, “He
was bound to act as he did, and if we punished, we should be punishing
eternal Necessity.”—Measuring the punishment by the degree of knowledge we
possess or can obtain of the previous history of the crime—is that not in
conflict with all equity?




25.


EXCHANGE AND EQUITY.—In an exchange, the only just and honest course would
be for either party to demand only so much as he considers his commodity
to be worth, allowance being made for trouble in acquisition, scarcity,
time spent and so forth, besides the subjective value. As soon as you make
your price bear a relation to the other’s need, you become a refined sort
of robber and extortioner.—If money is the sole medium of exchange, we
must remember that a shilling is by no means the same thing in the hands
of a rich heir, a farm labourer, a merchant, and a university student. It
would be equitable for every one to receive much or little for his money,
according as he has done much or little to earn it. In practice, as we all
know, the reverse is the case. In the world of high finance the shilling
of the idle rich man can buy more than that of the poor, industrious man.




26.


LEGAL CONDITIONS AS MEANS.—Law, where it rests upon contracts between
equals, holds good so long as the power of the parties to the contract
remains equal or similar. Wisdom created law to end all feuds and useless
expenditure among men on an equal footing. Quite as definite an end is put
to this waste, however, when one party has become decidedly weaker than
the other. Subjection enters and law ceases, but the result is the same as
that attained by law. For now it is the wisdom of the superior which
advises to spare the inferior and not uselessly to squander his strength.
Thus the position of the inferior is often more favourable than that of
the equal.—Hence legal conditions are temporary _means_ counselled by
wisdom, and not ends.




27.


EXPLANATION OF MALICIOUS JOY.—Malicious joy arises when a man consciously
finds himself in evil plight and feels anxiety or remorse or pain. The
misfortune that overtakes B. makes him equal to A., and A. is reconciled
and no longer envious.—If A. is prosperous, he still hoards up in his
memory B.’s misfortune as a capital, so as to throw it in the scale as a
counter-weight when he himself suffers adversity. In this case too he
feels “malicious joy” (_Schadenfreude_). The sentiment of equality thus
applies its standard to the domain of luck and chance. Malicious joy is
the commonest expression of victory and restoration of equality, even in a
higher state of civilisation. This emotion has only been in existence
since the time when man learnt to look upon another as his equal—in other
words, since the foundation of society.




28.


THE ARBITRARY ELEMENT IN THE AWARD OF PUNISHMENT.—To most criminals
punishment comes just as illegitimate children come to women. They have
done the same thing a hundred times without any bad consequences. Suddenly
comes discovery, and with discovery punishment. Yet habit should make the
deed for which the criminal is punished appear more excusable, for he has
developed a propensity that is hard to resist. Instead of this, the
criminal is punished more severely if the suspicion of habitual crime
rests on him, and habit is made a valid reason against all extenuation. On
the other hand, a model life, wherein crime shows up in more terrible
contrast, should make the guilt appear more heavy! But here the custom is
to soften the punishment. Everything is measured not from the standpoint
of the criminal but from that of society and its losses and dangers. The
previous utility of an individual is weighed against his one nefarious
action, his previous criminality is added to that recently discovered, and
punishment is thus meted out as highly as possible. But if we thus punish
or reward a man’s past (for in the former case the diminution of
punishment is a reward) we ought to go farther back and punish and reward
the cause of his past—I mean parents, teachers, society. In many instances
we shall then find the _judges_ somehow or other sharing in the guilt. It
is arbitrary to stop at the criminal himself when we punish his past: if
we will not grant the absolute excusability of every crime, we should stop
at each individual case and probe no farther into the past—in other words,
isolate guilt and not connect it with previous actions. Otherwise we sin
against logic. The teachers of free will should draw the inevitable
conclusion from their doctrine of “free will” and boldly decree: “No
action has a past.”




29.


ENVY AND HER NOBLER SISTER.—Where equality is really recognised and
permanently established, we see the rise of that propensity that is
generally considered immoral, and would scarcely be conceivable in a state
of nature—envy. The envious man is susceptible to every sign of individual
superiority to the common herd, and wishes to depress every one once more
to the level—or raise himself to the superior plane. Hence arise two
different modes of action, which Hesiod designated good and bad Eris. In
the same way, in a condition of equality there arises indignation if A. is
prosperous above and B. unfortunate beneath their deserts and equality.
These latter, however, are emotions of nobler natures. They feel the want
of justice and equity in things that are independent of the arbitrary
choice of men—or, in other words, they desire the equality recognised by
man to be recognised as well by Nature and chance. They are angry that men
of equal merits should not have equal fortune.




30.


THE ENVY OF THE GODS.—“The envy of the Gods” arises when a despised person
sets himself on an equality with his superior (like Ajax), or is made
equal with him by the favour of fortune (like Niobe, the too favoured
mother). In the social class system this envy demands that no one shall
have merits above his station, that his prosperity shall be on a level
with his position, and especially that his self-consciousness shall not
outgrow the limits of his rank. Often the victorious general, or the pupil
who achieves a masterpiece, has experienced “the envy of the gods.”




31.


VANITY AS AN ANTI-SOCIAL AFTERGROWTH.—As men, for the sake of security,
have made themselves equal in order to found communities, but as also this
conception is imposed by a sort of constraint and is entirely opposed to
the instincts of the individual, so, the more universal security is
guaranteed, the more do new offshoots of the old instinct for predominance
appear. Such offshoots appear in the setting-up of class distinctions, in
the demand for professional dignities and privileges, and, generally
speaking, in vanity (manners, dress, speech, and so forth). So soon as
danger to the community is apparent, the majority, who were unable to
assert their preponderance in a time of universal peace, once more bring
about the condition of equality, and for the time being the absurd
privileges and vanities disappear. If the community, however, collapses
utterly and anarchy reigns supreme, there arises the state of nature: an
absolutely ruthless inequality as recounted by Thucydides in the case of
Corcyra. Neither a natural justice nor a natural injustice exists.




32.


EQUITY.—Equity is a development of justice, and arises among such as do
not come into conflict with the communal equality. This more subtle
recognition of the principle of equilibrium is applied to cases where
nothing is prescribed by law. Equity looks forwards and backwards, its
maxim being, “Do unto others as you would that they should do unto you.”
_Aequum_ means: “This principle is conformable to our equality; it tones
down even our small differences to an appearance of equality, and expects
us to be indulgent in cases where we are not compelled to pardon.”




33.


ELEMENTS OF REVENGE.—The word “revenge” is spoken so quickly that it
almost seems as if it could not contain more than one conceptual and
emotional root. Hence we are still at pains to find this root. Our
economists, in the same way, have never wearied of scenting a similar
unity in the word “value,” and of hunting after the primitive root idea of
value. As if all words were not pockets, into which this or that or
several things have been stuffed at once! So “revenge” is now one thing,
now another, and sometimes more composite. Let us first distinguish that
defensive counter-blow, which we strike, almost unconsciously, even at
inanimate objects (such as machinery in motion) that have hurt us. The
notion is to set a check to the object that has hurt us, by bringing the
machine to a stop. Sometimes the force of this counter-blow, in order to
attain its object, will have to be strong enough to shatter the machine.
If the machine be too strong to be disorganised by one man, the latter
will all the same strike the most violent blow he can—as a sort of last
attempt. We behave similarly towards persons who hurt us, at the immediate
sensation of the hurt. If we like to call this an act of revenge, well and
good: but we must remember that here self-preservation alone has set its
cog-wheels of reason in motion, and that after all we do not think of the
doer of the injury but only of ourselves. We act without any idea of doing
injury in return, only with a view to getting away safe and sound.—It
needs time to pass in thought from oneself to one’s adversary and ask
oneself at what point he is most vulnerable. This is done in the second
variety of revenge, the preliminary idea of which is to consider the
vulnerability and susceptibility of the other. The intention then is to
give pain. On the other hand, the idea of securing himself against further
injury is in this case so entirely outside the avenger’s horizon, that he
almost regularly brings about his own further injury and often foresees it
in cold blood. If in the first sort of revenge it was the fear of a second
blow that made the counter-blow as strong as possible, in this case there
is an almost complete indifference to what one’s adversary will do: the
strength of the counter-blow is only determined by what he has _already_
done to us. Then what has he done? What profit is it to us if he is now
suffering, after we have suffered through him? This is a case of
readjustment, whereas the first act of revenge only serves the purpose of
self-preservation. It may be that through our adversary we have lost
property, rank, friends, children—these losses are not recovered by
revenge, the readjustment only concerns a subsidiary loss which is added
to all the other losses. The revenge of readjustment does not preserve one
from further injury, it does not make good the injury already
suffered—except in one case. If our honour has suffered through our
adversary, revenge can restore it. But in any case honour _has_ suffered
an injury if intentional harm has been done us, because our adversary
proved thereby that he was not afraid of us. By revenge we prove that we
are not afraid of him either, and herein lies the settlement, the
readjustment. (The intention of showing their complete lack of fear goes
so far in some people that the dangers of revenge—loss of health or life
or other losses—are in their eyes an indispensable condition of every
vengeful act. Hence they practise the duel, although the law also offers
them aid in obtaining satisfaction for what they have suffered. They are
not satisfied with a safe means of recovering their honour, because this
would not prove their fearlessness.)—In the first-named variety of revenge
it is just fear that strikes the counter-blow; in the second case it is
the absence of fear, which, as has been said, wishes to manifest itself in
the counter-blow.—Thus nothing appears more different than the motives of
the two courses of action which are designated by the one word “revenge.”
Yet it often happens that the avenger is not precisely certain as to what
really prompted his deed: perhaps he struck the counterblow from fear and
the instinct of self-preservation, but in the background, when he has time
to reflect upon the standpoint of wounded honour, he imagines that he has
avenged himself for the sake of his honour—this motive is in any case more
_reputable_ than the other. An essential point is whether he sees his
honour injured in the eyes of others (the world) or only in the eyes of
his offenders: in the latter case he will prefer secret, in the former
open revenge. Accordingly, as he enters strongly or feebly into the soul
of the doer and the spectator, his revenge will be more bitter or more
tame. If he is entirely lacking in this sort of imagination, he will not
think at all of revenge, as the feeling of “honour” is not present in him,
and accordingly cannot be wounded. In the same way, he will not think of
revenge if he despises the offender and the spectator; because as objects
of his contempt they cannot give him honour, and accordingly cannot rob
him of honour. Finally, he will forego revenge in the not uncommon case of
his loving the offender. It is true that he then suffers loss of honour in
the other’s eyes, and will perhaps become less worthy of having his love
returned. But even to renounce all requital of love is a sacrifice that
love is ready to make when its only object is to avoid hurting the beloved
object: this would mean hurting oneself more than one is hurt by the
sacrifice.—Accordingly, every one will avenge himself, unless he be bereft
of honour or inspired by contempt or by love for the offender. Even if he
turns to the law-courts, he desires revenge as a private individual; but
also, as a thoughtful, prudent man of society, he desires the revenge of
society upon one who does not respect it. Thus by legal punishment private
honour as well as that of society is restored—that is to say, punishment
is revenge. Punishment undoubtedly contains the first-mentioned element of
revenge, in as far as by its means society helps to preserve itself, and
strikes a counter-blow in self-defence. Punishment desires to prevent
further injury, to scare other offenders. In this way the two elements of
revenge, different as they are, are united in punishment, and this may
perhaps tend most of all to maintain the above-mentioned confusion of
ideas, thanks to which the individual avenger generally does not know what
he really wants.




34.


THE VIRTUES THAT DAMAGE US.—As members of communities we think we have no
right to exercise certain virtues which afford us great honour and some
pleasure as private individuals (for example, indulgence and favour
towards miscreants of all kinds)—in short, every mode of action whereby
the advantage of society would suffer through our virtue. No bench of
judges, face to face with its conscience, may permit itself to be
gracious. This privilege is reserved for the king as an individual, and we
are glad when he makes use of it, proving that we should like to be
gracious individually, but not collectively. Society recognises only the
virtues profitable to her, or at least not injurious to her—virtues like
justice, which are exercised without loss, or, in fact, at compound
interest. The virtues that damage us cannot have originated in society,
because even now opposition to them arises in every small society that is
in the making. Such virtues are therefore those of men of unequal
standing, invented by the superior individuals; they are the virtues of
rulers, and the idea underlying them is: “I am mighty enough to put up
with an obvious loss; that is a proof of my power.” Thus they are virtues
closely akin to pride.




35.


THE CASUISTRY OF ADVANTAGE.—There would be no moral casuistry if there
were no casuistry of advantage. The most free and refined intelligence is
often incapable of choosing between two alternatives in such a way that
his choice necessarily involves the greater advantage. In such cases we
choose because we must, and afterwards often feel a kind of emotional
sea-sickness.




36.


TURNING HYPOCRITE.—Every beggar turns hypocrite, like every one who makes
his living out of indigence, be it personal or public.—The beggar does not
feel want nearly so keenly as he must make others feel it, if he wishes to
make a living by mendicancy.




37.


A SORT OF CULT OF THE PASSIONS.—You hypochondriacs, you philosophic
blind-worms talk of the formidable nature of human passions, in order to
inveigh against the dreadsomeness of the whole world-structure. As if the
passions were always and everywhere formidable! As if this sort of terror
must always exist in the world!—Through a carelessness in small matters,
through a deficiency in observation of self and of the rising generation,
you have yourselves allowed your passions to develop into such unruly
monsters that you are frightened now at the mere mention of the word
“passion”! It rests with you and it rests with us to divest the passions
of their formidable features and so to dam them that they do not become
devastating floods.—We must not exalt our errors into eternal fatalities.
Rather shall we honestly endeavour to convert all the passions of humanity
into sources of joy.(18)




38.


THE STING OF CONSCIENCE.—The sting of conscience, like the gnawing of a
dog at a stone, is mere foolishness.




39.


ORIGIN OF RIGHTS.—Rights may be traced to traditions, traditions to
momentary agreements. At some time or other men were mutually content with
the consequences of making an agreement, and, again, too indolent formally
to renew it. Thus they went on living as if it had constantly been
renewed, and gradually, when oblivion cast its veil over the origin, they
thought they possessed a sacred, unalterable foundation on which every
generation would be compelled to build. Tradition was now a constraint,
even if it no more involved the profit originally derived from making the
agreement.—Here the weak have always found their strong fortress. They are
inclined to immortalise the momentary agreement, the single act of favour
shown towards them.




40.


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF OBLIVION IN MORAL SENTIMENT.—The same actions that in
primitive society first aimed at the common advantage were later on
performed from other motives: from fear or reverence of those who demanded
and recommended them; or from habit, because men had seen them done about
them from childhood upwards; or from kindness, because the practising of
them caused delight and approving looks on all sides; or from vanity,
because they were praised. Such actions, in which the fundamental motive,
that of utility, has been _forgotten_, are then called moral; not, indeed,
because they are done from those other motives, but because they are not
done with a conscious purpose of utility.—Whence the hatred of utility
that suddenly manifests itself here, and by which all praiseworthy actions
formally exclude all actions for the sake of utility?—Clearly society, the
rallying-point of all morality and of all maxims in praise of moral
action, has had to battle too long and too fiercely with the selfishness
and obstinacy of the individual not to rate every motive morally higher
than utility. Hence it looks as if morals had not sprung from utility,
whereas in fact morals are originally the public utility, which had great
difficulty in prevailing over the interests of the unit and securing a
loftier reputation.




41.


THE HEIRS TO THE WEALTH OF MORALITY.—Even in the domain of morals there is
an inherited wealth, which is owned by the gentle, the good-tempered, the
compassionate, the indulgent. They have inherited from their forefathers
their gentle mode of action, but not common sense (the source of that mode
of action). The pleasant thing about this wealth is that one must always
bestow and communicate a portion of it, if its presence is to be felt at
all. Thus this wealth unconsciously aims at bridging the gulf between the
morally rich and the morally poor, and, what is its best and most
remarkable feature, not for the sake of a future mean between rich and
poor, but for the sake of a universal prosperity and superfluity.—Such may
be the prevailing view of inherited moral wealth, but it seems to me that
this view is maintained more _in majorem gloriam_ of morality than in
honour of truth. Experience at least establishes a maxim which must serve,
if not as a refutation, at any rate as an important check upon that
generalisation. Without the most exquisite intelligence, says experience,
without the most refined capacity for choice and a strong propensity to
observe the mean, the morally rich will become spendthrifts of morality.
For by abandoning themselves without restraint to their compassionate,
gentle, conciliatory, harmonising instincts, they make all about them more
careless, more covetous, and more sentimental. The children of these
highly moral spendthrifts easily and (sad to relate) at best become
pleasant but futile wasters.




42.


THE JUDGE AND EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES.—“One should behave as a man of
honour even towards the devil and pay his debts,” said an old soldier,
when the story of Faust had been related to him in rather fuller detail.
“Hell is the right place for Faust!” “You are terrible, you men!” cried
his wife; “how can that be? After all, his only fault was having no ink in
his ink-stand! It is indeed a sin to write with blood, but surely for that
such a handsome man ought not to burn in Hell-fire?”




43.


PROBLEM OF THE DUTY OF TRUTH.—Duty is an imperious sentiment that forces
us to action. We call it good, and consider it outside the pale of
discussion. The origin, limits, and justification of duty we will not
debate or allow to be debated. But the thinker considers everything an
evolution and every evolution a subject for discussion, and is accordingly
without duty so long as he is merely a thinker. As such, he would not
recognise the duty of seeing and speaking the truth; he would not _feel_
the sentiment at all. He asks, whence comes it and whither will it go? But
even this questioning appears to him questionable. Surely, however, the
consequence would be that the thinker’s machinery would no longer work
properly if he could really feel himself unencumbered by duty in the
search for knowledge? It would appear, then, that for fuel the same
element is necessary as must be investigated by means of the
machine.—Perhaps the formula will be: granted there were a duty of
recognising truth, what is then the truth in regard to every other kind of
duty?—But is not a hypothetical sense of duty a contradiction in terms?




44.


GRADES OF MORALS.—Morality is primarily a means of preserving the
community and saving it from destruction. Next it is a means of
maintaining the community on a certain plane and in a certain degree of
benevolence. Its motives are fear and hope, and these in a more coarse,
rough, and powerful form, the more the propensity towards the perverse,
one-sided, and personal still persists. The most terrible means of
intimidation must be brought into play so long as milder forms have no
effect and that twofold species of preservation cannot be attained. (The
strongest intimidation, by the way, is the invention of a hereafter with a
hell everlasting.) For this purpose we must have racks and torturers of
the soul. Further grades of morality, and accordingly means to the end
referred to, are the commandments of a God (as in the Mosaic law). Still
further and higher are the commandments of an absolute sense of duty with
a “Thou shalt”—all rather roughly hewn yet _broad_ steps, because on the
finer, narrower steps men cannot yet set their feet. Then comes a morality
of inclination, of taste, finally of insight—which is beyond all the
illusory motives of morality, but has convinced itself that humanity for
long periods could be allowed no other.




45.


THE MORALITY OF PITY IN THE MOUTHS OF THE INTEMPERATE.—All those who are
not sufficiently masters of themselves and do not know morality as a
self-control and self-conquest continuously exercised in things great and
small, unconsciously come to glorify the good, compassionate, benevolent
impulses of that instinctive morality which has no head, but seems merely
to consist of a heart and helpful hands. It is to their interest even to
cast suspicion upon a morality of reason and to set up the other as the
sole morality.




46.


SEWERS OF THE SOUL.—Even the soul must have its definite sewers, through
which it can allow its filth to flow off: for this purpose it may use
persons, relations, social classes, its native country, or the world, or
finally—for the wholly arrogant (I mean our modern “pessimists”)—_le bon
Dieu_.




47.


A KIND OF REST AND CONTEMPLATION.—Beware lest your rest and contemplation
resemble that of a dog before a butcher’s stall, prevented by fear from
advancing and by greed from retiring, and opening its eyes wide as though
they were mouths.




48.


PROHIBITIONS WITHOUT REASONS.—A prohibition, the reason of which we do not
understand or admit, is almost a command, not only for the stiff-necked
but for the thirster after knowledge. We at once make an experiment in
order to learn _why_ the prohibition was made. Moral prohibitions, like
those of the Decalogue, are only suited to ages when reason lies
vanquished. Nowadays a prohibition like “Thou shalt not kill,” “Thou shalt
not commit adultery,” laid down without reasons, would have an injurious
rather than a beneficial effect.




49.


CHARACTER PORTRAIT.—What sort of a man is it that can say of himself: “I
despise very easily, but never hate. I at once find out in every man
something which can be honoured and for which I honour him: the so-called
amiable qualities attract me but little”?




50.


PITY AND CONTEMPT.—The expression of pity is regarded as a sign of
contempt, because one has clearly ceased to be an object of _fear_ as soon
as one becomes an object of pity. One has sunk below the level of the
equilibrium. For this equilibrium does not satisfy human vanity, which is
only satisfied by the feeling that one is imposing respect and awe. Hence
it is difficult to explain why pity is so highly prized, just as we need
to explain why the unselfish man, who is originally despised or feared as
being artful, is praised.




51.


THE CAPACITY OF BEING SMALL.—We must be as near to flowers, grasses, and
butterflies as a child, that is, not much bigger than they. We adults have
grown up beyond them and have to stoop to them. I think the grasses hate
us when we confess our love for them.—He who would have a share in all
good things must understand at times how to be small.




52.


THE SUM-TOTAL OF CONSCIENCE.—The sum-total of our conscience is all that
has regularly been demanded of us, without reason, in the days of our
childhood, by people whom we respected or feared. From conscience comes
that feeling of obligation (“This I must do, this omit”) which does not
ask, Why must I?—In all cases where a thing is done with “because” and
“why,” man acts without conscience, but not necessarily on that account
_against_ conscience.—The belief in authority is the source of conscience;
which is therefore not the voice of God in the heart of man, but the voice
of some men in man.




53.


CONQUEST OF THE PASSIONS.—The man who has overcome his passions has
entered into possession of the most fruitful soil, like the colonist who
has become lord over bogs and forests. To sow the seed of spiritual good
works on the soil of the vanquished passions is the next and most urgent
task. The conquest itself is a means, not an end: if it be not so
regarded, all kind of weeds and devil’s crop quickly spring up upon the
fertile soil that has been cleared, and soon the growth is all wilder and
more luxuriant than before.




54.


SKILL IN SERVICE.—All so-called practical men have skill in service,
whether it be serving others or themselves; this is what makes them
practical. Robinson owned a servant even better than Friday—his name was
Crusoe.




55.


DANGER IN SPEECH TO INTELLECTUAL FREEDOM.—Every word is a preconceived
judgment.




56.


INTELLECT AND BOREDOM.—The proverb, “The Hungarian is far too lazy to feel
bored,” gives food for thought. Only the highest and most active animals
are capable of being bored.—The boredom of God on the seventh day of
Creation would be a subject for a great poet.




57.


INTERCOURSE WITH ANIMALS.—The origin of our morality may still be observed
in our relations with animals. Where advantage or the reverse do not come
into play, we have a feeling of complete irresponsibility. For example, we
kill or wound insects or let them live, and as a rule think no more about
it. We are so clumsy that even our gracious acts towards flowers and small
animals are almost always murderous: this does not in the least detract
from our pleasure in them.—To-day is the festival of the small animals,
the most sultry day of the year. There is a swarming and crawling around
us, and we, without intention, but also without reflection, crush here and
there a little fly or winged beetle.—If animals do us harm, we strive to
_annihilate_ them in every possible way. The means are often cruel enough,
even without our really intending them to be so—it is the cruelty of
thoughtlessness. If they are useful, we turn them to advantage, until a
more refined wisdom teaches us that certain animals amply reward a
different mode of treatment, that of tending and breeding. Here
responsibility first arises. Torturing is avoided in the case of the
domestic animal. One man is indignant if another is cruel to his cow,
quite in accordance with the primitive communal morality, which sees the
commonwealth in danger whenever an individual does wrong. He who perceives
any transgression in the community fears indirect harm to himself. Thus we
fear in this case for the quality of meat, agriculture, and means of
communication if we see the domestic animals ill-treated. Moreover, he who
is harsh to animals awakens a suspicion that he is also harsh to men who
are weak, inferior, and incapable of revenge. He is held to be ignoble and
deficient in the finer form of pride. Thus arises a foundation of moral
judgments and sentiments, but the greatest contribution is made by
superstition. Many animals incite men by glances, tones, and gestures to
transfer themselves into them in imagination, and some religions teach us,
under certain circumstances, to see in animals the dwelling-place of human
and divine souls: whence they recommend a nobler caution or even a
reverential awe in intercourse with animals. Even after the disappearance
of this superstition the sentiments awakened by it continue to exercise
their influence, to ripen and to blossom.—Christianity, as is well known,
has shown itself in this respect a poor and retrograde religion.




58.


NEW ACTORS.—Among human beings there is no greater banality than death.
Second in order, because it is possible to die without being born, comes
birth, and next comes marriage. But these hackneyed little tragi-comedies
are always presented, at each of their unnumbered and innumerable
performances, by new actors, and accordingly do not cease to find
interested spectators: whereas we might well believe that the whole
audience of the world-theatre had long since hanged themselves to every
tree from sheer boredom at these performances. So much depends on new
actors, so little on the piece.




59.


WHAT IS “BEING OBSTINATE”?—The shortest way is not the straightest
possible, but that wherein favourable winds swell our sails. So says the
wisdom of seamen. Not to follow his course is obstinate, firmness of
character being then adulterated by stupidity.




60.


THE WORD “VANITY.”—It is annoying that certain words, with which we
moralists positively cannot dispense, involve in themselves a kind of
censorship of morals, dating from the times when the most ordinary and
natural impulses were denounced. Thus that fundamental conviction that on
the waves of society we either find navigable waters or suffer shipwreck
far more through what we appear than through what we are (a conviction
that must act as guiding principle of all action in relation to society)
is branded with the general word “vanity.” In other words, one of the most
weighty and significant of qualities is branded with an expression which
denotes it as essentially empty and negative: a great thing is designated
by a diminutive, ay, even slandered by the strokes of caricature. There is
no help for it; we must use such words, but then we must shut our ears to
the insinuations of ancient habits.




61.


THE FATALISM OF THE TURK.—The fatalism of the Turk has this fundamental
defect, that it contrasts man and fate as two distinct things. Man, says
this doctrine, may struggle against fate and try to baffle it, but in the
end fate will always gain the victory. Hence the most rational course is
to resign oneself or to live as one pleases. As a matter of fact, every
man is himself a piece of fate. When he thinks that he is struggling
against fate in this way, fate is accomplishing its ends even in that
struggle. The combat is a fantasy, but so is the resignation in fate—all
these fantasies are included in fate.—The fear felt by most people of the
doctrine that denies the freedom of the will is a fear of the fatalism of
the Turk. They imagine that man will become weakly resigned and will stand
before the future with folded hands, because he cannot alter anything of
the future. Or that he will give a free rein to his caprices, because the
predestined cannot be made worse by that course. The follies of men are as
much a piece of fate as are his wise actions, and even that fear of belief
in fate is a fatality. You yourself, you poor timid creature, are that
indomitable _Moira_, which rules even the Gods; whatever may happen, you
are a curse or a blessing, and in any case the fetters wherein the
strongest lies bound: in you the whole future of the human world is
predestined, and it is no use for you to be frightened of yourself.




62.


THE ADVOCATE OF THE DEVIL.—“Only by our own suffering do we become wise,
only by others’ suffering do we become good”—so runs that strange
philosophy which derives all morality from pity and all intellectuality
from the isolation of the individual. Herein this philosophy is the
unconscious pleader for all human deterioration. For pity needs suffering,
and isolation contempt of others.




63.


THE MORAL CHARACTER-MASKS.—In ages when the character-masks of different
classes are definitely fixed, like the classes themselves, moralists will
be seduced into holding the moral character-masks, too, as absolute, and
in delineating them accordingly. Thus Molière is intelligible as the
contemporary of the society of Louis XIV.: in our society of transitions
and intermediate stages he would seem an inspired pedant.




64.


THE MOST NOBLE VIRTUE.—In the first era of the higher humanity courage is
accounted the most noble virtue, in the next justice, in the third
temperance, in the fourth wisdom. In which era do _we_ live? In which do
_you_ live?




65.


A NECESSARY PRELIMINARY.—A man who will not become master of his
irritability, his venomous and vengeful feelings, and his lust, and
attempts to become master in anything else, is as stupid as the farmer who
lays out his field beside a torrent without guarding against that torrent.




66.


WHAT IS TRUTH?—_Schwarzert_ (Melanchthon): We often preach our faith when
we have lost it, and leave not a stone unturned to find it—and then we
often do not preach worst!

_Luther_: Brother, you are really speaking like an angel to-day.

_Schwarzert_: But that is the idea of your enemies, and they apply it to
you.

_Luther_: Then it would be a lie from the devil’s hind-quarters.




67.


THE HABIT OF CONTRASTS.—Superficial, inexact observation sees contrasts
everywhere in nature (for instance, “hot and cold”), where there are no
contrasts, only differences of degree. This bad habit has induced us to
try to understand and interpret even the inner nature, the intellectual
and moral world, in accordance with such contrasts. An infinite amount of
cruelty, arrogance, harshness, estrangement, and coldness has entered into
human emotion, because men imagined they saw contrasts where there were
only transitions.




68.


CAN WE FORGIVE?—How can we forgive them at all, if they know not what they
do? We have nothing to forgive. But does a man ever fully know what he is
doing? And if this point at least remains always debatable, men never have
anything to forgive each other, and indulgence is for the reasonable man
an impossible thing. Finally, if the evil-doers had really known what they
did, we should still only have a right to forgive if we had a right to
accuse and to punish. But we have not that right.




69.


HABITUAL SHAME.—Why do we feel shame when some virtue or merit is
attributed to us which, as the saying goes, “we have not deserved”?
Because we appear to have intruded upon a territory to which we do not
belong, from which we should be excluded, as from a holy place or holy of
holies, which ought not to be trodden by our foot. Through the errors of
others we have, nevertheless, penetrated to it, and we are now swayed
partly by fear, partly by reverence, partly by surprise; we do not know
whether we ought to fly or to enjoy the blissful moment with all its
gracious advantages. In all shame there is a mystery, which seems
desecrated or in danger of desecration through us. All _favour_ begets
shame.—But if it be remembered that we have never really “deserved”
anything, this feeling of shame, provided that we surrender ourselves to
this point of view in a spirit of Christian contemplation, becomes
habitual, because upon such a one God seems continually to be conferring
his blessing and his favours. Apart from this Christian interpretation,
the state of habitual shame will be possible even to the entirely godless
sage, who clings firmly to the basic non-responsibility and
non-meritoriousness of all action and being. If he be treated as if he had
deserved this or that, he will seem to have won his way into a higher
order of beings, who do actually deserve something, who are free and can
really bear the burden of responsibility for their own volition and
capacity. Whoever says to him, “You have deserved it,” appears to cry out
to him, “You are not a human being, but a God.”




70.


THE MOST UNSKILFUL TEACHER.—In one man all his real virtues are implanted
on the soil of his spirit of contradiction, in another on his incapacity
to say “no”—in other words, on his spirit of acquiescence. A third has
made all his morality grow out of his pride as a solitary, a fourth from
his strong social instinct. Now, supposing that the seeds of the virtues
in these four cases, owing to mischance or unskilful teachers, were not
sown on the soil of their nature, which provides them with the richest and
most abundant mould, they would become weak, unsatisfactory men (devoid of
morality). And who would have been the most unskilful of teachers, the
evil genius of these men? The moral fanatic, who thinks that the good can
only grow out of the good and on the soil of the good.




71.


THE CAUTIOUS STYLE.—_A._ But if this were known to _all_, it would be
injurious to the _majority_. You yourself call your opinions dangerous to
those in danger, and yet you make them public?

_B._ I write so that neither the mob, nor the _populi_, nor the parties of
all kinds can read me. So my opinions will never be “public opinions.”

_A._ How do you write, then?

_B._ Neither usefully nor pleasantly—for the three classes I have
mentioned.




72.


DIVINE MISSIONARIES.—Even Socrates feels himself to be a divine
missionary, but I am not sure whether we should not here detect a tincture
of that Attic irony and fondness for jesting whereby this odious, arrogant
conception would be toned down. He talks of the fact without unction—his
images of the gadfly and the horse are simple and not sacerdotal. The real
religious task which he has set himself—to _test_ God in a hundred ways
and see whether he spoke the truth—betrays a bold and free attitude, in
which the missionary walked by the side of his God. This testing of God is
one of the most subtle compromises between piety and free-thinking that
has ever been devised.—Nowadays we do not even need this compromise any
longer.




73.


HONESTY IN PAINTING.—Raphael, who cared a great deal for the Church (so
far as she could pay him), but, like the best men of his time, cared
little for the objects of the Church’s belief, did not advance one step to
meet the exacting, ecstatic piety of many of his patrons. He remained
honest even in that exceptional picture which was originally intended for
a banner in a procession—the Sistine Madonna. Here for once he wished to
paint a vision, but such a vision as even noble youths without “faith” may
and will have—the vision of the future wife, a wise, high-souled, silent,
and very beautiful woman, carrying her first-born in her arms. Let men of
an older generation, accustomed to prayer and devotion, find here, like
the worthy elder on the left, something superhuman to revere. We younger
men (so Raphael seems to call to us) are occupied with the beautiful
maiden on the right, who says to the spectator of the picture, with her
challenging and by no means devout look, “The mother and her child—is not
that a pleasant, inviting sight?” The face and the look are reflected in
the joy in the faces of the beholders. The artist who devised all this
enjoys himself in this way, and adds his own delight to the delight of the
art-lover. As regards the “messianic” expression in the face of the child,
Raphael, honest man, who would not paint any state of soul in which he did
not believe, has amiably cheated his religious admirers. He painted that
freak of nature which is very often found, the man’s eye in the child’s
face, and that, too, the eye of a brave, helpful man who sees distress.
This eye should be accompanied by a beard. The fact that a beard is
wanting, and that two different ages are seen in one countenance, is the
pleasing paradox which believers have interpreted in accordance with their
faith in miracles. The artist could only expect as much from their art of
exposition and interpretation.




74.


PRAYER.—On two hypotheses alone is there any sense in prayer, that not
quite extinct custom of olden times. It would have to be possible either
to fix or alter the will of the godhead, and the devotee would have to
know best himself what he needs and should really desire. Both hypotheses,
axiomatic and traditional in all other religions, are denied by
Christianity. If Christianity nevertheless maintained prayer side by side
with its belief in the all-wise and all-provident divine reason (a belief
that makes prayer really senseless and even blasphemous), it showed here
once more its admirable “wisdom of the serpent.” For an outspoken command,
“Thou shalt not pray,” would have led Christians by way of boredom to the
denial of Christianity. In the Christian _ora et labora ora_ plays the
rôle of pleasure. Without _ora_ what could those unlucky saints who
renounced _labora_ have done? But to have a chat with God, to ask him for
all kinds of pleasant things, to feel a slight amusement at one’s own
folly in still having any wishes at all, in spite of so excellent a
father—all that was an admirable invention for saints.




75.


A HOLY LIE.—The lie that was on Arria’s lips when she died (_Paete, non
dolet_(19)) obscures all the truths that have ever been uttered by the
dying. It is the only holy _lie_ that has become famous, whereas elsewhere
the odour of sanctity has clung only to _errors_.




76.


THE MOST NECESSARY APOSTLE.—Among twelve apostles one must always be hard
as stone, in order that upon him the new church may be built.




77.


WHICH IS MORE TRANSITORY, THE BODY OR THE SPIRIT?—In legal, moral, and
religious institutions the external and concrete elements—in other words,
rites, gestures, and ceremonies—are the most permanent. They are the body
to which a new spirit is constantly being superadded. The cult, like an
unchangeable text, is ever interpreted anew. Concepts and emotions are
fluid, customs are solid.




78.


THE BELIEF IN DISEASE _QUA_ DISEASE.—Christianity first painted the devil
on the wall of the world. Christianity first brought the idea of sin into
the world. The belief in the remedies, which is offered as an antidote,
has gradually been shaken to its very foundations. But the belief in the
disease, which Christianity has taught and propagated, still exists.




79.


SPEECH AND WRITINGS OF RELIGIOUS MEN.—If the priest’s style and general
expression, both in speaking and writing, do not clearly betray the
religious man, we need no longer take his views upon religion and his
pleading for religion seriously. These opinions have become powerless for
him if, judging by his style, he has at command irony, arrogance, malice,
hatred, and all the changing eddies of mood, just like the most
irreligious of men—how far more powerless will they be for his hearers and
readers! In short, he will serve to make the latter still more
irreligious.




80.


THE DANGER IN PERSONALITY.—The more God has been regarded as a personality
in himself, the less loyal have we been to him. Men are far more attached
to their thought-images than to their best beloved. That is why they
sacrifice themselves for State, Church, and even for God—so far as he
remains _their_ creation, their thought, and is not too much looked upon
as a personality. In the latter case they almost always quarrel with him.
After all, it was the most pious of men who let slip that bitter cry: “My
God, why hast thou forsaken me?”




81.


WORLDLY JUSTICE.—It is possible to unhinge worldly justice with the
doctrine of the complete non-responsibility and innocence of every man. An
attempt has been made in the same direction on the basis of the opposite
doctrine of the full responsibility and guilt of every man. It was the
founder of Christianity who wished to abolish worldly justice and banish
judgment and punishment from the world. For he understood all guilt as
“sin”—that is, an outrage against God and not against the world. On the
other hand, he considered every man in a broad sense, and almost in every
sense, a sinner. The guilty, however, are not to be the judges of their
peers—so his rules of equity decided. Thus all dispensers of worldly
justice were in his eyes as culpable as those they condemned, and their
air of guiltlessness appeared to him hypocritical and pharisaical.
Moreover, he looked to the motives and not to the results of actions, and
thought that only one was keen-sighted enough to give a verdict on
motives—himself or, as he expressed it, God.




82.


AN AFFECTATION IN PARTING.—He who wishes to sever his connection with a
party or a creed thinks it necessary for him to refute it. This is a most
arrogant notion. The only thing necessary is that he should clearly see
what tentacles hitherto held him to this party or creed and no longer hold
him, what views impelled him to it and now impel him in some other
directions. We have not joined the party or creed on strict grounds of
knowledge. We should not affect this attitude on parting from it either.




83.


SAVIOUR AND PHYSICIAN.—In his knowledge of the human soul the founder of
Christianity was, as is natural, not without many great deficiencies and
prejudices, and, as physician of the soul, was addicted to that
disreputable, laical belief in a universal medicine. In his methods he
sometimes resembles that dentist who wishes to heal all pain by extracting
the tooth. Thus, for example, he assails sensuality with the advice: “If
thine eye offend thee, pluck it out.”—Yet there still remains the
distinction that the dentist at least attains his object—painlessness for
the patient—although in so clumsy a fashion that he becomes ridiculous;
whereas the Christian who follows that advice and thinks he has killed his
sensuality, is wrong, for his sensuality still lives in an uncanny,
vampire form, and torments him in hideous disguises.




84.


PRISONERS.—One morning the prisoners entered the yard for work, but the
warder was not there. Some, as their manner was, set to work at once;
others stood idle and gazed defiantly around. Then one of them strode
forward and cried, “Work as much as you will or do nothing, it all comes
to the same. Your secret machinations have come to light; the warder has
been keeping his eye on you of late, and will cause a terrible judgment to
be passed upon you in a few days’ time. You know him—he is of a cruel and
resentful disposition. But now, listen: you have mistaken me hitherto. I
am not what I seem, but far more—I am the son of the warder, and can get
anything I like out of him. I can save you—nay, I will save you. But
remember this: I will only save those of you who _believe_ that I am the
son of the prison warder. The rest may reap the fruits of their unbelief.”
“Well,” said an old prisoner after an interval of silence, “what can it
matter to you whether we believe you or not? If you are really the son,
and can do what you say, then put in a good word for us all. That would be
a real kindness on your part. But have done with all talk of belief and
unbelief!” “What is more,” cried a younger man, “I don’t believe him: he
has only got a bee in his bonnet. I’ll wager that in a week’s time we
shall find ourselves in the same place as we are to-day, and the warder
will know nothing.” “And if the warder ever knew anything, he knows it no
longer,” said the last of the prisoners, coming down into the yard at that
moment, “for he has just died suddenly.” “Ah ha!” cried several in
confusion, “ah ha! Sir Son, Sir Son, how stands it now with your title?
Are we by any chance _your_ prisoners now?” “I told you,” answered the man
gently, “I will set free all who believe in me, as surely as my father
still lives.”—The prisoners did not laugh, but shrugged their shoulders
and left him to himself.




85.


THE PERSECUTORS OF GOD.—Paul conceived and Calvin followed up the idea
that countless creatures have been predestined to damnation from time
immemorial, and that this fair world was made in order that the glory of
God might be manifested therein. So heaven and hell and mankind merely
exist to satisfy the vanity of God! What a cruel, insatiable vanity must
have smouldered in the soul of the first or second thinker of such a
thought!—Paul, then, after all, remained Saul—the persecutor of God.




86.


SOCRATES.—If all goes well, the time will come when, in order to advance
themselves on the path of moral reason, men will rather take up the
_Memorabilia_ of Socrates than the Bible, and when Montaigne and Horace
will be used as pioneers and guides for the understanding of Socrates, the
simplest and most enduring of interpretative sages. In him converge the
roads of the most different philosophic modes of life, which are in truth
the modes of the different temperaments, crystallised by reason and habit
and all ultimately directed towards the delight in life and in self. The
apparent conclusion is that the most peculiar thing about Socrates was his
share in all the temperaments. Socrates excels the founder of Christianity
by virtue of his merry style of seriousness and by that wisdom of sheer
roguish pranks which constitutes the best state of soul in a man.
Moreover, he had a superior intelligence.




87.


LEARNING TO WRITE WELL.—The age of good speaking is over, because the age
of city-state culture is over. The limit allowed by Aristotle to the great
city—in which the town-crier must be able to make himself heard by the
whole assembled community—troubles us as little as do any
city-communities, us who even wish to be understood beyond the boundaries
of nations. Therefore every one who is of a good European turn of mind
must learn to _write_ well, and to write better and better. He cannot help
himself, he must learn that: even if he was born in Germany, where bad
writing is looked upon as a national privilege. Better writing means
better thinking; always to discover matter more worthy of communication;
to be able to communicate it properly; to be translateable into the
tongues of neighbouring nations; to make oneself comprehensible to
foreigners who learn our language; to work with the view of making all
that is good common property, and of giving free access everywhere to the
free; finally, to pave the way for that still remote state of things, when
the great task shall come for good Europeans—guidance and guardianship of
the universal world-culture.—Whoever preaches the opposite doctrine of not
troubling about good writing and good reading (both virtues grow together
and decline together) is really showing the peoples a way of becoming more
and more _national_. He is intensifying the malady of this century, and is
a foe to good Europeans, a foe to free spirits.




88.


THE THEORY OF THE BEST STYLE.—The theory of the best style may at one time
be the theory of finding the expression by which we transfer every mood of
ours to the reader and the listener. At another, it may be the theory of
finding expressions for the more desirable human moods, the communication
and transference of which one desires most—for the mood of a man moved
from the depth of his heart, intellectually cheerful, bright, and sincere,
who has conquered his passions. This will be the theory of the best style,
a theory that corresponds to the good man.




89.


PAYING ATTENTION TO MOVEMENT.—The movement of the sentences shows whether
the author be tired. Individual expressions may nevertheless be still
strong and good, because they were invented earlier and for their own
sake, when the thought first flashed across the author’s mind. This is
frequently the case with Goethe, who too often dictated when he was tired.




90.


“ALREADY” AND “STILL.”—_A._ German prose is still very young. Goethe
declares that Wieland is its father.

_B._ So young and already so ugly!

_C._ But, so far as I am aware, Bishop Ulfilas already wrote German prose,
which must therefore be fifteen hundred years old.

_B._ So old and still so ugly!




91.


ORIGINAL GERMAN.—German prose, which is really not fashioned on any
pattern and must be considered an original creation of German taste,
should give the eager advocate of a future original German culture an
indication of how real German dress, German society, German furniture,
German meals would look without the imitation of models.—Some one who had
long reflected on these vistas finally cried in great horror, “But, Heaven
help us, perhaps we already have that original culture—only we don’t like
to talk about it!”




92.


FORBIDDEN BOOKS.—One should never read anything written by those arrogant
wiseacres and puzzle-brains who have the detestable vice of logical
paradox. They apply _logical_ formulæ just where everything is really
improvised at random and built in the air. (“Therefore” with them means,
“You idiot of a reader, this ‘therefore’ does not exist for you, but only
for me.” The answer to this is: “You idiot of a writer, then why do you
write?”)




93.


DISPLAYING ONE’S WIT.—Every one who wishes to display his wit thereby
proclaims that he has also a plentiful lack of wit. That vice which clever
Frenchmen have of adding a touch of _dédain_ to their best ideas arises
from a desire to be considered richer than they really are. They wish to
be carelessly generous, as if weary of continual spending from overfull
treasuries.




94.


FRENCH AND GERMAN LITERATURE.—The misfortune of the French and German
literature of the last hundred years is that the Germans ran away too
early from the French school, and the French, later on, went too early to
the German school.




95.


OUR PROSE.—None of the present-day cultured nations has so bad a prose as
the German. When clever, _blasé_ Frenchmen say, “There is no German
prose,” we ought really not to be angry, for this criticism is more polite
than we deserve. If we look for reasons, we come at last to the strange
phenomenon that the German knows only improvised prose and has no
conception of any other. He simply cannot understand the Italian, who says
that prose is as much harder than poetry as the representation of naked
beauty is harder to the sculptor than that of draped beauty. Verse,
images, rhythm, and rhyme need honest effort—that even the German
realises, and he is not inclined to set a very high value on extempore
poetry. But the notion of working at a page of prose as at a statue sounds
to him like a tale from fairyland.




96.


THE GRAND STYLE.—The grand style comes into being when the beautiful wins
a victory over the monstrous.




97.


DODGING.—We do not realise, in the case of distinguished minds, wherein
lies the excellence of their expression, their turn of phrase, until we
can say what word every mediocre writer would inevitably have hit upon in
expressing the same idea. All great artists, in steering their car, show
themselves prone to dodge and leave the track, but never to fall over.




98.


SOMETHING LIKE BREAD.—Bread neutralises and takes out the taste of other
food, and is therefore necessary to every long meal. In all works of art
there must be something like bread, in order that they may produce divers
effects. If these effects followed one another without occasional pauses
and intervals, they would soon make us weary and provoke disgust—in fact,
a long meal of art would then be impossible.




99.


JEAN PAUL.—Jean Paul knew a great deal, but had no science; understood all
manner of tricks of art, but had no art; found almost everything
enjoyable, but had no taste; possessed feeling and seriousness, but in
dispensing them poured over them a nauseous sauce of tears; had even wit,
but, unfortunately for his ardent desire for it, far too little—whence he
drives the reader to despair by his very lack of wit. In short, he was the
bright, rank-smelling weed that shot up overnight in the fair pleasaunces
of Schiller and Goethe. He was a good, comfortable man, and yet a destiny,
a destiny in a dressing-gown.(20)




100.


PALATE FOR OPPOSITES.—In order to enjoy a work of the past as its
contemporaries enjoyed it, one must have a palate for the prevailing taste
of the age which it attacked.




101.


SPIRITS-OF-WINE AUTHORS.—Many writers are neither spirit nor wine, but
spirits of wine. They can flare up, and then they give warmth.




102.


THE INTERPRETATIVE SENSE.—The sense of taste, as the true interpretative
sense, often talks the other senses over to its point of view and imposes
upon them its laws and customs. At table one can receive disclosures about
the most subtle secrets of the arts; it suffices to observe what tastes
good and when and after what and how long it tastes good.




103.


LESSING.—Lessing had a genuine French talent, and, as writer, went most
assiduously to the French school. He knows well how to arrange and display
his wares in his shop-window. Without this true art his thoughts, like the
objects of them, would have remained rather in the dark, nor would the
general loss be great. His art, however, has taught many (especially the
last generation of German scholars) and has given enjoyment to a countless
number. It is true his disciples had no need to learn from him, as they
often did, his unpleasant tone with its mingling of petulance and
candour.—Opinion is now unanimous on Lessing as “lyric poet,” and will
some day be unanimous on Lessing as “dramatic poet.”




104.


UNDESIRABLE READERS.—How an author is vexed by those stolid, awkward
readers who always fall at every place where they stumble, and always hurt
themselves when they fall!




105.


POETS’ THOUGHTS.—Real thoughts of real poets always go about with a veil
on, like Egyptian women; only the deep _eye_ of thought looks out freely
through the veil.—Poets’ thoughts are as a rule not of such value as is
supposed. We have to pay for the veil and for our own curiosity into the
bargain.




106.


WRITE SIMPLY AND USEFULLY.—Transitions, details, colour in depicting the
passions—we make a present of all these to the author because we bring
them with us and set them down to the credit of his book, provided he
makes us some compensation.




107.


WIELAND.—Wieland wrote German better than any one else, and had the
genuine adequacies and inadequacies of the master. His translations of the
letters of Cicero and Lucian are the best in the language. His ideas,
however, add nothing to our store of thought. We can endure his cheerful
moralities as little as his cheerful immoralities, for both are very
closely connected. The men who enjoyed them were at bottom better men than
we are, but also a good deal heavier. They _needed_ an author of this
sort. The Germans did not need Goethe, and therefore cannot make proper
use of him. We have only to consider the best of our statesmen and artists
in this light. None of them had or _could_ have had Goethe as their
teacher.




108.


RARE FESTIVALS.—Pithy conciseness, repose, and maturity—where you find
these qualities in an author, cry halt and celebrate a great festival in
the desert. It will be long before you have such a treat again.




109.


THE TREASURE OF GERMAN PROSE.—Apart from Goethe’s writings and especially
Goethe’s conversations with Eckermann (the best German book in existence),
what German prose literature remains that is worth reading over and over
again? Lichtenberg’s _Aphorisms_, the first book of Jung-Stilling’s _Story
of My Life_, Adalbert Stifter’s _St. Martin’s Summer_ and Gottfried
Keller’s _People of Seldwyla_—and there, for the time being, it comes to
an end.




110.


LITERARY AND COLLOQUIAL STYLE.—The art of writing demands, first and
foremost, substitutions for the means of expression which speech alone
possesses—in other words, for gestures, accent, intonation, and look.
Hence literary style is quite different from colloquial style, and far
more difficult, because it has to make itself as intelligible as the
latter with fewer accessaries. Demosthenes delivered his speeches
differently from what we read; he worked them up for reading
purposes.—Cicero’s speeches ought to be “demosthenised” with the same
object, for at present they contain more of the Roman Forum than we can
endure.




111.


CAUTION IN QUOTATION.—Young authors do not know that a good expression or
idea only looks well among its peers; that an excellent quotation may
spoil whole pages, nay the whole book; for it seems to cry warningly to
the reader, “Mark you, I am the precious stone, and round about me is
lead—pale, worthless lead!” Every word, every idea only desires to live in
its own company—that is the moral of a choice style.




112.


HOW SHOULD ERRORS BE ENUNCIATED?—We may dispute whether it be more
injurious for errors to be enunciated badly or as well as the best truths.
It is certain that in the former case they are doubly harmful to the brain
and are less easily removed from it. But, on the other hand, they are not
so certain of effect as in the latter case. They are, in fact, less
contagious.




113.


LIMITING AND WIDENING.—Homer limited and diminished the horizon of his
subject, but allowed individual scenes to expand and blossom out. Later,
the tragedians are constantly renewing this process. Each takes his
material in ever smaller and smaller fragments than his predecessor did,
but each attains a greater wealth of blooms within the narrow hedges of
these sequestered garden enclosures.




114.


LITERATURE AND MORALITY MUTUALLY EXPLANATORY.—We can show from Greek
literature by what forces the Greek spirit developed, how it entered upon
different channels, and where it became enfeebled. All this also depicts
to us how Greek morality proceeded, and how all morality will proceed: how
it was at first a constraint and displayed cruelty, then became gradually
milder; how a pleasure in certain actions, in certain forms and
conventions arose, and from this again a propensity for solitary exercise,
for solitary possession; how the track becomes crowded and overcrowded
with competitors; how satiety enters in, new objects of struggle and
ambition are sought, and forgotten aims are awakened to life; how the
drama is repeated, and the spectators become altogether weary of looking
on, because the whole gamut seems to have been run through—and then comes
a stoppage, an expiration, and the rivulets are lost in the sand. The end,
or at any rate _an_ end, has come.




115.


WHAT LANDSCAPES GIVE PERMANENT DELIGHT.—Such and such a landscape has
features eminently suited for painting, but I cannot find the formula for
it; it remains beyond my grasp as a whole. I notice that all landscapes
which please me permanently have a simple geometrical scheme of lines
underneath all their complexity. Without such a mathematical substratum no
scenery becomes artistically pleasing. Perhaps this rule may be applied
symbolically to human beings.




116.


READING ALOUD.—The ability to read aloud involves of necessity the ability
to declaim. Everywhere we must apply pale tints, but we must determine the
degree of pallor in close relation to the richly and deeply coloured
background, that always hovers before our eyes and acts as our guide—in
other words, in accordance with the way in which we should _declaim_ the
same passages. That is why we must be able to declaim.




117.


THE DRAMATIC SENSE.—He who has not the four subtler senses of art tries to
understand everything with the fifth sense, which is the coarsest of
all—the dramatic sense.




118.


HERDER.—Herder fails to be all that he made people think he was and
himself wished to think he was. He was no great thinker or discoverer, no
newly fertile soil with the unexhausted strength of a virgin forest. But
he possessed in the highest degree the power of scenting the future, he
saw and picked the first-fruits of the seasons earlier than all others,
and they then believed that he had made them grow. Between darkness and
light, youth and age, his mind was like a hunter on the watch, looking
everywhere for transitions, depressions, convulsions, the outward and
visible signs of internal growth. The unrest of spring drove him to and
fro, but he was himself not the spring.—At times, indeed, he had some
inkling of this, and yet would fain not have believed it—he, the ambitious
priest, who would have so gladly been the intellectual pope of his epoch!
This is his despair. He seems to have lived long as a pretender to several
kingdoms or even to a universal monarchy. He had his following which
believed in him, among others the young Goethe. But whenever crowns were
really distributed, he was passed over. Kant, Goethe, and then the first
true German historians and scholars robbed him of what he thought he had
reserved for himself (although in silence and secret he often thought the
reverse). Just when he doubted in himself, he gladly clothed himself in
dignity and enthusiasm: these were often in him mere garments, which had
to hide a great deal and also to deceive and comfort him. He really had
fire and enthusiasm, but his ambition was far greater! It blew impatiently
at the fire, which flickered, crackled, and smoked—his _style_ flickers,
crackles, and smokes—but he yearned for the great flame which never broke
out. He did not sit at the table of the genuine creators, and his ambition
did not admit of his sitting modestly among those who simply enjoy. Thus
he was a restless spirit, the taster of all intellectual dishes, which
were collected by the Germans from every quarter and every age in the
course of half a century. Never really happy and satisfied, Herder was
also too often ill, and then at times envy sat by his bed, and hypocrisy
paid her visit as well. He always had an air of being scarred and
crippled, and he lacked simple, stalwart manliness more completely than
any of the so-called “classical writers.”




119.


SCENT OF WORDS.—Every word has its scent; there is a harmony and discord
of scents, and so too of words.




120.


THE FAR-FETCHED STYLE.—The natural style is an offence to the lover of the
far-fetched style.




121.


A VOW.—I will never again read an author of whom one can suspect that he
_wanted_ to make a book, but only those writers whose thoughts
unexpectedly became a book.




122.


THE ARTISTIC CONVENTION.—Three-fourths of Homer is convention, and the
same is the case with all the Greek artists, who had no reason for falling
into the modern craze for originality. They had no fear of convention, for
after all convention was a link between them and their public. Conventions
are the artistic means _acquired_ for the understanding of the hearer; the
common speech, learnt with much toil, whereby the artist can really
communicate his ideas. All the more when he wishes, like the Greek poets
and musicians, to conquer at once with each of his works (since he is
accustomed to compete publicly with one or two rivals), the first
condition is that he must be understood at once, and this is only possible
by means of convention. What the artist devises beyond convention he
offers of his own free will and takes a risk, his success at best
resulting in the setting-up of a new convention. As a rule originality is
marvelled at, sometimes even worshipped, but seldom understood. A stubborn
avoidance of convention means a desire not to be understood. What, then,
is the object of the modern craze for originality?




123.


ARTISTS’ AFFECTATION OF SCIENTIFIC METHOD.—Schiller, like other German
artists, fancied that if a man had intellect he was entitled to improvise
even with the pen on all difficult subjects. So there we see his prose
essays—in every way a model of how _not_ to attack scientific questions of
æsthetics and ethics, and a danger for young readers who, in their
admiration for Schiller the poet, have not the courage to think meanly of
Schiller the thinker and author.—The temptation to traverse for once the
forbidden paths, and to have his say in science as well, is easy and
pardonable in the artist. For even the ablest artist from time to time
finds his handicraft and his workshop unendurable. This temptation is so
strong that it makes the artist show all the world what no one wishes to
see, that his little chamber of thought is cramped and untidy. Why not,
indeed? He does not live there. He proceeds to show that the storeroom of
his knowledge is partly empty, partly filled with lumber. Why not, indeed?
This condition does not really become the artist-child badly. In
particular, the artist shows that for the very easiest exercises of
scientific method, which are accessible even to beginners, his joints are
too stiff and untrained. Even of that he need not really be ashamed! On
the other hand, he often develops no mean art in imitating all the
mistakes, vices, and base pedantries that are practised in the scientific
community, in the belief that these belong to the appearance of the thing,
if not to the thing itself. This is the very point that is so amusing in
artists’ writing, that the artist involuntarily acts as his vocation
demands: he parodies the scientific and inartistic natures. Towards
science he should show no attitude but that of parody, in so far as he is
an artist and only an artist.




124.


THE FAUST-IDEA.—A little sempstress is seduced and plunged into despair: a
great scholar of all the four Faculties is the evil-doer. That cannot have
happened in the ordinary course, surely? No, certainly not! Without the
aid of the devil incarnate, the great scholar would never have achieved
the deed.—Is this really destined to be the greatest German “tragic idea,”
as one hears it said among Germans?—But for Goethe even this idea was too
terrible. His kind heart could not avoid placing the little sempstress,
“the good soul that forgot itself but once,” near to the saints, after her
involuntary death. Even the great scholar, “the good man” with “the dark
impulse,” is brought into heaven in the nick of time, by a trick which is
played upon the devil at the decisive moment. In heaven the lovers find
themselves again. Goethe once said that his nature was too conciliatory
for really tragic subjects.




125.


ARE THERE “GERMAN CLASSICS”?—Sainte-Beuve observes somewhere that the word
“classic” does not suit the genius of certain literatures. For instance,
nobody could talk seriously of “German classics.”—What do our German
publishers, who are about to add fifty more to the fifty German classics
we are told to accept, say to that? Does it not almost seem as if one need
only have been dead for the last thirty years, and lie a lawful prey to
the public,(21) in order to hear suddenly and unexpectedly the trumpet of
resurrection as a “Classic”? And this in an age and a nation where at
least five out of the six great fathers of its literature are undoubtedly
antiquated or becoming antiquated—without there being any need for the age
or the nation to be ashamed of this. For those writers have given way
before the strength of our time—let that be considered in all
fairness!—Goethe, as I have indicated, I do not include. He belongs to a
higher species than “national literatures”: hence life, revival, and decay
do not enter into the reckoning in his relations with his countrymen. He
lived and now lives but for the few; for the majority he is nothing but a
flourish of vanity which is trumpeted from time to time across the border
into foreign ears. Goethe, not merely a great and good man, but a
_culture_, is in German history an interlude without a sequel. Who, for
instance, would be able to point to any trace of Goethe’s influence in
German politics of the last seventy years (whereas the influence,
certainly of Schiller, and perhaps of Lessing, can be traced in the
political world)? But what of those five others? Klopstock, in a most
honourable way, became out of date even in his own lifetime, and so
completely that the meditative book of his later years, _The Republic of
Learning_, has never been taken seriously from that day to this. Herder’s
misfortune was that his writings were always either new or antiquated.
Thus for stronger and more subtle minds (like Lichtenberg) even Herder’s
masterpiece, his _Ideas for the History of Mankind_, was in a way
antiquated at the very moment of its appearance. Wieland, who lived to the
full and made others live likewise, was clever enough to anticipate by
death the waning of his influence. Lessing, perhaps, still lives
to-day—but among a young and ever younger band of scholars. Schiller has
fallen from the hands of young men into those of boys, of all German boys.
It is a well-known sign of obsolescence when a book descends to people of
less and less mature age.—Well, what is it that has thrust these five into
the background, so that well-educated men of affairs no longer read them?
A better taste, a riper knowledge, a higher reverence for the real and the
true: in other words, the very virtues which these five (and ten or twenty
others of lesser repute) first re-planted in Germany, and which now, like
a mighty forest, cast over their graves not only the shadow of awe, but
something of the shadow of oblivion.—But classical writers are not
planters of intellectual and literary virtues. They bring those virtues to
perfection and are their highest luminous peaks, and being brighter,
freer, and purer than all that surrounds them, they remain shining above
the nations when the nations themselves perish. There may come an elevated
stage of humanity, in which the Europe of the peoples is a dark, forgotten
thing, but Europe lives on in thirty books, very old but never
antiquated—in the classics.




126.


INTERESTING, BUT NOT BEAUTIFUL.—This countryside conceals its meaning, but
it has one that we should like to guess. Everywhere that I look, I read
words and hints of words, but I do not know where begins the sentence that
solves the riddle of all these hints. So I get a stiff neck in trying to
discover whether I should start reading from this or that point.




127.


AGAINST INNOVATORS IN LANGUAGE.—The use of neologisms or archaisms, the
preference for the rare and the bizarre, the attempt to enrich rather than
to limit the vocabulary, are always signs either of an immature or of a
corrupted taste. A noble poverty but a masterly freedom within the limits
of that modest wealth distinguishes the Greek artists in oratory. They
wish to have less than the people has—for the people is richest in old and
new—but they wish to have that little _better_. The reckoning up of their
archaic and exotic forms is soon done, but we never cease marvelling if we
have an eye for their light and delicate manner in handling the
commonplace and apparently long outworn elements in word and phrase.




128.


GLOOMY AND SERIOUS AUTHORS.—He who commits his sufferings to paper becomes
a gloomy author, but he becomes a serious one if he tells us what he _has_
suffered and why he is now enjoying a pleasurable repose.




129.


HEALTHINESS OF TASTE.—How is it that health is less contagious than
disease—generally, and particularly in matters of taste? Or are there
epidemics of health?




130.


A RESOLUTION.—Never again to read a book that is born and christened (with
ink) at the same moment.




131.


IMPROVING OUR IDEAS.—Improving our style means improving our ideas, and
nothing else. He who does not at once concede this can never be convinced
of the point.




132.


CLASSICAL BOOKS.—The weakest point in every classical book is that it is
written too much in the mother tongue of its author.




133.


BAD BOOKS.—The book should demand pen, ink, and desk, but usually it is
pen, ink, and desk that demand the book. That is why books are of so
little account at present.




134.


PRESENCE OF SENSE.—When the public reflects on paintings, it becomes a
poet; when on poems, an investigator. At the moment when the artist
summons it it is always lacking in the right sense, and accordingly in
presence of sense, not in presence of mind.




135.


CHOICE IDEAS.—The choice style of a momentous period does not only select
its words but its ideas—and both from the customary and prevailing usage.
Venturesome ideas, that smell too fresh, are to the maturer taste no less
repugnant than new and reckless images and phrases. Later on both choice
ideas and choice words soon smack of mediocrity, because the scent of the
choice vanishes quickly, and then nothing but the customary and
commonplace element is tasted.




136.


MAIN REASON FOR CORRUPTION OF STYLE.—The desire to display more sentiment
than one really feels for a thing corrupts style, in language and in all
art. All great art shows rather the opposite tendency. Like every man of
moral significance, it loves to check emotion on its way and not let it
run its course to the very end. This modesty of letting emotion but half
appear is most clearly to be observed, for example, in Sophocles. The
features of sentiment seem to become beautified when sentiment feigns to
be more shy than it really is.




137.


AN EXCUSE FOR THE HEAVY STYLE.—The lightly uttered phrase seldom falls on
the ear with the full weight of the subject. This is, however, due to the
bad training of the ear, which by education must pass from what has
hitherto been called music to the school of the higher harmony—in other
words, to conversation.




138.


BIRD’S-EYE VIEWS.—Here torrents rush from every side into a ravine: their
movement is so swift and stormy, and carries the eye along so quickly,
that the bare or wooded mountain slopes around seem not to sink down but
to fly down. We are in an agonised tension at the sight, as if behind all
this were hidden some hostile element, before which all must fly, and
against which the abyss alone gave protection. This landscape cannot be
painted, unless we hover above it like a bird in the open air. Here for
once the so-called bird’s-eye view is not an artistic caprice, but the
sole possibility.




139.


RASH COMPARISONS.—If rash comparisons are not proofs of the wantonness of
the writer, they are proofs of the exhaustion of his imagination. In any
case they bear witness to his bad taste.




140.


DANCING IN CHAINS.—In the case of every Greek artist, poet, or writer we
must ask: What is the new constraint which he imposes upon himself and
makes attractive to his contemporaries, so as to find imitators? For the
thing called “invention” (in metre, for example) is always a self-imposed
fetter of this kind. “Dancing in chains”—to make that hard for themselves
and then to spread a false notion that it is easy—that is the trick that
they wish to show us. Even in Homer we may perceive a wealth of inherited
formulæ and laws of epic narration, within the circle of which he had to
dance, and he himself created new conventions for them that came after.
This was the discipline of the Greek poets: first to impose upon
themselves a manifold constraint by means of the earlier poets; then to
invent in addition a new constraint, to impose it upon themselves and
cheerfully to overcome it, so that constraint and victory are perceived
and admired.




141.


AUTHORS’ COPIOUSNESS.—The last quality that a good author acquires is
copiousness: whoever has it to begin with will never become a good author.
The noblest racehorses are lean until they are permitted to rest from
their victories.




142.


WHEEZING HEROES.—Poets and artists who suffer from a narrow chest of the
emotions generally make their heroes wheeze. They do not know what easy
breathing means.




143.


THE SHORT-SIGHTED.(22)—The short-sighted are the deadly foes of all
authors who let themselves go. These authors should know the wrath with
which these people shut the book in which they observe that its creator
needs fifty pages to express five ideas. And the cause of their wrath is
that they have endangered what remains of their vision almost without
compensation. A short-sighted person said, “All authors let themselves
go.” “Even the Holy Ghost?” “Even the Holy Ghost.” But he had a right to,
for he wrote for those who had lost their sight altogether.




144.


THE STYLE OF IMMORTALITY.—Thucydides and Tacitus both imagined immortal
life for their works when they executed them. That might be guessed (if
not known otherwise) from their style. The one thought to give permanence
to his ideas by salting them, the other by boiling them down; and neither,
it seems, made a miscalculation.




145.


AGAINST IMAGES AND SIMILES.—By images and similes we convince, but we do
not prove. That is why science has such a horror of images and similes.
Science does not want to convince or make plausible, and rather seeks to
provoke cold distrust by its mode of expression, by the bareness of its
walls. For distrust is the touchstone for the gold of certainty.




146.


CAUTION.—In Germany, he who lacks thorough knowledge should beware of
writing. The good German does not say in that case “he is ignorant,” but
“he is of doubtful character.”—This hasty conclusion, by the way, does
great credit to the Germans.




147.


PAINTED SKELETONS.—Painted skeletons are those authors who try to make up
for their want of flesh by artistic colourings.




148.


THE GRAND STYLE AND SOMETHING BETTER.—It is easier to learn how to write
the grand style than how to write easily and simply. The reasons for this
are inextricably bound up with morality.




149.


SEBASTIAN BACH.—In so far as we do not hear Bach’s music as perfect and
experienced connoisseurs of counterpoint and all the varieties of the
fugal style (and accordingly must dispense with real artistic enjoyment),
we shall feel in listening to his music—in Goethe’s magnificent phrase—as
if “we were present at God’s creation of the world.” In other words, we
feel here that something great is in the making but not yet made—our
mighty modern music, which by conquering nationalities, the Church, and
counterpoint has conquered the world. In Bach there is still too much
crude Christianity, crude Germanism, crude scholasticism. He stands on the
threshold of modern European music, but turns from thence to look at the
Middle Ages.




150.


HÄNDEL.—Händel, who in the invention of his music was bold, original,
truthful, powerful, inclined to and akin to all the heroism of which a
_nation_ is capable, often proved stiff, cold, nay even weary of himself
in composition. He applied a few well-tried methods of execution, wrote
copiously and quickly, and was glad when he had finished—but that joy was
not the joy of God and other creators in the eventide of their working
day.




151.


HAYDN.—So far as genius can exist in a man who is merely _good_, Haydn had
genius. He went just as far as the limit which morality sets to intellect,
and only wrote music that has “no past.”




152.


BEETHOVEN AND MOZART.—Beethoven’s music often appears like a deeply
emotional meditation on unexpectedly hearing once more a piece long
thought to be forgotten, “Tonal Innocence”: it is music about music. In
the song of the beggar and child in the street, in the monotonous airs of
vagrant Italians, in the dance of the village inn or in carnival nights he
discovers his melodies. He stores them together like a bee, snatching here
and there some notes or a short phrase. To him these are hallowed memories
of “the better world,” like the ideas of Plato.—Mozart stands in quite a
different relation to his melodies. He finds his inspiration not in
hearing music but in gazing at life, at the most stirring life of southern
lands. He was always dreaming of Italy, when he was not there.




153.


RECITATIVE.—Formerly recitative was dry, but now we live in the age of
moist recitative. It has fallen into the water, and the waves carry it
whithersoever they list.




154.


“CHEERFUL” MUSIC.—If for a long time we have heard no music, it then goes
like a heavy southern wine all too quickly into the blood and leaves
behind it a soul dazed with narcotics, half-awake, longing for sleep. This
is particularly the case with cheerful music, which inspires in us
bitterness and pain, satiety and home-sickness together, and forces us to
sip again and again as at a sweetened draught of poison. The hall of gay,
noisy merriment then seems to grow narrow, the light to lose its
brightness and become browner. At last we feel as if this music were
penetrating to a prison where a poor wretch cannot sleep for
home-sickness.




155.


FRANZ SCHUBERT.—Franz Schubert, inferior as an artist to the other great
musicians, had nevertheless the largest share of inherited musical wealth.
He spent it with a free hand and a kind heart, so that for a few centuries
musicians will continue to _nibble_ at his ideas and inspirations. In his
works we find a store of _unused_ inventions; the greatness of others will
lie in making use of those inventions. If Beethoven may be called the
ideal listener for a troubadour, Schubert has a right to be called the
ideal troubadour.




156.


MODERN MUSICAL EXECUTION.—Great tragic or dramatic execution of music
acquires its character by imitating the gesture of the great sinner, such
as Christianity conceives and desires him: the slow-stepping, passionately
brooding man, distracted by the agonies of conscience, now flying in
terror, now clutching with delight, now standing still in despair—and all
the other marks of great sinfulness. Only on the Christian assumption that
all men are great sinners and do nothing but sin could we justify the
application of this style of execution to _all_ music. So far, music would
be the reflection of all the actions and impulses of man, and would
continually have to express by gestures the language of the great sinner.
At such a performance, a listener who was not enough of a Christian to
understand this logic might indeed cry out in horror, “For the love of
Heaven, how did sin find its way into music?”




157.


FELIX MENDELSSOHN.—Felix Mendelssohn’s music is the music of the good
taste that enjoys all the good things that have ever existed. It always
points behind. How could it have much “in front,” much of a future?—But
did he want it to have a future? He possessed a virtue rare among artists,
that of gratitude without _arrière-pensée_. This virtue, too, always
points behind.




158.


A MOTHER OF ARTS.—In our sceptical age, real devotion requires almost a
brutal heroism of ambition. Fanatical shutting of the eyes and bending of
the knee no longer suffice. Would it not be possible for ambition—in its
eagerness to be the last devotee of all the ages—to become the begetter of
a final church music, as it has been the begetter of the final church
architecture? (They call it the Jesuit style.)




159.


FREEDOM IN FETTERS—A PRINCELY FREEDOM.—Chopin, the last of the modern
musicians, who gazed at and worshipped beauty, like Leopardi; Chopin, the
Pole, the inimitable (none that came before or after him has a right to
this name)—Chopin had the same princely punctilio in convention that
Raphael shows in the use of the simplest traditional colours. The only
difference is that Chopin applies them not to colour but to melodic and
rhythmic traditions. He admitted the validity of these traditions because
he was born under the sway of etiquette. But in these fetters he plays and
dances as the freest and daintiest of spirits, and, be it observed, he
does not spurn the chain.




160.


CHOPIN’S BARCAROLLE.—Almost all states and modes of life have a moment of
rapture, and good artists know how to discover that moment. Such a moment
there is even in life by the seashore—that dreary, sordid, unhealthy
existence, dragged out in the neighbourhood of a noisy and covetous
rabble. This moment of rapture Chopin in his Barcarolle expressed in sound
so supremely that Gods themselves, when they heard it, might yearn to lie
long summer evenings in a boat.




161.


ROBERT SCHUMANN.—“The Stripling,” as the romantic songsters of Germany and
France of the first three decades of this century imagined him—this
stripling was completely translated into song and melody by Robert
Schumann, the eternal youth, so long as he felt himself in full possession
of his powers. There are indeed moments when his music reminds one of the
eternal “old maid.”




162.


DRAMATIC SINGERS.—“Why does this beggar sing?” “Probably he does not know
how to wail.” “Then he does right.” But our dramatic singers, who wail
because they do not know how to sing—are they also in the right?




163.


DRAMATIC MUSIC.—For him who does not see what is happening on the stage,
dramatic music is a monstrosity, just as the running commentary to a lost
text is a monstrosity. Such music requires us to have ears where our eyes
are. This, however, is doing violence to Euterpe, who, poor Muse, wants to
have her eyes and ears where the other Muses have theirs.




164.


VICTORY AND REASONABLENESS.—Unfortunately in the æsthetic wars, which
artists provoke by their works and apologias for their works, just as is
the case in real war, it is might and not reason that decides. All the
world now assumes as a historical fact that, in his dispute with Piccini,
Gluck was in the right. At any rate, he was victorious, and had might on
his side.




165.


OF THE PRINCIPLE OF MUSICAL EXECUTION.—Do the modern musical performers
really believe that the supreme law of their art is to give every piece as
much high-relief as is possible, and to make it speak at all costs a
dramatic language? Is not this principle, when applied for example to
Mozart, a veritable sin against the spirit—the gay, sunny, airy, delicate
spirit—of Mozart, whose seriousness was of a kindly and not awe-inspiring
order, whose pictures do not try to leap from the wall and drive away the
beholder in panic? Or do you think that all Mozart’s music is identical
with the statue-music in _Don Juan_? And not only Mozart’s, but all
music?—You reply that the advantage of your principle lies in its greater
_effect_. You would be right if there did not remain the counter-question,
“_On whom_ has the effect operated, and _on whom_ should an artist of the
first rank desire to produce his effect?” Never on the populace! Never on
the immature! Never on the morbidly sensitive! Never on the diseased! And
above all—never on the _blasé_!




166.


THE MUSIC OF TO-DAY.—This ultra-modern music, with its strong lungs and
weak nerves, is frightened above all things of itself.




167.


WHERE MUSIC IS AT HOME.—Music reaches its high-water mark only among men
who have not the ability or the right to argue. Accordingly, its chief
promoters are princes, whose aim is that there should be not much
criticism nor even much thought in their neighbourhood. Next come
societies which, under some pressure or other (political or religious),
are forced to become habituated to silence, and so feel all the greater
need of spells to charm away emotional ennui—these spells being generally
eternal love-making and eternal music. Thirdly, we must reckon whole
nations in which there is no “society,” but all the greater number of
individuals with a bent towards solitude, mystical thinking, and a
reverence for all that is inexpressible; these are the genuine “musical
souls.” The Greeks, as a nation delighting in talking and argument,
accordingly put up with music only as an _hors d’œuvre_ to those arts
which really admit of discussion and dispute. About music one can hardly
even _think_ clearly. The Pythagoreans, who in so many respects were
exceptional Greeks, are said to have been great musicians. This was the
school that invented a five-years’ silence,(23) but did not invent a
dialectic.




168.


SENTIMENTALITY IN MUSIC.—We may be ever so much in sympathy with serious
and profound music, yet nevertheless, or perhaps all the more for that
reason, we shall at occasional moments be overpowered, entranced, and
almost melted away by its opposite—I mean, by those simple Italian
operatic airs which, in spite of all their monotony of rhythm and
childishness of harmony, seem at times to sing to us like the very soul of
music. Admit this or not as you please, you Pharisees of good taste, it is
so, and it is my present task to propound the riddle that it is so, and to
nibble a little myself at the solution.—In childhood’s days we tasted the
honey of many things for the first time. Never was honey so good as then;
it seduced us to life, into abundant life, in the guise of the first
spring, the first flower, the first butterfly, the first friendship.
Then—perhaps in our ninth year or so—we heard our first music, and this
was the first that we understood; thus the simplest and most childish
tunes, that were not much more than a sequel to the nurse’s lullaby and
the strolling fiddler’s tune, were our first experience. (For even the
most trifling “revelations” of art need preparation and study; there is no
“immediate” effect of art, whatever charming fables the philosophers may
tell.) Our sensation on hearing these Italian airs is associated with
those first musical raptures, the strongest of our lives. The bliss of
childhood and its flight, the feeling that our most precious possession
can never be brought back, all this moves the chords of the soul more
strongly than the most serious and profound music can move them.—This
mingling of æsthetic pleasure with moral pain, which nowadays it is
customary to call (rather too haughtily, I think) “sentimentality”—it is
the mood of Faust at the end of the first scene—this “sentimentality” of
the listener is all to the advantage of Italian music. It is a feeling
which the experienced connoisseurs in art, the pure “æsthetes,” like to
ignore.—Moreover, almost all music has a magical effect only when we hear
it speak the language of our own _past_. Accordingly, it seems to the
layman that all the old music is continually growing better, and that all
the latest is of little value. For the latter arouses no “sentimentality,”
that most essential element of happiness, as aforesaid, for every man who
cannot approach this art with pure æsthetic enjoyment.




169.


AS FRIENDS OF MUSIC.—Ultimately we are and remain good friends with music,
as we are with the light of the moon. Neither, after all, tries to
supplant the sun: they only want to illumine our nights to the best of
their powers. Yet we may jest and laugh at them, may we not? Just a
little, at least, and from time to time? At the man in the moon, at the
woman in the music?




170.


ART IN AN AGE OF WORK.—We have the conscience of an industrious epoch.
This debars us from devoting our best hours and the best part of our days
to art, even though that art be the greatest and worthiest. Art is for us
a matter of leisure, of recreation, and we consecrate to it the _residue_
of our time and strength. This is the cardinal fact that has altered the
relation of art to life. When art makes its great demands of time and
strength upon its recipients, it has to battle against the conscience of
the industrious and efficient, it is relegated to the idle and
conscienceless, who, by their very nature, are not exactly suited to great
art, and consider its claims arrogant. It might, therefore, be all over
with art, since it lacks air and the power to breathe. But perhaps the
great art attempts, by a sort of coarsening and disguising, to make itself
at home in that other atmosphere, or at least to put up with it—an
atmosphere which is really a natural element only for petty art, the art
of recreation, of pleasant distraction. This happens nowadays almost
everywhere. Even the exponents of great art promise recreation and
distraction; even they address themselves to the exhausted; even they
demand from him the evening hours of his working-day—just like the artists
of the entertaining school, who are content to smooth the furrowed brow
and brighten the lack-lustre eye. What, then, are the devices of their
mightier brethren? These have in their medicine-chests the most powerful
excitants, which might give a shock even to a man half-dead: they can
deafen you, intoxicate you, make you shudder, or bring tears to your eyes.
By this means they overpower the exhausted man and stimulate him for one
night to an over-lively condition, to an ecstasy of terror and delight.
This great art, as it now lives in opera, tragedy, and music—have we a
right to be angry with it, because of its perilous fascination, as we
should be angry with a cunning courtesan? Certainly not. It would far
rather live in the pure element of morning calm, and would far rather make
its appeal to the fresh, expectant, vigorous morning-soul of the beholder
or listener. Let us be thankful that it prefers living thus to vanishing
altogether. But let us also confess that an era that once more introduces
free and complete high-days and holidays into life will have no use for
_our_ great art.




171.


THE EMPLOYEES OF SCIENCE AND THE OTHERS.—Really efficient and successful
men of science might be collectively called “The Employees.” If in youth
their acumen is sufficiently practised, their memory is full, and hand and
eye have acquired sureness, they are appointed by an older
fellow-craftsman to a scientific position where their qualities may prove
useful. Later on, when they have themselves gained an eye for the gaps and
defects in their science, they place themselves in whatever position they
are needed. These persons all exist for the sake of science. But there are
rarer spirits, spirits that seldom succeed or fully mature—“for whose sake
science exists”—at least, in their view. They are often unpleasant,
conceited, or cross-grained men, but almost always prodigies to a certain
extent. They are neither employees nor employers; they make use of what
those others have worked out and established, with a certain princely
carelessness and with little and rare praise—just as if the others
belonged to a lower order of beings. Yet they possess the same qualities
as their fellow-workers, and that sometimes in a less developed form.
Moreover, they have a peculiar limitation, from which the others are free;
this makes it impossible to put them into a place and to see in them
useful tools. They can only live in their own air and on their own soil.
This limitation suggests to them what elements of a science “are
theirs”—in other words, what they can carry home into their house and
atmosphere: they think that they are always collecting their scattered
“property.” If they are prevented from building at their own nest, they
perish like shelterless birds. The loss of freedom causes them to wilt
away. If they show, like their colleagues, a fondness for certain regions
of science, it is always only regions where the fruits and seeds necessary
to them can thrive. What do they care whether science, taken as a whole,
has untilled or badly tilled regions? They lack all impersonal interest in
a scientific problem. As they are themselves personal through and through,
all their knowledge and ideas are remoulded into a person, into a living
complexity, with its parts interdependent, overlapping, jointly nurtured,
and with a peculiar atmosphere and scent as a whole.—Such natures, with
their system of personal knowledge, produce the illusion that a science
(or even the whole of philosophy) is finished and has reached its goal.
The life in their system works this magic, which at times has been fatal
to science and deceptive to the really efficient workers above described,
and at other times, when drought and exhaustion prevailed, has acted as a
kind of restorative, as if it were the air of a cool, refreshing
resting-place.—These men are usually called _philosophers_.




172.


RECOGNITION OF TALENT.—As I went through the village of S., a boy began to
crack his whip with all his might—he had made great progress in this art,
and he knew it. I threw him a look of recognition—in reality it hurt me
cruelly. We do the same in our recognition of many of the talents. We do
good to them when they hurt us.




173.


LAUGHING AND SMILING.—The more joyful and assured the mind becomes, the
more man loses the habit of loud laughter. In compensation, there is an
intellectual smile continually bubbling up in him, a sign of his
astonishment at the innumerable concealed delights of a good existence.




174.


THE TALK OF INVALIDS.—Just as in spiritual grief we tear our hair, strike
our foreheads, lacerate our cheeks or even (like Œdipus) gouge our eyes
out, so against violent physical pain we call to our aid a bitter, violent
emotion, through the recollection of slanderous and malignant people,
through the denigration of our future, through the sword-pricks and acts
of malice which we mentally direct against the absent. And at times it is
true that one devil drives out another—but then we have the other.—Hence a
different sort of talk, tending to alleviate pain, should be recommended
invalids: reflections upon the kindnesses and courtesies that can be
performed towards friend and foe.




175.


MEDIOCRITY AS A MASK.—Mediocrity is the happiest mask which the superior
mind can wear, because it does not lead the great majority—that is, the
mediocre—to think that there is any disguise. Yet the superior mind
assumes the mask just for their sake—so as not to irritate them, nay,
often from a feeling of pity and kindness.




176.


THE PATIENT.—The pine tree seems to listen, the fir tree to wait, and both
without impatience. They do not give a thought to the petty human being
below who is consumed by his impatience and his curiosity.




177.


THE BEST JOKER.—My favourite joke is the one that takes the place of a
heavy and rather hesitating idea, and that at once beckons with its finger
and winks its eye.




178.


THE ACCESSARIES OF ALL REVERENCE.—Wherever the past is revered, the
over-cleanly and over-tidy people should not be admitted. Piety does not
feel content without a little dust, dirt, and dross.




179.


THE GREAT DANGER OF SAVANTS.—It is just the most thorough and profound
savants who are in peril of seeing their life’s goal set ever lower and
lower, and, with a feeling of this in their minds, to become ever more
discouraged and more unendurable in the latter half of their lives. At
first they plunge into their science with spacious hopes and set
themselves daring tasks, the ends of which are already anticipated by
their imaginations. Then there are moments as in the lives of the great
maritime discoverers—knowledge, presentiment, and power raise each other
higher and higher, until a new shore first dawns upon the eye in the far
distance. But now the stern man recognises more and more how important it
is that the individual task of the inquirer should be limited as far as
possible, so that it may be entirely accomplished and the intolerable
waste of force from which earlier periods of science suffered may be
avoided. In those days everything was done ten times over, and then the
eleventh always had the last and best word. Yet the more the savant learns
and practises this art of solving riddles in their entirety, the more
pleasure he finds in so doing. But at the same time his demands upon what
is here called “entirety” grow more exacting. He sets aside everything
that must remain in this sense incomplete, he acquires a disgust and an
acute scent for the half-soluble—for all that can only give a kind of
certainty in a general and indefinite form. His youthful plans crumble
away before his eyes. There remains scarcely anything but a few little
knots, in untying which the master now takes his pleasure and shows his
strength. Then, in the midst of all this useful, restless activity, he,
now grown old, is suddenly then often overcome by a deep misgiving, a sort
of torment of conscience. He looks upon himself as one changed, as if he
were diminished, humbled, transformed into a dexterous _dwarf_; he grows
anxious as to whether mastery in small matters be not a convenience, an
escape from the summons to greatness in life and form. But he cannot pass
_beyond_ any longer—the time for that has gone by.




180.


TEACHERS IN THE AGE OF BOOKS.—Now that self-education and mutual education
are becoming more widespread, the teacher in his usual form must become
almost unnecessary. Friends eager to learn, who wish to master some branch
of knowledge together, find in our age of books a shorter and more natural
way than “school” and “teachers.”




181.


VANITY AS THE GREATEST UTILITY.—Originally the strong individual uses not
only Nature but even societies and weaker individuals as objects of
rapine. He exploits them, so far as he can, and then passes on. As he
lives from hand to mouth, alternating between hunger and superfluity, he
kills more animals than he can eat, and robs and maltreats men more than
is necessary. His manifestation of power is at the same time one of
revenge against his cramped and worried existence. Furthermore, he wishes
to be held more powerful than he is, and thus misuses opportunities; the
accretion of fear that he begets being an accretion of power. He soon
observes that he stands or falls not by what he _is_ but by what he is
_thought_ to be. Herein lies the origin of vanity. The man of power seeks
by every means to increase others’ faith in his power.—The thralls who
tremble before him and serve him know, for their part, that they are worth
just so much as they appear to him to be worth, and so they work with an
eye to this valuation rather than to their own self-satisfaction. We know
vanity only in its most weakened forms, in its idealisations and its small
doses, because we live in a late and very emasculated state of society.
Originally vanity is the great utility, the strongest means of
preservation. And indeed vanity will be greater, the cleverer the
individual, because an increase in the belief in power is easier than an
increase in the power itself, but only for him who has intellect or (as
must be the case under primitive conditions) who is cunning and crafty.




182.


WEATHER-SIGNS OF CULTURE.—There are so few decisive weather-signs of
culture that we must be glad to have at least one unfailing sign at hand
for use in house and garden. To test whether a man belongs to us (I mean
to the free spirits) or not, we must test his sentiments regarding
Christianity. If he looks upon Christianity with other than a critical
eye, we turn our backs to him, for he brings us impure air and bad
weather.—It is no longer our task to teach such men what a sirocco wind
is. They have Moses and the prophets of weather and of enlightenment.(24)
If they will not listen to these, then——




183.


THERE IS A PROPER TIME FOR WRATH AND PUNISHMENT.—Wrath and punishment are
our inheritance from the animals. Man does not become of age until he has
restored to the animals this gift of the cradle.—Herein lies buried one of
the mightiest ideas that men can have, the idea of a progress of all
progresses.—Let us go forward together a few millenniums, my friends!
There is still reserved for mankind a great deal of joy, the very scent of
which has not yet been wafted to the men of our day! Indeed, we may
promise ourselves this joy, nay summon and conjure it up as a necessary
thing, so long as the development of human reason does not stand still.
Some day we shall no longer be reconciled to the logical sin that lurks in
all wrath and punishment, whether exercised by the individual or by
society—some day, when head and heart have learnt to live as near together
as they now are far apart. That they no longer stand so far apart as they
did originally is fairly palpable from a glance at the whole course of
humanity. The individual who can review a life of introspective work will
become conscious of the _rapprochement_ arrived at, with a proud delight
at the distance he has bridged, in order that he may thereupon venture
upon more ample hopes.




184.


ORIGIN OF PESSIMISTS.—A snack of good food often decides whether we are to
look to the future with hollow eye or in hopeful mood. The same influence
extends to the very highest and most intellectual states. Discontent and
reviling of the world are for the present generation an inheritance from
starveling ancestors. Even in our artists and poets we often notice that,
however exuberant their life, they are not of good birth, and have often,
from oppressed and ill-nourished ancestors, inherited in their blood and
brain much that comes out as the subject and even the conscious colouring
of their work. The culture of the Greeks is a culture of men of wealth, in
fact, inherited wealth. For a few centuries they lived better than we do
(better in every sense, in particular far more simply in food and drink).
Then the brain finally became so well-stored and subtle, and the blood
flowed so quickly, like a joyous, clear wine, that the best in them came
to light no longer as gloomy, distorted, and violent, but full of beauty
and sunshine.




185.


OF REASONABLE DEATH.—Which is more reasonable, to stop the machine when
the works have done the task demanded of them, or to let it run on until
it stands still of its own accord—in other words, is destroyed? Is not the
latter a waste of the cost of upkeep, a misuse of the strength and care of
those who serve? Are men not here throwing away that which would be sorely
needed elsewhere? Is not a kind of contempt of the machines propagated, in
that many of them are so uselessly tended and kept up?—I am speaking of
involuntary (natural) and voluntary (reasonable) death. Natural death is
independent of all reason and is really an irrational death, in which the
pitiable substance of the shell determines how long the kernel is to exist
or not; in which, accordingly, the stunted, diseased and dull-witted
jailer is lord, and indicates the moment at which his distinguished
prisoner shall die. Natural death is the suicide of nature—in other words,
the annihilation of the most rational being through the most irrational
element that is attached thereto. Only through religious illumination can
the reverse appear; for then, as is equitable, the higher reason (God)
issues its orders, which the lower reason has to obey. Outside religious
thought natural death is not worth glorifying. The wise dispensation and
disposal of death belongs to that now quite incomprehensible and
immoral-sounding morality of the future, the dawn of which it will be an
ineffable delight to behold.




186.


RETROGRADE INFLUENCES.—All criminals force society back to earlier stages
of culture than that in which they are placed for the time being. Their
influence is retrograde. Let us consider the tools that society must forge
and maintain for its defence: the cunning detectives, the jailers, the
hangmen. Nor should we forget the public counsel for prosecution and
defence. Finally we may ask ourselves whether the judge himself and
punishment and the whole legal procedure are not oppressive rather than
elevating in their reaction upon all who are not law-breakers. For we
shall never succeed in arraying self-defence and revenge in the garb of
innocence, and so long as men are used and sacrificed as a means to the
end of society, all loftier humanity will deplore this necessity.




187.


WAR AS A REMEDY.—For nations that are growing weak and contemptible war
may be prescribed as a remedy, if indeed they really want to go on living.
National consumption as well as individual admits of a brutal cure. The
eternal will to live and inability to die is, however, in itself already a
sign of senility of emotion. The more fully and thoroughly we live, the
more ready we are to sacrifice life for a single pleasurable emotion. A
people that lives and feels in this wise has no need of war.




188.


INTELLECTUAL AND PHYSICAL TRANSPLANTATION AS REMEDIES.—The different
cultures are so many intellectual climates, every one of which is
peculiarly harmful or beneficial to this or that organism. History as a
whole, as the knowledge of different cultures, is the science of remedies,
but not the science of the healing art itself. We still need a physician
who can make use of these remedies, in order to send every one—temporarily
or permanently—to the climate that just suits him. To live in the present,
within the limits of a single culture, is insufficient as a universal
remedy: too many highly useful kinds of men, who cannot breathe freely in
this atmosphere, would perish. With the aid of history we must give them
air and try to preserve them: even men of lower cultures have their
value.—Add to this cure of intellects that humanity, on considerations of
bodily health, must strive to discover by means of a medical geography
what kinds of degeneration and disease are caused by each region of the
earth, and conversely, what ingredients of health the earth affords: and
then, gradually, nations, families, and individuals must be transplanted
long and permanently enough for them to become masters of their inherited
physical infirmities. The whole world will finally be a series of
sanatoria.




189.


REASON AND THE TREE OF MANKIND.—What you all fear in your senile
short-sightedness, regarding the over-population of the world, gives the
more hopeful a mighty task. Man is some day to become a tree overshadowing
the whole earth, with millions upon millions of buds that shall all grow
to fruits side by side, and the earth itself shall be prepared for the
nourishment of this tree. That the shoot, tiny as yet, may increase in sap
and strength; that the sap may flow in countless channels for the
nutrition of the whole and the parts—from these and similar tasks we must
derive our standard for measuring whether a man of to-day is useful or
worthless. The task is unspeakably great and adventurous: let us all
contribute our share to prevent the tree from rotting before its time! The
historically trained mind will no doubt succeed in calling up the human
activities of all the ages before its eyes, as the community of ants with
its cunningly wrought mounds stands before our eyes. Superficially judged,
mankind as a whole, like ant-kind, might admit of our speaking of
“instinct.” On a closer examination we observe how whole nations, nay
whole centuries, take pains to discover and test new means of benefiting
the great mass of humanity, and thus finally the great common fruit-tree
of the world. Whatever injury the individual nations or periods may suffer
in this testing process, they have each become wise through this injury,
and from them the tide of wisdom slowly pours over the principles of whole
races and whole epochs. Ants too go astray and make blunders. Through the
folly of its remedies, mankind may well go to rack and ruin before the
proper time. There is no sure guiding instinct for the former or the
latter. Rather must we boldly face the great task of preparing the earth
for a plant of the most ample and joyous fruitfulness—a task set by reason
to reason!




190.


THE PRAISE OF DISINTERESTEDNESS AND ITS ORIGIN.—Between two neighbouring
chieftains there was a long-standing quarrel: they laid waste each other’s
territories, stole cattle, and burnt down houses, with an indecisive
result on the whole, because their power was fairly equal. A third, who
from the distant situation of his property was able to keep aloof from
these feuds, yet had reason to dread the day when one of the two
neighbours should gain a decisive preponderance, at last intervened
between the combatants with ceremonial goodwill. Secretly he lent a heavy
weight to his peace proposal by giving either to understand that he would
henceforth join forces with the other against the one who strove to break
the peace. They met in his presence, they hesitatingly placed into his
hand the hands that had hitherto been the tools and only too often the
causes of hatred—and then they really and seriously tried to keep the
peace. Either saw with astonishment how suddenly his prosperity and his
comfort increased; how he now had as neighbour a dealer ready to buy and
sell instead of a treacherous or openly scornful evil-doer; how even, in
unforeseen troubles, they could reciprocally save each other from
distress, instead of, as before, making capital out of this distress of
his neighbour and enhancing it to the highest degree. It even seemed as if
the human type had improved in both countries, for the eyes had become
brighter, the forehead had lost its wrinkles; all now felt confidence in
the future—and nothing is more advantageous for the souls and bodies of
men than this confidence. They saw each other every year on the
anniversary of the alliance, the chieftains as well as their retinue, and
indeed before the eyes of the mediator, whose mode of action they admired
and revered more and more, the greater the profit that they owed to him
became. Then his mode of action was called _disinterested_. They had
looked far too fixedly at the profit they had reaped themselves hitherto
to see anything more of their neighbour’s method of dealing than that his
condition in consequence of this had not altered so much as their own; he
had rather remained the same: and thus it appeared that the former had not
had his profit in view. For the first time people said to themselves that
disinterestedness was a virtue. It is true that in minor private matters
similar circumstances had arisen, but men only had eyes for this virtue
when it was depicted on the walls in a large script that was legible to
the whole community. Moral qualities are not recognised as virtues,
endowed with names, held in esteem, and recommended as worthy of
acquisition until the moment when they have _visibly_ decided the
happiness and destiny of whole societies. For then the loftiness of
sentiment and the excitation of the inner creative forces is in many so
great, that offerings are brought to this quality, offerings from the best
of what each possesses. At its feet the serious man lays his seriousness,
the dignified man his dignity, women their gentleness, the young all the
wealth of hope and futurity that in them lies; the poet lends it words and
names, sets it marching in the procession of similar beings, gives it a
pedigree, and finally, as is the way of artists, adores the picture of his
fancy as a new godhead—he even teaches others to adore. Thus in the end,
with the co-operation of universal love and gratitude, a virtue becomes,
like a statue, a repository of all that is good and honourable, a sort of
temple and divine personage combined. It appears thenceforward as an
individual virtue, as an absolute entity, which it was not before, and
exercises the power and privileges of a sanctified super-humanity.—In the
later days of Greece the cities were full of such deified human
abstractions (if one may so call them). The nation, in its own fashion,
had set up a Platonic “Heaven of Ideas” on earth, and I do not think that
its inhabitants were felt to be less alive than any of the old Homeric
divinities.




191.


DAYS OF DARKNESS.—“Days of Darkness” is the name given in Norway to the
period when the sun remains below the horizon the whole day long. The
temperature then falls slowly but continually.—A fine simile for all
thinkers for whom the sun of the human future is temporarily eclipsed.




192.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF LUXURY.—A garden, figs, a little cheese, and three or
four good friends—that was the luxury of Epicurus.




193.


THE EPOCHS OF LIFE.—The real epochs of life are those brief periods of
cessation midway between the rise and decline of a dominating idea or
emotion. Here once again there is satisfaction: all the rest is hunger and
thirst—or satiety.




194.


DREAMS.—Our dreams, if for once in a way they succeed and are
complete—generally a dream is a bungled piece of work—are symbolic
concatenations of scenes and images in place of a narrative poetical
language. They paraphrase our experiences or expectations or relations
with poetic boldness and definiteness, so that in the morning we are
always astonished at ourselves when we remember the nature of our dream.
In dreams we use up too much artistry—and hence are often too poor in
artistry in the daytime.




195.


NATURE AND SCIENCE.—As in nature, so in science the worse and less fertile
soils are first cultivated—because the means that science in its early
stages has at command are fairly sufficient for this purpose. The working
of the most fertile soils requires an enormous, carefully developed,
persevering method, tangible individual results, and an organised body of
well-trained workers. All these are found together only at a late
stage.—Impatience and ambition often grasp too early at these most fertile
soils, but the results are then from the first null and void. In nature
such losses would usually be avenged by the starvation of the settlers.




196.


THE SIMPLE LIFE.—A simple mode of life is nowadays difficult, requiring as
it does far more reflection and gift for invention than even very clever
people possess. The most honourable will perhaps still say, “I have not
the time for such lengthy reflection. The simple life is for me too lofty
a goal: I will wait till those wiser than I have discovered it.”




197.


PEAKS AND NEEDLE-POINTS.—The poor fertility, the frequent celibacy, and in
general the sexual coldness of the highest and most cultivated spirits, as
that of the classes to which they belong, is essential in human economy.
Intelligence recognises and makes use of the fact that at an acme of
intellectual development the danger of a neurotic offspring is very great.
Such men are the peaks of mankind—they ought no longer to run out into
needle-points.




198.


_NATURA NON FACIT SALTUM._—However strongly man may develop upwards and
seem to leap from one contradiction to another, a close observation will
reveal the dovetails where the new building grows out of the old. This is
the biographer’s task: he must reflect upon his subject on the principle
that nature takes no jumps.




199.


CLEAN, BUT—He who clothes himself with rags washed clean dresses cleanly,
to be sure, but is still ragged.




200.


THE SOLITARY SPEAKS.—In compensation for much disgust, disheartenment,
boredom—such as a lonely life without friends, books, duties, and passions
must involve—we enjoy those short spans of deep communion with ourselves
and with Nature. He who fortifies himself completely against boredom
fortifies himself against himself too. He will never drink the most
powerful elixir from his own innermost spring.




201.


FALSE RENOWN.—I hate those so-called natural beauties which really have
significance only through science, especially geographical science, but
are insignificant in an æsthetic sense: for example, the view of Mont
Blanc from Geneva. This is an insignificant thing without the auxiliary
mental joy of science: the nearer mountains are all more beautiful and
fuller of expression, but “not nearly so high,” adds that absurd
depreciatory science. The eye here contradicts science: how can it truly
rejoice in the contradiction?




202.


THOSE THAT TRAVEL FOR PLEASURE.—Like animals, stupid and perspiring, they
climb mountains: people forgot to tell them that there were fine views on
the way.




203.


TOO MUCH AND TOO LITTLE.—Men nowadays live too much and think too little.
They have hunger and dyspepsia together, and become thinner and thinner,
however much they eat. He who now says “Nothing has happened to me” is a
blockhead.




204.


END AND GOAL.—Not every end is the goal. The end of a melody is not its
goal, and yet if a melody has not reached its end, it has also not reached
its goal. A parable.




205.


NEUTRALITY OF NATURE ON A GRAND SCALE.—The neutrality of Nature on a grand
scale (in mountain, sea, forest, and desert) is pleasing, but only for a
brief space. Afterwards we become impatient. “Have they all nothing to say
to _us_? Do _we_ not exist so far as they are concerned?” There arises a
feeling that a _lèse-majesté_ is committed against humanity.




206.


FORGETTING OUR PURPOSE.—In a journey we commonly forget its goal. Almost
every vocation is chosen and entered upon as means to an end, but is
continued as the ultimate end. Forgetting our purpose is the most frequent
form of folly.




207.


SOLAR ORBIT OF AN IDEA.—When an idea is just rising on the horizon, the
soul’s temperature is usually very low. Gradually the idea develops in
warmth, and is hottest (that is to say, exerts its greatest influence)
when belief in the idea is already on the wane.




208.


HOW TO HAVE EVERY MAN AGAINST YOU.—If some one now dared to say, “He that
is not for me is against me,” he would at once have all against him.—This
sentiment does credit to our era.




209.


BEING ASHAMED OF WEALTH.—Our age endures only a single species of rich
men—those who are ashamed of their wealth. If we hear it said of any one
that he is very rich, we at once feel a similar sentiment to that
experienced at the sight of a repulsively swollen invalid, one suffering
from diabetes or dropsy. We must with an effort remember our humanity, in
order to go about with this rich man in such a way that he does not notice
our feeling of disgust. But as soon as he prides himself at all on his
wealth, our feelings are mingled with an almost compassionate surprise at
such a high degree of human unreason. We would fain raise our hands to
heaven and cry, “Poor deformed and overburdened creature, fettered a
hundredfold, to whom every hour brings or may bring something unpleasant,
in whose frame twitches every event that occurs in scores of countries,
how can you make us believe that you feel at ease in your position? If you
appear anywhere in public, we know that it is a sort of running the
gauntlet amid countless glances that have for you only cold hate or
importunity or silent scorn. You may earn more easily than others, but it
is only a superfluous earning, which brings little joy, and the guarding
of what you have earned is now, at any rate, a more troublesome business
than any toilsome process of earning. You are continually suffering,
because you are continually losing. What avails it you that they are
always injecting you with fresh artificial blood? That does not relieve
the pain of those cupping-glasses that are fixed, for ever fixed, on your
neck!—But, to be quite fair to you, it is difficult or perhaps impossible
for you _not_ to be rich. You _must_ guard, you _must_ earn more; the
inherited bent of your character is the yoke fastened upon you. But do not
on that account deceive us—be honestly and visibly ashamed of the yoke you
wear, as in your soul you are weary and unwilling to wear it. This shame
is no disgrace.”




210.


EXTRAVAGANT PRESUMPTIONS.—There are men so presumptuous that they can only
praise a greatness which they publicly admire by representing it as steps
and bridges that lead to themselves.




211.


ON THE SOIL OF INSULT.—He who wishes to deprive men of a conception is
generally not satisfied with refuting it and drawing out of it the
illogical worm that resides within. Rather, when the worm has been killed,
does he throw the whole fruit as well into the mire, in order to make it
ignoble in men’s sight and to inspire disgust. Thus he thinks that he has
found a means of making the usual “third-day resurrection” of conceptions
an impossibility.—He is wrong, for on the very soil of insult, in the
midst of the filth, the kernel of the conception soon produces new
seeds.—The right thing then, is not to scorn and bespatter what one wishes
finally to remove, but to lay it tenderly on ice again and again, having
regard to the fact that conceptions are very tenacious of life. Here we
must act according to the maxim: “One refutation is no refutation.”




212.


THE LOT OF MORALITY.—Since spiritual bondage is being relaxed, morality
(the inherited, traditional, instinctive mode of action in accordance with
moral sentiments) is surely also on the decline. This, however, is not the
case with the individual virtues, moderation, justice, repose; for the
greatest freedom of the conscious intellect leads at some time, even
unconsciously, back to these virtues, and then enjoins their practice as
expedient.




213.


THE FANATIC OF DISTRUST AND HIS SURETY.—_The Elder_: You wish to make the
tremendous venture and instruct mankind in the great things? What is your
surety?

_Pyrrho_: It is this: I intend to warn men against myself; I intend to
confess all the defects of my character quite openly, and reveal to the
world my hasty conclusions, my contradictions, and my foolish blunders.
“Do not listen to me,” I will say to them, “until I have become equal to
the meanest among you, nay am even less than he. Struggle against truth as
long as you can, from your disgust with her advocate. I shall be your
seducer and betrayer if you find in me the slightest glimmering of
respectability and dignity.”

_The Elder_: You promise too much; you cannot bear this burden.

_Pyrrho_: Then I will tell men even that, and say that I am too weak, and
cannot keep my promise. The greater my unworthiness, the more will they
mistrust the truth, when it passes through my lips.

_The Elder_: You propose to teach distrust of truth?

_Pyrrho_: Yes; distrust as it never was yet on earth, distrust of anything
and everything. This is the only road to truth. The right eye must not
trust the left eye, and for some time light must be called darkness: this
is the path that you must tread. Do not imagine that it will lead you to
fruit trees and fair pastures. You will find on this road little hard
grains—these are truths. For years and years you will have to swallow
handfuls of lies, so as not to die of hunger, although you know that they
are lies. But those grains will be sown and planted, and perhaps, perhaps
some day will come the harvest. No one may _promise_ that day, unless he
be a fanatic.

_The Elder_: Friend, friend! Your words too are those of a fanatic!

_Pyrrho_: You are right! I will be distrustful of all words.

_The Elder_: Then you will have to be silent.

_Pyrrho_: I shall tell men that I have to be silent, and that they are to
mistrust my silence.

_The Elder_: So you draw back from your undertaking?

_Pyrrho_: On the contrary—you have shown me the door through which I must
pass.

_The Elder_: I don’t know whether we yet completely understand each other?

_Pyrrho_: Probably not.

_The Elder_: If only you understand yourself!

(Pyrrho turns round and laughs.)

_The Elder_: Ah, friend! Silence and laughter—is that now your whole
philosophy?

_Pyrrho_: There might be a worse.




214.


EUROPEAN BOOKS.—In reading Montaigne, La Rochefoucauld, La Bruyère,
Fontenelle (especially the _Dialogues des Morts_), Vauvenargues, and
Chamfort we are nearer to antiquity than in any group of six authors of
other nations. Through these six the spirit of the last centuries before
Christ has once more come into being, and they collectively form an
important link in the great and still continuous chain of the Renaissance.
Their books are raised above all changes of national taste and
philosophical nuances from which as a rule every book takes and must take
its hue in order to become famous. They contain more real ideas than all
the books of German philosophers put together: ideas of the sort that
breed ideas——I am at a loss how to define to the end: enough to say that
they appear to me writers who wrote neither for children nor for
visionaries, neither for virgins nor for Christians, neither for Germans
nor for—I am again at a loss how to finish my list. To praise them in
plain terms, I may say that had they been written in Greek, they would
have been understood by Greeks. How much, on the other hand, would even a
Plato have understood of the writings of our best German thinkers—Goethe
and Schopenhauer, for instance—to say nothing of the repugnance that he
would have felt to their style, particularly to its obscure, exaggerated,
and occasionally dry-as-dust elements? And these are defects from which
these two among German thinkers suffer least and yet far too much (Goethe
as thinker was fonder than he should have been of embracing the cloud, and
Schopenhauer almost constantly wanders, not with impunity, among symbols
of objects rather than among the objects themselves).—On the other hand,
what clearness and graceful precision there is in these Frenchmen! The
Greeks, whose ears were most refined, could not but have approved of this
art, and one quality they would even have admired and reverenced—the
French verbal wit: they were extremely fond of this quality, without being
particularly strong in it themselves.




215.


FASHION AND MODERNITY.—Wherever ignorance, uncleanness, and superstition
are still rife, where communication is backward, agriculture poor, and the
priesthood powerful, national costumes are still worn. Fashion, on the
other hand, rules where the opposite conditions prevail. Fashion is
accordingly to be found next to the virtues in modern Europe. Are we to
call it their seamy side?—Masculine dress that is fashionable and no
longer national proclaims of its wearer: firstly, that he does not wish to
appear as an individual or as member of a class or race; that he has made
an intentional suppression of these kinds of vanity a law unto himself:
secondly, that he is a worker, and has little time for dressing and
self-adornment, and moreover regards anything expensive or luxurious in
material and cut as out of harmony with his work: lastly, that by his
clothes he indicates the more learned and intellectual callings as those
to which he stands or would like to stand nearest as a European—whereas
such national costumes as still exist would exhibit the occupations of
brigand, shepherd, and soldier as the most desirable and distinguished.
Within this general character of masculine fashion exist the slight
fluctuations demanded by the vanity of young men, the dandies and dawdlers
of our great cities—in other words, Europeans who have not yet reached
maturity.—European women are as yet far less mature, and for this reason
the fluctuations with them are much greater. They also will not have the
national costume, and hate to be recognised by their dress as German,
French, or Russian. They are, however, very desirous of creating an
impression as individuals. Then, too, their dress must leave no one in
doubt that they belong to one of the more reputable classes of society (to
“good” or “high” or “great” society), and on this score their pretensions
are all the greater if they belong scarcely or not at all to that class.
Above all, the young woman does not want to wear what an older woman
wears, because she thinks she loses her market value if she is suspected
of being somewhat advanced in years. The older woman, on the other hand,
would like to deceive the world as long as possible by a youthful garb.
From this competition must continually arise temporary fashions, in which
the youthful element is unmistakably and inimitably apparent. But after
the inventive genius of the young female artists has run riot for some
time in such indiscreet revelations of youth (or rather, after the
inventive genius of older, courtly civilisations and of still existing
peoples—in fact, of the whole world of dress—has been pressed into the
service, and, say, the Spaniards, Turks, and ancient Greeks have been
yoked together for the glorification of fair flesh), then they at last
discover, time and again, that they have not been good judges of their own
interest; that if they wish to have power over men, the game of
hide-and-seek with the beautiful body is more likely to win than naked or
half-naked honesty. And then the wheel of taste and vanity turns once more
in an opposite direction. The rather older young women find that their
kingdom has come, and the competition of the dear, absurd creatures rages
again from the beginning.—But the more women advance mentally, and no
longer among themselves concede the pre-eminence to an unripe age, the
smaller their fluctuations of costume grow and the less elaborate their
adornment. A just verdict in this respect must not be based on ancient
models—in other words, not on the standard of the dress of women who dwell
on the shores of the Mediterranean—but must have an eye to the climatic
conditions of the central and northern regions, where the intellectual and
creative spirit of Europe now finds its most natural home.—Generally
speaking, therefore, it is not change that will be the characteristic mark
of fashion and modernity, for change is retrograde, and betokens the still
unripened men and women of Europe; but rather the repudiation of national,
social, and individual vanity. Accordingly, it is commendable, because
involving a saving of time and strength, if certain cities and districts
of Europe think and invent for all the rest in the matter of dress, in
view of the fact that a sense of form does not seem to have been bestowed
upon all. Nor is it really an excessive ambition, so long as these
fluctuations still exist, for Paris, for example, to claim to be the sole
inventor and innovator in this sphere. If a German, from hatred of these
claims on the part of a French city, wishes to dress differently,—as, for
example, in the Dürer style,—let him reflect that he then has a costume
which the Germans of olden times wore, but which the Germans have not in
the slightest degree invented. For there has never been a style of dress
that characterised the German as a German. Moreover, let him observe how
he looks in his costume, and whether his altogether modern face, with all
its hues and wrinkles, does not raise a protest against a Dürer fashion of
dress.—Here, where the concepts “modern” and “European” are almost
identical, we understand by “Europe” a far wider region than is embraced
by the Europe of geography, the little peninsula of Asia. In particular,
we must include America, in so far as America is the daughter of our
civilisation. On the other hand, not all Europe falls under the heading of
cultured “Europe,” but only those nations and divisions of nations which
have their common past in Greece, Rome, Judaism, and Christianity.




216.


“GERMAN VIRTUE.”—There is no denying that from the end of the eighteenth
century a current of moral awakening flowed through Europe. Then only
Virtue found again the power of speech. She learnt to discover the
unrestrained gestures of exaltation and emotion, she was no longer ashamed
of herself, and she created philosophies and poems for her own
glorification. If we look for the sources of this current, we come upon
Rousseau, but the mythical Rousseau, the phantom formed from the
impression left by his writings (one might almost say again, his
mythically interpreted writings) and by the indications that he provided
himself. He and his public constantly worked at the fashioning of this
ideal figure. The other origin lies in the resurrection of the Stoical
side of Rome’s greatness, whereby the French so nobly carried on the task
of the Renaissance. With striking success they proceeded from the
reproduction of antique forms to the reproduction of antique characters.
Thus they may always claim a title to the highest honours, as the nation
which has hitherto given the modern world its best books and its best men.
How this twofold archetype, the mythical Rousseau and the resurrected
spirit of Rome, affected France’s weaker neighbours, is particularly
noticeable in Germany, which, in consequence of her novel and quite
unwonted impulse to seriousness and loftiness in will and self-control,
finally came to feel astonishment at her own newfound virtue, and launched
into the world the concept “German virtue,” as if this were the most
original and hereditary of her possessions. The first great men who
transfused into their own blood that French impulse towards greatness and
consciousness of the moral will were more honest, and more grateful.
Whence comes the moralism of Kant? He is continually reminding us: from
Rousseau and the revival of Stoic Rome. The moralism of Schiller has the
same source and the same glorification of the source. The moralism of
Beethoven in notes is a continual song in praise of Rousseau, the antique
French, and Schiller. “Young Germany” was the first to forget its
gratitude, because in the meantime people had listened to the preachers of
hatred of the French. The “young German” came to the fore with more
consciousness than is generally allowed to youths. When he investigated
his paternity, he might well think of the proximity of Schiller,
Schleiermacher, and Fichte. But he should have looked for his grandfathers
in Paris and Geneva, and it was very short-sighted of him to believe what
he believed: that virtue was not more than thirty years old. People became
used to demanding that the word “German” should connote “virtue,” and this
process has not been wholly forgotten to this day.—Be it observed further
that this moral awakening, as may almost be guessed, has resulted only in
drawbacks and obstacles to the _recognition_ of moral phenomena. What is
the entire German philosophy, starting from Kant, with all its French,
English, and Italian offshoots and by-products? A semi-theological attack
upon Helvetius, a rejection of the slowly and laboriously acquired views
and signposts of the right road, which in the end he collected and
expressed so well. To this day Helvetius is the best-abused of all good
moralists and good men in Germany.




217.


CLASSIC AND ROMANTIC.—Both classically and romantically minded spirits—two
species that always exist—cherish a vision of the future; but the former
derive their vision from the strength of their time, the latter from its
weakness.




218.


THE MACHINE AS TEACHER.—Machinery teaches in itself the dovetailed working
of masses of men, in activities where each has but one thing to do. It is
the model of party organisations and of warfare. On the other hand, it
does not teach individual self-glorification, for it makes of the many a
machine, and of each individual a tool for one purpose. Its most general
effect is to teach the advantage of centralisation.




219.


UNABLE TO SETTLE.—One likes to live in a small town. But from time to time
just this small town drives us out into bare and lonely Nature, especially
when we think we know it too well. Finally, in order to refresh ourselves
from Nature, we go to the big town. A few draughts from this cup and we
see its dregs, and the circle begins afresh, with the small town as
starting-point.—So the moderns live; they are in all things rather too
thorough to be able to settle like the men of other days.




220.


REACTION AGAINST THE CIVILISATION OF MACHINERY.—The machine, itself a
product of the highest mental powers, sets in motion hardly any but the
lower, unthinking forces of the men who serve it. True, it unfetters a
vast quantity of force which would otherwise lie dormant. But it does not
communicate the impulse to climb higher, to improve, to become artistic.
It creates activity and monotony, but this in the long-run produces a
counter-effect, a despairing ennui of the soul, which through machinery
has learnt to hanker after the variety of leisure.




221.


THE DANGER OF ENLIGHTENMENT.—All the half-insane, theatrical, bestially
cruel, licentious, and especially sentimental and self-intoxicating
elements which go to form the true revolutionary substance, and became
flesh and spirit, before the revolution, in Rousseau—all this composite
being, with factitious enthusiasm, finally set even “enlightenment” upon
its fanatical head, which thereby began itself to shine as in an
illuminating halo. Yet, enlightenment is essentially foreign to that
phenomenon, and, if left to itself, would have pierced silently through
the clouds like a shaft of light, long content to transfigure individuals
alone, and thus only slowly transfiguring national customs and
institutions as well. But now, bound hand and foot to a violent and abrupt
monster, enlightenment itself became violent and abrupt. Its danger has
therefore become almost greater than its useful quality of liberation and
illumination, which it introduced into the great revolutionary movement.
Whoever grasps this will also know from what confusion it has to be
extricated, from what impurities to be cleansed, in order that it may then
by itself continue the work of enlightenment and also nip the revolution
in the bud and nullify its effects.




222.


PASSION IN THE MIDDLE AGES.—The Middle Ages are the period of great
passions. Neither antiquity nor our period possesses this widening of the
soul. Never was the capacity of the soul greater or measured by larger
standards. The physical, primeval sensuality of the barbarian races and
the over-soulful, over-vigilant, over-brilliant eyes of Christian mystics,
the most childish and youthful and the most over-ripe and world-weary, the
savageness of the beast of prey and the effeminacy and excessive
refinement of the late antique spirit—all these elements were then not
seldom united in one and the same person. Thus, if a man was seized by a
passion, the rapidity of the torrent must have been greater, the whirl
more confused, the fall deeper than ever before.—We modern men may be
content to feel that we have suffered a loss here.




223.


ROBBING AND SAVING.—All intellectual movements whereby the great may hope
to rob and the small to save are sure to prosper. That is why, for
instance, the German Reformation made progress.




224.


GLADSOME SOULS.—When even a remote hint of drink, drunkenness, and an
evil-smelling kind of jocularity was given, the souls of the old Germans
waxed gladsome. Otherwise they were depressed, but here they found
something they really understood.




225.


DEBAUCHERY AT ATHENS.—Even when the fish-market of Athens acquired its
thinkers and poets, Greek debauchery had a more idyllic and refined
appearance than Roman or German debauchery ever had. The voice of Juvenal
would have sounded there like a hollow trumpet, and would have been
answered by a good-natured and almost childish outburst of laughter.




226.


CLEVERNESS OF THE GREEK.—As the desire for victory and pre-eminence is an
ineradicable trait of human nature, older and more primitive than any
respect of or joy in equality, the Greek State sanctioned gymnastic and
artistic competitions among equals. In other words, it marked out an arena
where this impulse to conquer would find a vent without jeopardising the
political order. With the final decline of gymnastic and artistic contests
the Greek State fell into a condition of profound unrest and dissolution.




227.


THE “ETERNAL EPICURUS.”—Epicurus has lived in all periods, and lives yet,
unbeknown to those who called and still call themselves Epicureans, and
without repute among philosophers. He has himself even forgotten his own
name—that was the heaviest luggage that he ever cast off.




228.


THE STYLE OF SUPERIORITY.—“University slang,” the speech of the German
students, has its origin among the students who do not study. The latter
know how to acquire a preponderance over their more serious fellows by
exposing all the farcical elements of culture, respectability, erudition,
order, and moderation, and by having words taken from these realms always
on their lips, like the better and more learned students, but with malice
in their glance and an accompanying grimace. This language of
superiority—the only one that is original in Germany—is nowadays
unconsciously used by statesmen and newspaper critics as well. It is a
continual process of ironical quotation, a restless, cantankerous
squinting of the eye right and left, a language of inverted commas and
grimaces.




229.


THE RECLUSE.—We retire into seclusion, but not from personal misgivings,
as if the political and social conditions of the day did not satisfy us;
rather because by our retirement we try to save and collect forces which
will some day be urgently needed by culture, the more this present is
_this present_, and, as such, fulfils its task. We form a capital and try
to make it secure, but, as in times of real danger, our method is to bury
our hoard.




230.


TYRANTS OF THE INTELLECT.—In our times, any one who expressed a single
moral trait so thoroughly as the characters of Theophrastus and Molière
do, would be considered ill, and be spoken of as possessing “a fixed
idea.” The Athens of the third century, if we could visit it, would appear
to us populated by fools. Nowadays the democracy of ideas rules in every
brain—there the multitude collectively is lord. A single idea that tried
to be lord is now called, as above stated, “a fixed idea.” This is our
method of murdering tyrants—we hint at the madhouse.




231.


A MOST DANGEROUS EMIGRATION.—In Russia there is an emigration of the
intelligence. People cross the frontier in order to read and write good
books. Thus, however, they are working towards turning their country,
abandoned by the intellect, into a gaping Asiatic maw, which would fain
swallow our little Europe.




232.


POLITICAL FOOLS.—The almost religious love of the king was transferred by
the Greeks, when the monarchy was abolished, to the _polis_. An idea can
be loved more than a person, and does not thwart the lover so often as a
beloved human being (for the more men know themselves to be loved, the
less considerate they usually become, until they are no longer worthy of
love, and a rift really arises). Hence the reverence for State and _polis_
was greater than the reverence for princes had ever been. The Greeks are
the political fools of ancient history—today other nations boast that
distinction.




233.


AGAINST NEGLECT OF THE EYES.—Might one not find among the cultured classes
of England, who read the _Times_, a decline in their powers of sight every
ten years?




234.


GREAT WORKS AND GREAT FAITH.—One man had great works, but his comrade had
great faith in these works. They were inseparable, but obviously the
former was entirely dependent upon the latter.




235.


THE SOCIABLE MAN.—“I don’t get on well with myself,” said some one in
explanation of his fondness for society. “Society has a stronger digestion
than I have, and can put up with me.”




236.


SHUTTING THE MIND’S EYES.—If we are practised and accustomed to reflect
upon our actions, we must nevertheless close the inner eye while
performing an action (be this even only writing letters or eating or
drinking). Even in conversation with average people we must know how to
obscure our own mental vision in order to attain and grasp average
thinking. This shutting of the eyes is a conscious act and can be achieved
by the will.




237.


THE MOST TERRIBLE REVENGE.—If we wish to take a thorough revenge upon an
opponent, we must wait until we have our hand quite full of truths and
equities, and can calmly use the whole lot against him. Hence the exercise
of revenge may be identified with the exercise of equity. It is the most
terrible kind of revenge, for there is no higher court to which an appeal
can be made. Thus did Voltaire revenge himself on Piron, with five lines
that sum up Piron’s whole life, work, and character: every word is a
truth. So too he revenged himself upon Frederick the Great in a letter to
him from Ferney.




238.


TAXES OF LUXURY.—In shops we buy the most necessary and urgent things, and
have to pay very dear, because we pay as well for what is also to be had
there cheap, but seldom finds a customer—articles of luxury that minister
to pleasure. Thus luxury lays a constant tax upon the man of simple life
who does without luxuries.




239.


WHY BEGGARS STILL LIVE.—If all alms were given only out of compassion, the
whole tribe of beggars would long since have died of starvation.




240.


WHY BEGGARS STILL LIVE.—The greatest of almsgivers is cowardice.




241.


HOW THE THINKER MAKES USE OF A CONVERSATION.—Without being eavesdroppers,
we can hear a good deal if we are able to see well, and at the same time
to let ourselves occasionally get out of our own sight. But people do not
know how to make use of a conversation. They pay far too much attention to
what _they_ want to say and reply, whereas the true listener is often
contented to make a provisional answer and to say something merely as a
payment on account of politeness, but on the other hand, with his memory
lurking in ambush, carries away with him all that the other said, together
with his tones and gestures in speaking.—In ordinary conversation every
one thinks _he_ is the leader, just as if two ships, sailing side by side
and giving each other a slight push here and there, were each firmly
convinced that the other ship was following or even being towed.




242.


THE ART OF EXCUSING ONESELF.—If some one excuses himself to us, he has to
make out a very good case, otherwise we readily come to feel ourselves the
culprits, and experience an unpleasant emotion.




243.


IMPOSSIBLE INTERCOURSE.—The ship of your thoughts goes too deep for you to
be able to travel with it in the waters of these friendly, decorous,
obliging people. There are too many shallows and sandbanks: you would have
to tack and turn, and would find yourself continually at your wits’ end,
and they would soon also be in perplexity as to _your_ perplexity, the
reason for which they cannot divine.




244.


THE FOX OF FOXES.—A true fox not only calls sour the grapes he cannot
reach, but also those he has reached and snatched from the grasp of
others.




245.


IN INTIMATE INTERCOURSE.—However closely men are connected, there are
still all the four quarters of the heavens in their common horizon, and at
times they become aware of this fact.




246.


THE SILENCE OF DISGUST.—Behold! some one undergoes a thorough and painful
transformation as thinker and human being, and makes a public avowal of
the change. And those who hear him see nothing, and still believe he is
the same as before! This common experience has already disgusted many
writers. They had rated the intellectuality of mankind too highly, and
made a vow to be silent as soon as they became aware of their mistake.




247.


BUSINESS SERIOUSNESS.—The business of many rich and eminent men is their
form of recreation from too long periods of habitual leisure. They then
become as serious and impassioned as other people do in their rare moments
of leisure and amusement.




248.


THE EYE’S DOUBLE SENSE.—Just as a sudden scaly ripple runs over the waters
at your feet, so there are similar sudden uncertainties and ambiguities in
the human eye. They lead to the question: is it a shudder, or a smile, or
both?




249.


POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE.—This thinker needs no one to refute him—he is quite
capable of doing that himself.




250.


THE REVENGE OF THE EMPTY NETS.—Above all we should beware of those who
have the bitter feeling of the fisherman who after a hard day’s work comes
home in the evening with nets empty.




251.


NON-ASSERTION OF OUR RIGHTS.—The exertion of power is laborious and
demands courage. That is why so many do not assert their most valid
rights, because their rights are a kind of power, and they are too lazy or
too cowardly to exercise them. _Indulgence_ and _patience_ are the names
given to the virtues that cloak these faults.




252.


BEARERS OF LIGHT.—In Society there would be no sunshine if the born
flatterers (I mean the so-called amiable people) did not bring some in
with them.




253.


WHEN MOST BENEVOLENT.—When a man has been highly honoured and has eaten a
little, he is most benevolent.




254.


TO THE LIGHT.—Men press forward to the light not in order to see better
but to shine better.—The person before whom we shine we gladly allow to be
called a light.




255.


THE HYPOCHONDRIAC.—The hypochondriac is a man who has just enough
intellect and pleasure in the intellect to take his sorrows, his losses,
and his mistakes seriously. But the field on which he grazes is too small:
he crops it so close that in the end he has to look for single stalks.
Thus he finally becomes envious and avaricious—and only then is he
unbearable.




256.


GIVING IN RETURN.—Hesiod advises us to give the neighbour who has helped
us good measure and, if possible, fuller measure in return, as soon as we
have the power. For this is where the neighbour’s pleasure comes in, since
his former benevolence brings him interest. Moreover, he who gives in
return also has his pleasure, inasmuch as, by giving a little more than he
got, he redeems the slight humiliation of being compelled to seek aid.




257.


MORE SUBTLE THAN IS NECESSARY.—Our sense of observation for how far others
perceive our weaknesses is far more subtle than our sense of observation
for the weaknesses of others. It follows that the first-named sense is
more subtle than is necessary.




258.


A KIND OF BRIGHT SHADOWS.—Close to the nocturnal type of man we almost
regularly find, as if bound up with him, a bright soul. This is, as it
were, the negative shadow cast by the former.




259.


NOT TO TAKE REVENGE.—There are so many subtle sorts of revenge that one
who has occasion to take revenge can really do or omit to do what he
likes. In any case, the whole world will agree, after a time, that he
_has_ avenged himself. Hence the avoidance of revenge is hardly within
man’s power. He must not even so much as say that he does not _want_ to do
so, since the contempt for revenge is interpreted and felt as a sublime
and exquisite form of revenge.—It follows that we must do nothing
superfluous.




260.


THE MISTAKE OF THOSE WHO PAY HOMAGE.—Every one thinks he is paying a most
agreeable compliment to a thinker when he says that he himself hit upon
exactly the same idea and even upon the same expression. The thinker,
however, is seldom delighted at hearing such news, nay, rather, he often
becomes distrustful of his own thoughts and expressions. He silently
resolves to revise both some day. If we wish to pay homage to any one, we
must beware of expressing our agreement, for this puts us on the same
level.—Often it is a matter of social tact to listen to an opinion as if
it were not ours or even travelled beyond the limits of our own
horizon—as, for example, when an old man once in a while opens the
storehouse of his acquired knowledge.




261.


LETTERS.—A letter is an unannounced visit, and the postman is the
intermediary of impolite surprises. Every week we ought to have one hour
for receiving letters, and then go and take a bath.




262.


PREJUDICED.—Some one said: I have been prejudiced against myself from
childhood upwards, and hence I find some truth in every censure and some
absurdity in every eulogy. Praise I generally value too low and blame too
high.




263.


THE PATH TO EQUALITY.—A few hours of mountain-climbing make a blackguard
and a saint two rather similar creatures. Weariness is the shortest path
to equality and fraternity—and finally liberty is bestowed by sleep.




264.


CALUMNY.—If we begin to trace to its source a real scandalous
misrepresentation, we shall rarely look for its origin in our honourable
and straightforward enemies; for if they invented anything of the sort
about us, they, as being our enemies, would gain no credence. Those,
however, to whom for a time we have been most useful, but who, from some
reason or other, may be secretly sure that they will obtain no more from
us—such persons are in a position to start the ball of slander rolling.
They gain credence, firstly, because it is assumed that they would invent
nothing likely to do them damage; secondly, because they have learnt to
know us intimately.—As a consolation, the much-slandered man may say to
himself: Calumnies are diseases of others that break out in your body.
They prove that Society is a (moral) organism, so that you can prescribe
to _yourself_ the cure that will in the end be useful to others.




265.


THE CHILD’S KINGDOM OF HEAVEN.—The happiness of a child is as much of a
myth as the happiness of the Hyperboreans of whom the Greeks fabled. The
Greeks supposed that, if indeed happiness dwells anywhere on our earth, it
must certainly dwell as far as possible from us, perhaps over yonder at
the edge of the world. Old people have the same thought—if man is at all
capable of being happy, he must be happy as far as possible from our age,
at the frontiers and beginnings of life. For many a man the sight of
children, through the veil of this myth, is the greatest happiness that he
can feel. He enters himself into the forecourt of heaven when he says,
“Suffer the little children to come unto me, for of them is the kingdom of
heaven.” The myth of the child’s kingdom of heaven holds good, in some way
or other, wherever in the modern world some sentimentality exists.




266.


THE IMPATIENT.—It is just the growing man who does not want things in the
growing stage. He is too impatient for that. The youth will not wait
until, after long study, suffering, and privation, his picture of men and
things is complete. Accordingly, he confidently accepts another picture
that lies ready to his hand and is recommended to him, and pins his faith
to that, as if it must give him at once the lines and colours of his own
painting. He presses a philosopher or a poet to his bosom, and must from
that time forth perform long stretches of forced labour and renounce his
own self. He learns much in the process, but he often forgets what is most
worth learning and knowing—his self. He remains all his life a partisan.
Ah, a vast amount of tedious work has to be done before you find your own
colours, your own brush, your own canvas!—Even then you are very far from
being a master in the art of life, but at least you are the boss in your
own workshop.




267.


THERE ARE NO TEACHERS.—As thinkers we ought only to speak of
self-teaching. The instruction of the young by others is either an
experiment performed upon something as yet unknown and unknowable, or else
a thorough levelling process, in order to make the new member of society
conform to the customs and manners that prevail for the time being. In
both cases the result is accordingly unworthy of a thinker—the handiwork
of parents and teachers, whom some valiantly honest person(25) has called
“_nos ennemis naturels_.” One day, when, as the world thinks, we have long
since finished our education, we _discover ourselves_. Then begins the
task of the thinker, and then is the time to summon him to our aid—not as
a teacher, but as a self-taught man who has experience.




268.


SYMPATHY WITH YOUTH.—We are sorry when we hear that some one who is still
young is losing his teeth or growing blind. If we knew all the irrevocable
and hopeless feelings hidden in his whole being, how great our sorrow
would be! Why do we really suffer on this account? Because youth has to
continue the work we have undertaken, and every flaw and failing in its
strength is likely to injure _our_ work, that will fall into its hands. It
is the sorrow at the imperfect guarantee of our immortality: or, if we
only feel ourselves as executors of the human mission, it is the sorrow
that this mission must pass to weaker hands than ours.




269.


THE AGES OF LIFE.—The comparison of the four ages of life with the four
seasons of the year is a venerable piece of folly. Neither the first
twenty nor the last twenty years of a life correspond to a season of the
year, assuming that we are not satisfied with drawing a parallel between
white hair and snow and similar colour-analogies. The first twenty years
are a preparation for life in general, for the whole year of life, a sort
of long New Year’s Day. The last twenty review, assimilate, bring into
union and harmony all that has been experienced till then: as, in a small
degree, we do on every New Year’s Eve with the whole past year. But in
between there really lies an interval which suggests a comparison with the
seasons—the time from the twentieth to the fiftieth year (to speak here of
decades in the lump, while it is an understood thing that every one must
refine for himself these rough outlines). Those three decades correspond
to three seasons—summer, spring, and autumn. Winter human life has none,
unless we like to call the (unfortunately) often intervening hard, cold,
lonely, hopeless, unfruitful periods of disease the winters of man. The
twenties, hot, oppressive, stormy, impetuous, exhausting years, when we
praise the day in the evening, when it is over, as we wipe the sweat from
our foreheads—years in which work seems to us cruel but necessary—these
twenties are the summer of life. The thirties, on the other hand, are its
spring-time, with the air now too warm, now too cold, ever restless and
stimulating, bubbling sap, bloom of leaves, fragrance of buds everywhere,
many delightful mornings and evenings, work to which the song of birds
awakens us, a true work of the heart, a kind of joy in our own robustness,
strengthened by the savour of hopeful anticipation. Lastly the forties,
mysterious like all that is stationary, like a high, broad plateau,
traversed by a fresh breeze, with a clear, cloudless sky above it, which
always has the same gentle look all day and half the night—the time of
harvest and cordial gaiety—that is the autumn of life.




270.


WOMEN’S INTELLECT IN MODERN SOCIETY.—What women nowadays think of men’s
intellect may be divined from the fact that in their art of adornment they
think of anything but of emphasising the intellectual side of their faces
or their single intellectual features. On the contrary, they conceal such
traits, and understand, for example by an arrangement of their hair over
their forehead, how to give themselves an appearance of vivid, eager
sensuality and materialism, just when they but slightly possess those
qualities. Their conviction that intellect in women frightens men goes so
far that they even gladly deny the keenness of the most intellectual sense
and purposely invite the reputation of short-sightedness. They think they
will thereby make men more confiding. It is as if a soft, attractive
twilight were spreading itself around them.




271.


GREAT AND TRANSITORY.—What moves the observer to tears is the rapturous
look of happiness with which a fair young bride gazes upon her husband. We
feel all the melancholy of autumn in thinking of the greatness and of the
transitoriness of human happiness.




272.


SENSE AND SACRIFICE.—Many a woman has the _intelletto del sacrifizio_,(26)
and no longer enjoys life when her husband refuses to sacrifice her. With
all her wit, she then no longer knows—whither? and without perceiving it,
is changed from sacrificial victim to sacrificial priest.




273.


THE UNFEMININE.—“Stupid as a man,” say the women; “Cowardly as a woman,”
say the men. Stupidity in a woman is unfeminine.




274.


MASCULINE AND FEMININE TEMPERAMENT AND MORTALITY.—That the male sex has a
worse temperament than the female follows from the fact that male children
have a greater mortality than female, clearly because they “leap out of
their skins” more easily. Their wildness and unbearableness soon make all
the bad stuff in them deadly.




275.


THE AGE OF CYCLOPEAN BUILDING.—The democratisation of Europe is a
resistless force. Even he who would stem the tide uses those very means
that democratic thought first put into men’s hands, and he makes these
means more handy and workable. The most inveterate enemies of democracy (I
mean the spirits of upheaval) seem only to exist in order, by the fear
that they inspire, to drive forward the different parties faster and
faster on the democratic course. Now we may well feel sorry for those who
are working consciously and honourably for this future. There is something
dreary and monotonous in their faces, and the grey dust seems to have been
wafted into their very brains. Nevertheless, posterity may possibly some
day laugh at our anxiety, and see in the democratic work of several
generations what we see in the building of stone dams and walls—an
activity that necessarily covers clothes and face with a great deal of
dust, and perhaps unavoidably makes the workmen, too, a little
dull-witted; but who would on that account desire such work undone? It
seems that the democratisation of Europe is a link in the chain of those
mighty prophylactic principles which are the thought of the modern era,
and whereby we rise up in revolt against the Middle Ages. Now, and now
only, is the age of Cyclopean building! A final security in the
foundations, that the future may build on them without danger! Henceforth,
an impossibility of the orchards of culture being once more destroyed
overnight by wild, senseless mountain torrents! Dams and walls against
barbarians, against plagues, against physical and spiritual serfdom! And
all this understood at first roughly and literally, but gradually in an
ever higher and more spiritual sense, so that all the principles here
indicated may appear as the intellectual preparation of the highest artist
in horticulture, who can only apply himself to his own task when the other
is fully accomplished!—True, if we consider the long intervals of time
that here lie between means and end, the great, supreme labour, straining
the powers and brains of centuries, that is necessary in order to create
or to provide each individual means, we must not bear too hardly upon the
workers of the present when they loudly proclaim that the wall and the
fence are already the end and the final goal. After all, no one yet sees
the gardener and the fruit, for whose sake the fence exists.




276.


THE RIGHT OF UNIVERSAL SUFFRAGE.—The people has not granted itself
universal suffrage but, wherever this is now in force, it has received and
accepted it as a temporary measure. But in any case the people has the
right to restore the gift, if it does not satisfy its anticipations. This
dissatisfaction seems universal nowadays, for when, at any occasion where
the vote is exercised, scarce two-thirds, nay perhaps not even the
majority of all voters, go to the polls, that very fact is a vote against
the whole suffrage system.—On this point, in fact, we must pronounce a
much sterner verdict. A law that enacts that the majority shall decide as
to the welfare of all cannot be built up on the foundation that it alone
has provided, for it is bound to require a far broader foundation, namely
the unanimity of all. Universal suffrage must not only be the expression
of the will of a majority, but of the whole country. Thus the dissent of a
very small minority is already enough to set aside the system as
impracticable; and the abstention from voting is in fact a dissent of this
kind, which ruins the whole institution. The “absolute veto” of the
individual, or—not to be too minute—the veto of a few thousands, hangs
over the system as the consequence of justice. On every occasion when it
is employed, the system must, according to the variety of the division,
first prove that it has still a right to exist.




277.


FALSE CONCLUSIONS.—What false conclusions are drawn in spheres where we
are not at home, even by those of us who are accustomed as men of science
to draw right conclusions! It is humiliating! Now it is clear that in the
great turmoil of worldly doings, in political affairs, in all sudden and
urgent matters such as almost every day brings up, these false conclusions
must decide. For no one feels at home with novelties that have sprung up
in the night. All political work, even with great statesmen, is an
improvisation that trusts to luck.




278.


PREMISSES OF THE AGE OF MACHINERY.—The press, the machine, the railway,
the telegraph are premisses of which no one has yet dared to draw the
conclusions that will follow in a thousand years.




279.


A DRAG UPON CULTURE.—When we are told that here men have no time for
productive occupations, because military manœuvres and processions take up
their days, and the rest of the population must feed and clothe them,
their dress, however, being striking, often gay and full of absurdities;
that there only a few distinguished qualities are recognised, individuals
resemble each other more than elsewhere, or at any rate are treated as
equals, yet obedience is exacted and yielded without reasoning, for men
command and make no attempt to convince; that here punishments are few,
but these few cruel and likely to become the final and most terrible; that
there treason ranks as the capital offence, and even the criticism of
evils is only ventured on by the most audacious; that there, again, human
life is cheap, and ambition often takes the form of setting life in
danger—when we hear all this, we at once say, “This is a picture of a
barbarous society that rests on a hazardous footing.” One man perhaps will
add, “It is a portrait of Sparta.” But another will become meditative and
declare that this is a description of our modern military system, as it
exists in the midst of our altogether different culture and society, a
living anachronism, the picture, as above said, of a community resting on
a hazardous footing; a posthumous work of the past, which can only act as
a drag upon the wheels of the present.—Yet at times even a drag upon
culture is vitally necessary—that is to say, when culture is advancing too
rapidly downhill or (as perhaps in this case) _uphill_.




280.


MORE REVERENCE FOR THEM THAT KNOW.—In the competition of production and
sale the public is made judge of the product. But the public has no
special knowledge, and judges by the appearance of the wares. In
consequence, the art of appearance (and perhaps the taste for it) must
increase under the dominance of competition, while on the other hand the
quality of every product must deteriorate. The result will be—so far as
reason does not fall in value—that one day an end will be put to that
competition, and a new principle will win the day. Only the master of the
craft should pronounce a verdict on the work, and the public should be
dependent on the belief in the personality of the judge and his honesty.
Accordingly, no anonymous work! At least an expert should be there as
guarantor and pledge his name if the name of the creator is lacking or is
unknown. The cheapness of an article is for the layman another kind of
illusion and deceit, since only durability can decide that a thing is
cheap and to what an extent. But it is difficult, and for a layman
impossible, to judge of its durability.—Hence that which produces an
effect on the eye and costs little at present gains the advantage—this
being naturally machine-made work. Again, machinery—that is to say, the
cause of the greatest rapidity and facility in production—favours the most
saleable kind of article. Otherwise it involves no tangible profit; it
would be too little used and too often stand idle. But as to what is most
saleable, the public, as above said, decides: it must be the most
exchangeable—in other words, the thing that appears good and also appears
cheap. Thus in the domain of labour our motto must also hold good: “More
respect for them that know!”




281.


THE DANGER OF KINGS.—Democracy has it in its power, without any violent
means, and only by a lawful pressure steadily exerted, to make kingship
and emperorship hollow, until only a zero remains, perhaps with the
significance of every zero in that, while nothing in itself, it multiplies
a number tenfold if placed on the right side. Kingship and emperorship
would remain a gorgeous ornament upon the simple and appropriate dress of
democracy, a beautiful superfluity that democracy allows itself, a relic
of all the historically venerable, primitive ornaments, nay the symbol of
history itself, and in this unique position a highly effective thing if,
as above said, it does not stand alone, but is put on the right side.—In
order to avoid the danger of this nullification, kings hold by their teeth
to their dignity as war-lords. To this end they need wars, or in other
words exceptional circumstances, in which that slow, lawful pressure of
the democratic forces is relaxed.




282.


THE TEACHER A NECESSARY EVIL.—Let us have as few people as possible
between the productive minds and the hungry and recipient minds! The
middlemen almost unconsciously adulterate the food which they supply. For
their work as middlemen they want too high a fee for themselves, and this
is drawn from the original, productive spirits—namely, interest,
admiration, leisure, money, and other advantages.—Accordingly, we should
always look upon the teacher as a necessary evil, just like the merchant;
as an evil that we should make as small as possible.—Perhaps the
prevailing distress in Germany has its main cause in the fact that too
many wish to live and live well by trade (in other words, desiring as far
as possible to diminish prices for the producer and raise prices for the
consumer, and thus to profit by the greatest possible loss to both). In
the same way, we may certainly trace a main cause of the prevailing
intellectual poverty in the superabundance of teachers. It is because of
teachers that so little is learnt, and that so badly.




283.


THE TAX OF HOMAGE.—Him whom we know and honour,—be he physician, artist,
or artisan,—who does and produces something for us, we gladly pay as
highly as we can, often a fee beyond our means. On the other hand, we pay
the unknown as low a price as possible; here is a contest in which every
one struggles and makes others struggle for a foot’s breadth of land. In
the work of the known there is something that cannot be bought, the
sentiment and ingenuity put into his work for our own sake. We think we
cannot better express our sense of obligation than by a sort of sacrifice
on our part.—The heaviest tax is the tax of homage. The more competition
prevails, the more we buy for the unknown and work for the unknown, the
lower does this tax become, whereas it is really the standard for the
loftiness of man’s spiritual intercourse.




284.


THE MEANS TOWARDS GENUINE PEACE.—No government will nowadays admit that it
maintains an army in order to satisfy occasionally its passion for
conquest. The army is said to serve only defensive purposes. This
morality, which justifies self-defence, is called in as the government’s
advocate. This means, however, reserving morality for ourselves and
immorality for our neighbour, because he must be thought eager for attack
and conquest if our state is forced to consider means of self-defence.—At
the same time, by our explanation of our need of an army (because he
denies the lust of attack just as our state does, and ostensibly also
maintains his army for defensive reasons), we proclaim him a hypocrite and
cunning criminal, who would fain seize by surprise, without any fighting,
a harmless and unwary victim. In this attitude all states face each other
to-day. They presuppose evil intentions on their neighbour’s part and good
intentions on their own. This hypothesis, however, is an _inhuman_ notion,
as bad as and worse than war. Nay, at bottom it is a challenge and motive
to war, foisting as it does upon the neighbouring state the charge of
immorality, and thus provoking hostile intentions and acts. The doctrine
of the army as a means of self-defence must be abjured as completely as
the lust of conquest. Perhaps a memorable day will come when a nation
renowned in wars and victories, distinguished by the highest development
of military order and intelligence, and accustomed to make the heaviest
sacrifice to these objects, will voluntarily exclaim, “We will break our
swords,” and will destroy its whole military system, lock, stock, and
barrel. Making ourselves defenceless (after having been the most strongly
defended) from a loftiness of sentiment—that is the means towards genuine
peace, which must always rest upon a pacific disposition. The so-called
armed peace that prevails at present in all countries is a sign of a
bellicose disposition, of a disposition that trusts neither itself nor its
neighbour, and, partly from hate, partly from fear, refuses to lay down
its weapons. Better to perish than to hate and fear, and twice as far
better to perish than to make oneself hated and feared—this must some day
become the supreme maxim of every political community!—Our liberal
representatives of the people, as is well known, have not the time for
reflection on the nature of humanity, or else they would know that they
are working in vain when they work for “a gradual diminution of the
military burdens.” On the contrary, when the distress of these burdens is
greatest, the sort of God who alone can help here will be nearest. The
tree of military glory can only be destroyed at one swoop, with one stroke
of lightning. But, as you know, lightning comes from the cloud and from
above.




285.


WHETHER PROPERTY CAN BE SQUARED WITH JUSTICE.—When the injustice of
property is strongly felt (and the hand of the great clock is once more at
this place), we formulate two methods of relieving this injustice: either
an equal distribution, or an abolition of private possession and a return
to State ownership. The latter method is especially dear to the hearts of
our Socialists, who are angry with that primitive Jew for saying, “Thou
shalt not steal.” In their view the eighth(27) commandment should rather
run, “Thou shalt not possess.”—The former method was frequently tried in
antiquity, always indeed on a small scale, and yet with poor success. From
this failure we too may learn. “Equal plots of land” is easily enough
said, but how much bitterness is aroused by the necessary division and
separation, by the loss of time-honoured possessions, how much piety is
wounded and sacrificed! We uproot the foundation of morality when we
uproot boundary-stones. Again, how much fresh bitterness among the new
owners, how much envy and looking askance! For there have never been two
really equal plots of land, and if there were, man’s envy of his neighbour
would prevent him from believing in their equality. And how long would
this equality, unhealthy and poisoned at the very roots, endure? In a few
generations, by inheritance, here one plot would come to five owners,
there five plots to one. Even supposing that men acquiesced in such abuses
through the enactment of stern laws of inheritance, the same equal plots
would indeed exist, but there would also be needy malcontents, owning
nothing but dislike of their kinsmen and neighbours, and longing for a
general upheaval.—If, however, by the second method we try to restore
ownership to the community and make the individual but a temporary tenant,
we interfere with agriculture. For man is opposed to all that is only a
transitory possession, unblessed with his own care and sacrifice. With
such property he behaves in freebooter fashion, as robber or as worthless
spendthrift. When Plato declares that self-seeking would be removed with
the abolition of property, we may answer him that, if self-seeking be
taken away, man will no longer possess the four cardinal virtues either;
as we must say that the most deadly plague could not injure mankind so
terribly as if vanity were one day to disappear. Without vanity and
self-seeking what are human virtues? By this I am far from meaning that
these virtues are but varied names and masks for these two qualities.
Plato’s Utopian refrain, which is still sung by Socialists, rests upon a
deficient knowledge of men. He lacked the historical science of moral
emotions, the insight into the origin of the good and useful
characteristics of the human soul. He believed, like all antiquity, in
good and evil as in black and white—that is to say, in a radical
difference between good and bad men and good and bad qualities.—In order
that property may henceforth inspire more confidence and become more
moral, we should keep open all the paths of work for small fortunes, but
should prevent the effortless and sudden acquisition of wealth.
Accordingly, we should take all the branches of transport and trade which
favour the accumulation of large fortunes—especially, therefore, the money
market—out of the hands of private persons or private companies, and look
upon those who own too much, just as upon those who own nothing, as types
fraught with danger to the community.




286.


THE VALUE OF LABOUR.—If we try to determine the value of labour by the
amount of time, industry, good or bad will, constraint, inventiveness or
laziness, honesty or make-believe bestowed upon it, the valuation can
never be a just one. For the whole personality would have to be thrown
into the scale, and this is impossible. Here the motto is, “Judge not!”
But after all the cry for justice is the cry we now hear from those who
are dissatisfied with the present valuation of labour. If we reflect
further we find every person non-responsible for his product, the labour;
hence merit can never be derived therefrom, and every labour is as good or
as bad as it must be through this or that necessary concatenation of
forces and weaknesses, abilities and desires. The worker is not at liberty
to say whether he shall work or not, or to decide how he shall work. Only
the standpoints of usefulness, wider and narrower, have created the
valuation of labour. What we at present call justice does very well in
this sphere as a highly refined utility, which does not only consider the
moment and exploit the immediate opportunity, but looks to the permanence
of all conditions, and thus also keeps in view the well-being of the
worker, his physical and spiritual contentment: in order that he and his
posterity may work well for our posterity and become trustworthy for
longer periods than the individual span of human life. The _exploitation_
of the worker was, as we now understand, a piece of folly, a robbery at
the expense of the future, a jeopardisation of society. We almost have the
war now, and in any case the expense of maintaining peace, of concluding
treaties and winning confidence, will henceforth be very great, because
the folly of the exploiters was very great and long-lasting.




287.


OF THE STUDY OF THE SOCIAL BODY.—The worst drawback for the modern student
of economics and political science in Europe, and especially in Germany,
is that the actual conditions, instead of exemplifying rules, illustrate
exceptions or stages of transition and extinction. We must therefore learn
to look beyond actually existing conditions and, for example, turn our
eyes to distant North America, where we can still contemplate and
investigate, if we will, the initial and normal movement of the social
body. In Germany such a study requires arduous and historical research,
or, as I have suggested, a telescope.




288.


HOW FAR MACHINERY HUMILIATES.—Machinery is impersonal; it robs the piece
of work of its pride, of the individual merits and defects that cling to
all work that is not machine-made—in other words, of its bit of humanity.
Formerly, all buying from handicraftsmen meant a mark of distinction for
their personalities, with whose productions people surrounded themselves.
Furniture and dress accordingly became the symbols of mutual valuation and
personal connection. Nowadays, on the other hand, we seem to live in the
midst of anonymous and impersonal serfdom.—We must not buy the
facilitation of labour too dear.




289.


CENTURY-OLD QUARANTINE.—Democratic institutions are centres of quarantine
against the old plague of tyrannical desires. As such they are extremely
useful and extremely tedious.




290.


THE MOST DANGEROUS PARTISAN.—The most dangerous partisan is he whose
defection would involve the ruin of the whole party—in other words, the
best partisan.




291.


DESTINY AND THE STOMACH.—A piece more or less of bread and butter in the
jockey’s body is occasionally the decisive factor in races and bets, and
thus in the good and bad luck of thousands.—So long as the destiny of
nations depends upon diplomats, the stomachs of diplomats will always be
the object of patriotic misgivings. _Quousque tandem_....




292.


THE VICTORY OF DEMOCRACY.—All political powers nowadays attempt to exploit
the fear of Socialism for their own strengthening. Yet in the long run
democracy alone gains the advantage, for _all_ parties are now compelled
to flatter “the masses” and grant them facilities and liberties of all
kinds, with the result that the masses finally become omnipotent. The
masses are as far as possible removed from Socialism as a doctrine of
altering the acquisition of property. If once they get the steering-wheel
into their hands, through great majorities in their Parliaments, they will
attack with progressive taxation the whole dominant system of capitalists,
merchants, and financiers, and will in fact slowly create a middle class
which may forget Socialism like a disease that has been overcome.—The
practical result of this increasing democratisation will next be a
European league of nations, in which each individual nation, delimited by
the proper geographical frontiers, has the position of a canton with its
separate rights. Small account will be taken of the historic memories of
previously existing nations, because the pious affection for these
memories will be gradually uprooted under the democratic régime, with all
its craze for novelty and experiment. The corrections of frontiers that
will prove necessary will be so carried out as to serve the interests of
the great cantons and at the same time that of the whole federation, but
not that of any venerable memories. To find the standpoints for these
corrections will be the task of future diplomats, who will have to be at
the same time students of civilisation, agriculturists, and commercial
experts, with no armies but motives and utilities at their back. Then only
will foreign and home politics be inseparably connected, whereas to-day
the latter follows its haughty dictator, and gleans in sorry baskets the
stubble that is left over from the harvest of the former.




293.


GOAL AND MEANS OF DEMOCRACY.—Democracy tries to create and guarantee
independence for as many as possible in their opinions, way of life, and
occupation. For this purpose democracy must withhold the political
suffrage both from those who have nothing and from those who are really
rich, as being the two intolerable classes of men. At the removal of these
classes it must always work, because they are continually calling its task
in question. In the same way democracy must prevent all measures that seem
to aim at party organisation. For the three great foes of independence, in
that threefold sense, are the have-nots, the rich, and the parties.—I
speak of democracy as of a thing to come. What at present goes by that
name is distinguished from older forms of government only by the fact that
it drives with new horses; the roads and the wheels are the same as of
yore.—Has the danger really become less with _these_ conveyances of the
commonwealth?




294.


DISCRETION AND SUCCESS.—That great quality of discretion, which is
fundamentally the virtue of virtues, their ancestress and queen, has in
common life by no means always success on its side. The wooer would find
himself deceived if he had wooed that virtue only for the sake of success.
For it is rated by practical people as suspicious, and is confused with
cunning and hypocrisy: he who obviously lacks discretion, the man who
quickly grasps and sometimes misses his grasp, has prejudice on his
side—he is an honest, trustworthy fellow. Practical people, accordingly,
do not like the prudent man, thinking he is to them a danger. Moreover, we
often assume the prudent man to be anxious, preoccupied,
pedantic—unpractical, butterfly people find him uncomfortable, because he
does not live in their happy-go-lucky way, without thinking of actions and
duties; he appears among them as their embodied conscience, and the bright
day is dimmed to their eyes before his gaze. Thus when success and
popularity fail him, he may often say by way of private consolation, “So
high are the taxes you have to pay for the possession of the most precious
of human commodities—still it is worth the price!”




295.


_ET IN ARCADIA EGO._—I looked down, over waves of hills, to a milky-green
lake, through firs and pines austere with age; rocky crags of all shapes
about me, the soil gay with flowers and grasses. A herd of cattle moved,
stretched, and expanded itself before me; single cows and groups in the
distance, in the clearest evening light, hard by the forest of pines;
others nearer and darker; all in calm and eventide contentment. My watch
pointed to half-past six. The bull of the herd had stepped into the white
foaming brook, and went forward slowly, now striving against, now giving
way to his tempestuous course; thus, no doubt, he took his sort of fierce
pleasure. Two dark brown beings, of Bergamasque origin, tended the herd,
the girl dressed almost like a boy. On the left, overhanging cliffs and
fields of snow above broad belts of woodland; to the right, two enormous
ice-covered peaks, high above me, shimmering in the veil of the sunny
haze—all large, silent, and bright. The beauty of the whole was
awe-inspiring and induced to a mute worship of the moment and its
revelation. Unconsciously, as if nothing could be more natural, you
peopled this pure, clear world of light (which had no trace of yearning,
of expectancy, of looking forward or backward) with Greek heroes. You felt
it all as Poussin and his school felt—at once heroic and idyllic.—So
individual men too have lived, constantly feeling themselves in the world
and the world in themselves, and among them one of the greatest men, the
inventor of a heroico-idyllic form of philosophy—Epicurus.




296.


COUNTING AND MEASURING.—The art of seeing many things, of weighing one
with another, of reckoning one thing with another and constructing from
them a rapid conclusion, a fairly correct sum—that goes to make a great
politician or general or merchant. This quality is, in fact, a power of
speedy mental calculation. The art of seeing _one_ thing alone, of finding
therein the sole motive for action, the guiding principle of all other
action, goes to make the hero and also the fanatic. This quality means a
dexterity in measuring with one scale.




297.


NOT TO SEE TOO SOON.—As long as we undergo some experience, we must give
ourselves up to the experience and shut our eyes—in other words, not
become observers of what we are undergoing. For to observe would disturb
good digestion of the experience, and instead of wisdom we should gain
nothing but dyspepsia.




298.


FROM THE PRACTICE OF THE WISE.—To become wise we must _will_ to undergo
certain experiences, and accordingly leap into their jaws. This, it is
true, is very dangerous. Many a “sage” has been eaten up in the process.




299.


EXHAUSTION OF THE INTELLECT.—Our occasional coldness and indifference
towards people, which is imputed to us as hardness and defect of
character, is often only an exhaustion of the intellect. In this state
other men are to us, as we are to ourselves, tedious or immaterial.




300.


“THE ONE THING NEEDFUL.”—If we are clever, the one thing we need is to
have joy in our hearts. “Ah,” adds some one, “if we are clever, the best
thing we can do is to be wise.”




301.


A SIGN OF LOVE.—Some one said, “There are two persons about whom I have
never thought deeply. That is a sign of my love for them.”




302.


HOW WE SEEK TO IMPROVE BAD ARGUMENTS.—Many a man adds a bit of his
personality to his bad arguments, as if they would thus go better and
change into straight and good arguments. In the same way, players at
skittles, even after a throw, try to give a direction to the ball by turns
and gestures.




303.


HONESTY.—It is but a small thing to be a pattern sort of man with regard
to rights and property—for instance (to name trifling points, which of
course give a better proof of this sort of pattern nature than great
examples), if as a boy one never steals fruit from another’s orchard, and
as a man never walks on unmown fields. It is but little; you are then
still only a “law-abiding person,” with just that degree of morality of
which a “society,” a group of human beings, is capable.




304.


“MAN!”—What is the vanity of the vainest individual as compared with the
vanity which the most modest person feels when he thinks of his position
in nature and in the world as “Man!”




305.


THE MOST NECESSARY GYMNASTIC.—Through deficiency in self-control in small
matters a similar deficiency on great occasions slowly arises. Every day
on which we have not at least once denied ourselves some _trifle_ is
turned to bad use and a danger to the next day. This gymnastic is
indispensable if we wish to maintain the joy of being our own master.




306.


LOSING OURSELVES.—When we have first found ourselves, we must understand
how from time to time to _lose_ ourselves and then to find ourselves
again.—This is true on the assumption that we are thinkers. A thinker
finds it a drawback always to be tied to one person.




307.


WHEN IT IS NECESSARY TO PART.—You must, for a time at least, part from
that which you want to know and measure. Only when you have left a city do
you see how high its towers rise above its houses.




308.


AT NOONTIDE.—He to whom an active and stormy morning of life is allotted,
at the noontide of life feels his soul overcome by a strange longing for a
rest that may last for months and years. All grows silent around him,
voices sound farther and farther in the distance, the sun shines straight
down upon him. On a hidden woodland sward he sees the great God Pan
sleeping, and with Pan Nature seems to him to have gone to sleep with an
expression of eternity on their faces. He wants nothing, he troubles about
nothing; his heart stands still, only his eye lives. It is a death with
waking eyes. Then man sees much that he never saw before, and, so far as
his eye can reach, all is woven into and as it were buried in a net of
light. He feels happy, but it is a heavy, very heavy kind of
happiness.—Then at last the wind stirs in the trees, noontide is over,
life carries him away again, life with its blind eyes, and its tempestuous
retinue behind it—desire, illusion, oblivion, enjoyment, destruction,
decay. And so comes evening, more stormy and more active than was even the
morning.—To the really active man these prolonged phases of cognition seem
almost uncanny and morbid, but not unpleasant.




309.


TO BEWARE OF ONE’S PORTRAIT-PAINTER.—A great painter, who in a portrait
has revealed and put on canvas the fullest expression and look of which a
man is capable, will almost always think, when he sees the man later in
real life, that he is only looking at a caricature.




310.


THE TWO PRINCIPLES OF THE NEW LIFE.—_First Principle_: to arrange one’s
life on the most secure and tangible basis, not as hitherto upon the most
distant, undetermined, and cloudy foundation. _Second Principle_: to
establish the rank of the nearest and nearer things, and of the more and
less secure, before one arranges one’s life and directs it to a final end.




311.


DANGEROUS IRRITABILITY.—Talented men who are at the same time _idle_ will
always appear somewhat irritated when one of their friends has
accomplished a thorough piece of work. Their jealousy is awakened, they
are ashamed of their own laziness, or rather, they fear that their active
friend will now despise them even more than before. In such a mood they
criticise the new achievement, and, to the utter astonishment of the
author, their criticism becomes a revenge.




312.


DESTRUCTIONS OF ILLUSIONS.—Illusions are certainly expensive amusements;
but the destruction of illusions is still more expensive, if looked upon
as an amusement, as it undoubtedly is by some people.




313.


THE MONOTONE OF THE “SAGE.”—Cows sometimes have a look of wondering which
stops short on the path to questioning. In the eye of the higher
intelligence, on the other hand, the _nil admirari_ is spread out like the
monotony of the cloudless sky.




314.


NOT TO BE ILL TOO LONG.—We should beware of being ill too long. The
lookers-on become impatient of their customary duty of showing sympathy,
because they find it too much trouble to maintain the appearance of this
emotion for any length of time. Then they immediately pass to suspicion of
our character, with the conclusion: “You deserve to be ill, and we need no
longer be at pains to show our sympathy.”




315.


A HINT TO ENTHUSIASTS.—He who likes to be carried away, and would fain be
carried on high, must beware lest he become too heavy. For instance, he
must not learn much, and especially not let himself be crammed with
science. Science makes men ponderous—take care, ye enthusiasts!




316.


KNOWLEDGE OF HOW TO SURPRISE ONESELF.—He who would see himself as he is,
must know how to _surprise_ himself, torch in hand. For with the mind it
is as with the body: whoever is accustomed to look at himself in the glass
forgets his ugliness, and only recognises it again by means of the
portrait-painter. Yet he even grows used to the picture and forgets his
ugliness all over again.—Herein we see the universal law that man cannot
endure unalterable ugliness, unless for a moment. He forgets or denies it
in all cases.—The moralists must reckon upon that “moment” for bringing
forward their truths.




317.


OPINIONS AND FISH.—We are possessors of our opinions as of fish—that is,
in so far as we are possessors of a fish pond. We must go fishing and have
luck—then we have _our_ fish, _our_ opinions. I speak here of live
opinions, of live fish. Others are content to possess a cabinet of
fossils—and, in their head, “convictions.”




318.


SIGNS OF FREEDOM AND SERVITUDE.—To satisfy one’s needs so far as possible
oneself, even if imperfectly, is the path towards freedom in mind and
personality. To satisfy many even superfluous needs, and that as fully as
possible, is a training for servitude. The Sophist Hippias, who himself
earned and made all that he wore within and without, is the representative
of the highest freedom of mind and personality. It does not matter whether
all is done equally well and perfectly—pride can repair the damaged
places.




319.


BELIEF IN ONESELF.—In our times we mistrust every one who believes in
himself. Formerly this was enough to make people believe in one. The
recipe for finding faith now runs: “Spare not thyself! In order to set thy
opinion in a credible light, thou must first set fire to thy own hut!”




320.


AT ONCE RICHER AND POORER.—I know a man who accustomed himself even in
childhood to think well of the intellectuality of mankind—in other words,
of their real devotion as regards things of the intellect, their unselfish
preference for that which is recognised as true—but who had at the same
time a modest or even depreciatory view of his own brain (judgment,
memory, presence of mind, imagination). He set no value on himself when he
compared himself with others. Now in the course of years he was compelled,
first once and then in a hundred ways, to revise this verdict. One would
have thought he would be thoroughly satisfied and delighted. Such, in
fact, was to some extent the case, but, as he once said, “Yet a bitterness
of the deepest dye is mingled with my feeling, such as I did not know in
earlier life; for since I learnt to value men and myself more correctly,
my intellect seems to me of less use. I scarcely think I can now do any
good at all with it, because the minds of others cannot understand the
good. I now always see before me the frightful gulf between those who
could give help and those who need help. So I am troubled by the
misfortune of having my intellect to myself and of being forced to enjoy
it alone so far as it can give any enjoyment. But to give is more blessed
than to possess, and what is the richest man in the solitude of a
desert?”(28)




321.


HOW WE SHOULD ATTACK.—The reasons for which men believe or do not believe
are in very few people as strong as they might be. As a rule, in order to
shake a belief it is far from necessary to use the heaviest weapon of
attack. Many attain their object by merely making the attack with some
noise—in fact, pop-guns are often enough. In dealing with very vain
persons, the semblance of a strong attack is enough. They think they are
being taken quite seriously, and readily give way.




322.


DEATH.—Through the certain prospect of death a precious, fragrant drop of
frivolity might be mixed with every life—and now, you singular
druggist-souls, you have made of death a drop of poison, unpleasant to
taste, which makes the whole of life hideous.




323.


REPENTANCE.—Never allow repentance free play, but say at once to yourself,
“That would be adding a second piece of folly to the first.” If you have
worked evil, you must bethink yourself of doing good. If you are punished
for your actions, submit to the punishment with the feeling that by this
very submission you are somehow doing good, in that you are deterring
others from falling into the same error. Every malefactor who is punished
has a right to consider himself a benefactor to mankind.




324.


BECOMING A THINKER.—How can any one become a thinker if he does not spend
at least a third part of the day without passions, men, and books?




325.


THE BEST REMEDY.—A little health on and off is the best remedy for the
invalid.




326.


DON’T TOUCH.—There are dreadful people who, instead of solving a problem,
complicate it for those who deal with it and make it harder to solve.(29)
Whoever does not know how to hit the nail on the head should be entreated
not to hit the nail at all.




327.


FORGETTING NATURE.—We speak of Nature, and, in doing so, forget ourselves:
we ourselves are Nature, _quand même_.—Consequently, Nature is something
quite different from what we feel on hearing her name pronounced.




328.


PROFUNDITY AND ENNUI.—In the case of profound men, as of deep wells, it
takes a long time before anything that is thrown into them reaches the
bottom. The spectators, who generally do not wait long enough, too readily
look upon such a man as callous and hard—or even as boring.




329.


WHEN IT IS TIME TO VOW FIDELITY TO ONESELF.—We sometimes go astray in an
intellectual direction which does not correspond to our talents. For a
time we struggle heroically against wind and tide, really against
ourselves; but finally we become weary and we pant. What we accomplish
gives us no real pleasure, since we think that we have paid too heavy a
price for these successes. We even despair of our productivity, of our
future, perhaps in the midst of victory.—Finally, finally we turn back—and
then the wind swells our sails and bears us into our smooth water. What
bliss! How certain of victory we feel! Only now do we know what we are and
what we intend, and now we vow fidelity to ourselves, and have a right to
do so—as men that know.




330.


WEATHER PROPHETS.—Just as the clouds reveal to us the direction of the
wind high above our heads, so the lightest and freest spirits give signs
of future weather by their course. The wind in the valley and the
market-place opinions of to-day have no significance for the future, but
only for the past.




331.


CONTINUAL ACCELERATION.—Those who begin slowly and find it hard to become
familiar with a subject, sometimes acquire afterwards the quality of
continual acceleration—so that in the end no one knows where the current
will take them.




332.


THE THREE GOOD THINGS.—Greatness, calm, sunlight—these three embrace all
that a thinker desires and also demands of himself: his hopes and duties,
his claims in the intellectual and moral sphere, nay even in his daily
manner of life and the scenic background of his residence. Corresponding
to these three things are, firstly thoughts that exalt, secondly thoughts
that soothe, and thirdly thoughts that illuminate—but, fourthly, thoughts
that share in all these three qualities, in which all earthly things are
transfigured. This is the kingdom of the great _trinity of joy_.




333.


DYING FOR “TRUTH.”—We should not let ourselves be burnt for our
opinions—we are not so certain of them as all that. But we might let
ourselves be burnt for the right of possessing and changing our opinions.




334.


MARKET VALUE.—If we wish to pass exactly for what we are, we must be
something that has its market value. As, however, only objects in common
use have a market value, this desire is the consequence either of shrewd
modesty or of stupid immodesty.




335.


MORAL FOR BUILDERS.—We must remove the scaffolding when the house has been
built.




336.


SOPHOCLEANISM.—Who poured more water into wine than the Greeks? Sobriety
and grace combined—that was the aristocratic privilege of the Athenian in
the time of Sophocles and after. Imitate that whoever can! In life and in
work!




337.


HEROISM.—The heroic consists in doing something great (or in nobly _not_
doing something) without feeling oneself to be in competition _with_ or
_before_ others. The hero carries with him, wherever he goes, the
wilderness and the holy land with inviolable precincts.




338.


FINDING OUR “DOUBLE” IN NATURE.—In some country places we rediscover
ourselves, with a delightful shudder: it is the pleasantest way of finding
our “double.”—How happy must he be who has that feeling just here, in this
perpetually sunny October air, in this happy elfin play of the wind from
morn till eve, in this clearest of atmospheres and mildest of
temperatures, in all the serious yet cheerful landscape of hill, lake, and
forest on this plateau, which has encamped fearlessly next to the terrors
of eternal snow: here, where Italy and Finland have joined hands, and
where the home of all the silver colour-tones of Nature seems to be
established. How happy must he be who can say, “True, there are many
grander and finer pieces of scenery, but this is so familiar and intimate
to me, related by blood, nay even more to me!”




339.


AFFABILITY OF THE SAGE.—The sage will unconsciously be affable in his
intercourse with other men, as a prince would be, and will readily treat
them as equals, in spite of all differences of talent, rank, and
character. For this characteristic, however, so soon as people notice it,
he is most heavily censured.




340.


GOLD.—All that is gold does not glitter. A soft sheen characterises the
most precious metal.




341.


WHEEL AND DRAG.—The wheel and the drag have different duties, but also one
in common—that of hurting each other.




342.


DISTURBANCES OF THE THINKER.—All that interrupts the thinker in his
thoughts (disturbs him, as people say) must be regarded by him calmly, as
a new model who comes in by the door to offer himself to the artist.
Interruptions are the ravens which bring food to the recluse.




343.


BEING VERY CLEVER.—Being very clever keeps men young, but they must put up
with being considered, for that very reason, older than they are. For men
read the handwriting of the intellect as signs of _experience_—that is, of
having lived much and evilly, of suffering, error, and repentance. Hence,
if we are very clever and show it, we appear to them older and wickeder
than we are.




344.


HOW WE MUST CONQUER.—We ought not to desire victory if we only have the
prospect of overcoming our opponent by a hair’s breadth. A good victory
makes the vanquished rejoice, and must have about it something divine
which spares _humiliation_.




345.


AN ILLUSION OF SUPERIOR MINDS.—Superior minds find it difficult to free
themselves from an illusion; for they imagine that they excite envy among
the mediocre and are looked upon as exceptions. As a matter of fact,
however, they are looked upon as superfluous, as something that would not
be missed if it did not exist.




346.


DEMANDED BY CLEANLINESS.—Changing opinions is in some natures as much
demanded by cleanliness as changing clothes. In the case of other natures
it is only demanded by vanity.




347.


ALSO WORTHY OF A HERO.—Here is a hero who did nothing but shake the tree
as soon as the fruits were ripe. Do you think that too small a thing?
Well, just look at the tree that he shook.




348.


A GAUGE FOR WISDOM.—The growth of wisdom may be gauged exactly by the
diminution of ill-temper.




349.


EXPRESSING AN ERROR DISAGREEABLY.—It is not to every one’s taste to hear
truth pleasantly expressed. But let no one at least believe that error
will become truth if it is disagreeably expressed.




350.


THE GOLDEN MAXIM.—Man has been bound with many chains, in order that he
may forget to comport himself like an animal. And indeed he has become
more gentle, more intellectual, more joyous, more meditative than any
animal. But now he still suffers from having carried his chains so long,
from having been so long without pure air and free movement—these chains,
however, are, as I repeat again and again, the ponderous and significant
errors of moral, religious, and metaphysical ideas. Only when the disease
of chains is overcome is the first great goal reached—the separation of
man from the brute. At present we stand in the midst of our work of
removing the chains, and in doing so we need the strictest precautions.
Only the ennobled man may be granted freedom of spirit; to him alone comes
the alleviation of life and heals his wounds; he is the first who can say
that he lives for the sake of joy, with no other aim; in any other mouth,
his motto of “Peace around me and goodwill towards all the most familiar
things,” would be dangerous.—In this motto for single individuals he is
thinking of an ancient saying, magnificent and pathetic, which applied to
all, and has remained standing above all mankind, as a motto and a beacon
whereby shall perish all who adorn their banner too early—the rock on
which Christianity foundered. It is not even yet time, it seems, for _all
men_ to have the lot of those shepherds who saw the heavens lit up above
them and heard the words: “Peace on earth and goodwill to one another
among men.”—It is still the age of the individual.




                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐




_The Shadow_: Of all that you have enunciated, nothing pleased me more
than one promise: “Ye want again to be good neighbours to the most
familiar things.” This will be to the advantage of us poor shadows too.
For do but confess that you have hitherto been only too fond of reviling
us.

_The Wanderer_: Reviling? But why did you never defend yourselves? After
all, you were very close to our ears.

_The Shadow_: It seemed to us that we were too near you to have a right to
talk of ourselves.

_The Wanderer_: What delicacy! Ah, you shadows are “better men”(30) than
we, I can see that.

_The Shadow_: And yet you called us “importunate”—us, who know one thing
at least extremely well: how to be silent and to wait—no Englishman knows
it better. It is true we are very, very often in the retinue of men, but
never as their bondsmen. When man shuns light, we shun man—so far, at
least, we are free.

_The Wanderer_: Ah, light shuns man far oftener, and then also you abandon
him.

_The Shadow_: It has often pained me to leave you. I am eager for
knowledge, and much in man has remained obscure to me, because I cannot
always be in his company. At the price of complete knowledge of man I
would gladly be your slave.

_The Wanderer_: Do you know, do I know, whether you would not then
unwittingly become master instead of slave? Or would remain a slave
indeed, but would lead a life of humiliation and disgust because you
despised your master? Let us both be content with freedom such as you have
enjoyed up to now—you and I! For the sight of a being not free would
embitter my greatest joys; all that is best would be repugnant to me if
any one had to share it with me—I will not hear of any slaves about me.
That is why I do not care for the dog, that lazy, tail-wagging parasite,
who first became “doggish” as the slave of man, and of whom they still say
that he is loyal to his master and follows him like——

_The Shadow_: Like his shadow, they say. Perhaps I have already followed
you too long to-day? It has been the longest day, but we are nearing the
end; be patient a little more! The grass is damp; I am feeling chilly.

_The Wanderer_: Oh, is it already time to part? And I had to hurt you in
the end—I saw you became darker.

_The Shadow_: I blushed the only colour I have at command. I remembered
that I had often lain at your feet like a dog, and that you then——

_The Wanderer_: Can I not with all speed do something to please you? Have
you no wish?

_The Shadow_: None, except perhaps the wish that the philosophic “dog”(31)
expressed to Alexander the Great—just move a little out of my light; I
feel cold.

_The Wanderer_: What am I to do?

_The Shadow_: Walk under those fir-trees and look around you towards the
mountains; the sun is sinking.

_The Wanderer_: Where are you? Where are you?






FOOTNOTES


    1 “Foreword” and “forword” would be the literal rendering of the play
      on words.—TR.

    2 The allusion is to the ending of the Second Part of Goethe’s
      _Faust_—“das Ewig Weibliche Zieht uns _hinan_!”—“The Eternal
      Feminine Draweth us _on_!”—TR.

    3 It has been attempted to render the play on “Gewissen” and
      “Wissen.”—TR.

    4 Cf. John i. 1.—TR.

    5 The German word _Mitfreude_, coined by Nietzsche in opposition to
      _Mitleid_ (sympathy), is untranslateable.—TR.

    6 Herostratus of Ephesus (in 356 B.C.) set fire to the temple of Diana
      in order (as he confessed on the rack) to gain notoriety.—TR.

    7 Quotation from Schiller, _Don Carlos_, i. 5.—TR.

    8 This, of course, refers to Jesus and Socrates.—TR.

    9 Queen of the Amazons, slain by Achilles in the Trojan War.—TR.

   10 From Schiller, _Wallenstein’s Lager_: “Wer den Besten seiner Zeit
      genug gethan, der hat gelebt für alle Zeiten” (“He that has
      satisfied the best men of his time has lived for all time”).

   11 In German _Barockstil_, _i.e._ the degenerate post-Renaissance style
      in art and literature, which spread from Italy in the seventeenth
      century.—TR.

   12 The original word, _Freizügig_, means, in the modern German Empire,
      possessing the free right of migration, without pecuniary burdens or
      other restrictions, from one German state to another. The play on
      words in _Zug zur Freiheit_ (“impulse to freedom”) is
      untranslateable.—TR.

   13 Nietzsche seems to allude to his own case, for he ultimately
      contracted a myopia which bordered on blindness.—TR.

   14 The play on _bergen_ (shelter) and _verbergen_ (hide) is
      untranslateable.—TR.

   15 Allusion to German proverb: “Where there is nothing, the Emperor has
      lost his rights.”—TR.

   16 Genesis xiii. 9.—TR.

   17 Luke viii. 33.—TR.

   18 The play on Freudenschaften (_i.e._ pleasure-giving passions) and
      _Leidenschaften_ (_i.e._ pain-giving passions) is often used by
      Nietzsche, and is untranslateable.—_Tr._

   19 The wife of the Stoic Thrasea Paetus, when their complicity in the
      great conspiracy of 65 A.D. against Nero was discovered, is reported
      to have said as she committed suicide, “It doesn’t hurt,
      Paetus.”—_Tr._

   20 It is interesting to compare this judgment with Carlyle’s praise of
      Jean Paul. The dressing-gown is an allusion to Jean Paul’s favourite
      costume.—TR.

   21 The German copyright expires thirty years after publication.—TR.

   22 Nietzsche himself was extremely short-sighted.—TR.

   23 In the sixth century B.C. Pythagoras founded at Croton a “school”
      somewhat resembling a monastic order. Among the ordeals for
      novitiates was enforced silence for five years.—TR.

   24 In the German _Aufklärung_ there is a play on the sense “clearing
      up” (of weather) and “enlightenment.”—TR.

   25 Stendhal.—TR.

   26 A transposition of _sacrifizio dell’ intelletto_, the Jesuit
      maxim.—TR.

   27 The original, by a curious slip, has “seventh.”—TR.

   28 Clearly autobiographical. Nietzsche, like all great men, passed
      through a period of modesty and doubt.—TR.

   29 Nietzsche here alludes to his own countrymen.—TR.

   30 An allusion to the poem “Der Wilde” (The Savage) by Säume, which
      ends with the line, “Sehet, wir wilden sind doch bessere Menschen”
      (Behold, after all, we savages are better men).—TR.

   31 Diogenes, founder of the Cynic school, which derived its name from
      κυών (dog).—TR.