
================================================================================
[The Art of Controversy (논쟁의 기술)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Essays of Arthur Schopenhauer: the Wisdom of Life
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Essays of Arthur Schopenhauer: the Wisdom of Life

Author: Arthur Schopenhauer

Translator: T. Bailey Saunders


        
Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #10741]
                Most recently updated: October 28, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10741

Credits: Etext produced by Juliet Sutherland, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team.
        
        HTML file produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ESSAYS OF ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER: THE WISDOM OF LIFE ***

THE ESSAYS

OF

ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER

TRANSLATED BY

T. BAILEY SAUNDERS, M.A.



THE WISDOM OF LIFE.




CONTENTS.

  CHAPTER
  INTRODUCTION
  I. DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT
  II. PERSONALITY, OR WHAT A MAN IS
  III. PROPERTY, OR WHAT A MAN HAS
  IV. POSITION, OR A MAN'S PLACE IN THE ESTIMATION OF OTHERS--
    Sect. 1. Reputation
      "   2. Pride
      "   3. Rank
      "   4. Honor
      "   5. Fame




INTRODUCTION.


In these pages I shall speak of _The Wisdom of Life_ in the common
meaning of the term, as the art, namely, of ordering our lives so as
to obtain the greatest possible amount of pleasure and success; an art
the theory of which may be called _Eudaemonology_, for it teaches us
how to lead a happy existence. Such an existence might perhaps be
defined as one which, looked at from a purely objective point of
view, or, rather, after cool and mature reflection--for the question
necessarily involves subjective considerations,--would be decidedly
preferable to non-existence; implying that we should cling to it for
its own sake, and not merely from the fear of death; and further, that
we should never like it to come to an end.

Now whether human life corresponds, or could possibly correspond,
to this conception of existence, is a question to which, as is
well-known, my philosophical system returns a negative answer. On the
eudaemonistic hypothesis, however, the question must be answered in
the affirmative; and I have shown, in the second volume of my chief
work (ch. 49), that this hypothesis is based upon a fundamental
mistake. Accordingly, in elaborating the scheme of a happy existence,
I have had to make a complete surrender of the higher metaphysical and
ethical standpoint to which my own theories lead; and everything I
shall say here will to some extent rest upon a compromise; in so far,
that is, as I take the common standpoint of every day, and embrace
the error which is at the bottom of it. My remarks, therefore, will
possess only a qualified value, for the very word _eudaemonology_ is a
euphemism. Further, I make no claims to completeness; partly because
the subject is inexhaustible, and partly because I should otherwise
have to say over again what has been already said by others.

The only book composed, as far as I remember, with a like purpose to
that which animates this collection of aphorisms, is Cardan's _De
utilitate ex adversis capienda_, which is well worth reading, and may
be used to supplement the present work. Aristotle, it is true, has a
few words on eudaemonology in the fifth chapter of the first book
of his _Rhetoric_; but what he says does not come to very much.
As compilation is not my business, I have made no use of these
predecessors; more especially because in the process of compiling,
individuality of view is lost, and individuality of view is the kernel
of works of this kind. In general, indeed, the wise in all ages have
always said the same thing, and the fools, who at all times form the
immense majority, have in their way too acted alike, and done just the
opposite; and so it will continue. For, as Voltaire says, _we shall
leave this world as foolish and as wicked as we found it on our
arrival_.




THE WISDOM OF LIFE.




CHAPTER I.

DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT.


Aristotle[1] divides the blessings of life into three classes--those
which come to us from without, those of the soul, and those of the
body. Keeping nothing of this division but the number, I observe that
the fundamental differences in human lot may be reduced to three
distinct classes:

[Footnote 1: _Eth. Nichom_., I. 8.]

(1) What a man is: that is to say, personality, in the widest sense
of the word; under which are included health, strength, beauty,
temperament, moral character, intelligence, and education.

(2) What a man has: that is, property and possessions of every kind.

(3) How a man stands in the estimation of others: by which is to be
understood, as everybody knows, what a man is in the eyes of his
fellowmen, or, more strictly, the light in which they regard him. This
is shown by their opinion of him; and their opinion is in its turn
manifested by the honor in which he is held, and by his rank and
reputation.

The differences which come under the first head are those which Nature
herself has set between man and man; and from this fact alone we may
at once infer that they influence the happiness or unhappiness of
mankind in a much more vital and radical way than those contained
under the two following heads, which are merely the effect of human
arrangements. Compared with _genuine personal advantages_, such as a
great mind or a great heart, all the privileges of rank or birth, even
of royal birth, are but as kings on the stage, to kings in real life.
The same thing was said long ago by Metrodorus, the earliest disciple
of Epicurus, who wrote as the title of one of his chapters, _The
happiness we receive from ourselves is greater than that which we
obtain from our surroundings_[1] And it is an obvious fact, which
cannot be called in question, that the principal element in a man's
well-being,--indeed, in the whole tenor of his existence,--is what he
is made of, his inner constitution. For this is the immediate source
of that inward satisfaction or dissatisfaction resulting from the
sum total of his sensations, desires and thoughts; whilst his
surroundings, on the other hand, exert only a mediate or indirect
influence upon him. This is why the same external events or
circumstances affect no two people alike; even with perfectly similar
surroundings every one lives in a world of his own. For a man has
immediate apprehension only of his own ideas, feelings and volitions;
the outer world can influence him only in so far as it brings these to
life. The world in which a man lives shapes itself chiefly by the way
in which he looks at it, and so it proves different to different
men; to one it is barren, dull, and superficial; to another rich,
interesting, and full of meaning. On hearing of the interesting events
which have happened in the course of a man's experience, many people
will wish that similar things had happened in their lives too,
completely forgetting that they should be envious rather of the mental
aptitude which lent those events the significance they possess when he
describes them; to a man of genius they were interesting adventures;
but to the dull perceptions of an ordinary individual they would have
been stale, everyday occurrences. This is in the highest degree the
case with many of Goethe's and Byron's poems, which are obviously
founded upon actual facts; where it is open to a foolish reader to
envy the poet because so many delightful things happened to him,
instead of envying that mighty power of phantasy which was capable
of turning a fairly common experience into something so great and
beautiful.

[Footnote 1: Cf. Clemens Alex. Strom. II., 21.]

In the same way, a person of melancholy temperament will make a scene
in a tragedy out of what appears to the sanguine man only in the light
of an interesting conflict, and to a phlegmatic soul as something
without any meaning;--all of which rests upon the fact that every
event, in order to be realized and appreciated, requires the
co-operation of two factors, namely, a subject and an object, although
these are as closely and necessarily connected as oxygen and hydrogen
in water. When therefore the objective or external factor in an
experience is actually the same, but the subjective or personal
appreciation of it varies, the event is just as much a different one
in the eyes of different persons as if the objective factors had not
been alike; for to a blunt intelligence the fairest and best object in
the world presents only a poor reality, and is therefore only poorly
appreciated,--like a fine landscape in dull weather, or in the
reflection of a bad _camera obscura_. In plain language, every man
is pent up within the limits of his own consciousness, and cannot
directly get beyond those limits any more than he can get beyond his
own skin; so external aid is not of much use to him. On the stage, one
man is a prince, another a minister, a third a servant or a soldier or
a general, and so on,--mere external differences: the inner reality,
the kernel of all these appearances is the same--a poor player, with
all the anxieties of his lot. In life it is just the same. Differences
of rank and wealth give every man his part to play, but this by no
means implies a difference of inward happiness and pleasure; here,
too, there is the same being in all--a poor mortal, with his hardships
and troubles. Though these may, indeed, in every case proceed from
dissimilar causes, they are in their essential nature much the same in
all their forms, with degrees of intensity which vary, no doubt, but
in no wise correspond to the part a man has to play, to the presence
or absence of position and wealth. Since everything which exists or
happens for a man exists only in his consciousness and happens for it
alone, the most essential thing for a man is the constitution of this
consciousness, which is in most cases far more important than the
circumstances which go to form its contents. All the pride and
pleasure of the world, mirrored in the dull consciousness of a fool,
are poor indeed compared with the imagination of Cervantes writing his
_Don Quixote_ in a miserable prison. The objective half of life and
reality is in the hand of fate, and accordingly takes various forms in
different cases: the subjective half is ourself, and in essentials is
always remains the same.

Hence the life of every man is stamped with the same character
throughout, however much his external circumstances may alter; it is
like a series of variations on a single theme. No one can get beyond
his own individuality. An animal, under whatever circumstances it
is placed, remains within the narrow limits to which nature has
irrevocably consigned it; so that our endeavors to make a pet happy
must always keep within the compass of its nature, and be restricted
to what it can feel. So it is with man; the measure of the happiness
he can attain is determined beforehand by his individuality. More
especially is this the case with the mental powers, which fix once for
all his capacity for the higher kinds of pleasure. If these powers are
small, no efforts from without, nothing that his fellowmen or that
fortune can do for him, will suffice to raise him above the ordinary
degree of human happiness and pleasure, half animal though it be; his
only resources are his sensual appetite,--a cozy and cheerful family
life at the most,--low company and vulgar pastime; even education, on
the whole, can avail little, if anything, for the enlargement of his
horizon. For the highest, most varied and lasting pleasures are those
of the mind, however much our youth may deceive us on this point; and
the pleasures of the mind turn chiefly on the powers of the mind. It
is clear, then, that our happiness depends in a great degree upon what
we _are_, upon our individuality, whilst lot or destiny is generally
taken to mean only what we _have_, or our _reputation_. Our lot,
in this sense, may improve; but we do not ask much of it if we are
inwardly rich: on the other hand, a fool remains a fool, a dull
blockhead, to his last hour, even though he were surrounded by houris
in paradise. This is why Goethe, in the _West-östliclien Divan_, says
that every man, whether he occupies a low position in life, or emerges
as its victor, testifies to personality as the greatest factor in
happiness:--

  _Volk und Knecht und Uberwinder
    Sie gestehen, zu jeder Zeit,
  Höchtes Glück der Erdenkinder
    Sei nur die Persönlichkeit_.

Everything confirms the fact that the subjective element in life is
incomparably more important for our happiness and pleasure than the
objective, from such sayings as _Hunger is the best sauce_, and _Youth
and Age cannot live together_, up to the life of the Genius and the
Saint. Health outweighs all other blessings so much that one may
really say that a healthy beggar is happier than an ailing king. A
quiet and cheerful temperament, happy in the enjoyment of a perfectly
sound physique, an intellect clear, lively, penetrating and seeing
things as they are, a moderate and gentle will, and therefore a good
conscience--these are privileges which no rank or wealth can make up
for or replace. For what a man is in himself, what accompanies him
when he is alone, what no one can give or take away, is obviously more
essential to him than everything he has in the way of possessions, or
even what he may be in the eyes of the world. An intellectual man in
complete solitude has excellent entertainment in his own thoughts and
fancies, while no amount of diversity or social pleasure, theatres,
excursions and amusements, can ward off boredom from a dullard. A
good, temperate, gentle character can be happy in needy circumstances,
whilst a covetous, envious and malicious man, even if he be the
richest in the world, goes miserable. Nay more; to one who has the
constant delight of a special individuality, with a high degree of
intellect, most of the pleasures which are run after by mankind are
simply superfluous; they are even a trouble and a burden. And so
Horace says of himself, that, however many are deprived of the
fancy-goods of life, there is one at least who can live without
them:--

  _Gemmas, marmor, ebur, Tyrrhena sigilla, tabellas,
  Argentum, vestes, Gaetulo murice tinctas
  Sunt qui non habeant, est qui non curat habere_;

and when Socrates saw various articles of luxury spread out for sale,
he exclaimed: _How much there is in the world I do not want_.

So the first and most essential element in our life's happiness is
what we are,--our personality, if for no other reason than that it is
a constant factor coming into play under all circumstances: besides,
unlike the blessings which are described under the other two heads, it
is not the sport of destiny and cannot be wrested from us;--and, so
far, it is endowed with an absolute value in contrast to the merely
relative worth of the other two. The consequence of this is that it is
much more difficult than people commonly suppose to get a hold on a
man from without. But here the all-powerful agent, Time, comes in
and claims its rights, and before its influence physical and mental
advantages gradually waste away. Moral character alone remains
inaccessible to it. In view of the destructive effect of time, it
seems, indeed, as if the blessings named under the other two heads,
of which time cannot directly rob us, were superior to those of the
first. Another advantage might be claimed for them, namely, that being
in their very nature objective and external, they are attainable, and
every one is presented with the possibility, at least, of coming into
possession of them; whilst what is subjective is not open to us to
acquire, but making its entry by a kind of _divine right_, it remains
for life, immutable, inalienable, an inexorable doom. Let me quote
those lines in which Goethe describes how an unalterable destiny is
assigned to every man at the hour of his birth, so that he can develop
only in the lines laid down for him, as it were, by the conjunctions
of the stars: and how the Sybil and the prophets declare that
_himself_ a man can never escape, nor any power of time avail to
change the path on which his life is cast:--

  _Wie an dem Tag, der dich der Welt verliehen,
  Dïe Sonne stand zum Grusse der Planeten,
  Bist alsobald und fort und fort gediehen,
  Nach dem Gesetz, wonach du angetreten.
  So musst du sein, dir kannst du nicht entfliehen,
  So tagten schon Sybillen und Propheten;
  Und keine Zeit, und keine Macht zerstückelt
  Geprägte Form, die lebend sich entwickelt_.

The only thing that stands in our power to achieve, is to make the
most advantageous use possible of the personal qualities we possess,
and accordingly to follow such pursuits only as will call them into
play, to strive after the kind of perfection of which they admit and
to avoid every other; consequently, to choose the position, occupation
and manner of life which are most suitable for their development.

Imagine a man endowed with herculean strength who is compelled by
circumstances to follow a sedentary occupation, some minute exquisite
work of the hands, for example, or to engage in study and mental
labor demanding quite other powers, and just those which he has not
got,--compelled, that is, to leave unused the powers in which he is
pre-eminently strong; a man placed like this will never feel happy all
his life through. Even more miserable will be the lot of the man
with intellectual powers of a very high order, who has to leave them
undeveloped and unemployed, in the pursuit of a calling which does not
require them, some bodily labor, perhaps, for which his strength is
insufficient. Still, in a case of this kind, it should be our care,
especially in youth, to avoid the precipice of presumption, and not
ascribe to ourselves a superfluity of power which is not there.

Since the blessings described under the first head decidedly outweigh
those contained under the other two, it is manifestly a wiser course
to aim at the maintenance of our health and the cultivation of our
faculties, than at the amassing of wealth; but this must not be
mistaken as meaning that we should neglect to acquire an adequate
supply of the necessaries of life. Wealth, in the strict sense of the
word, that is, great superfluity, can do little for our happiness; and
many rich people feel unhappy just because they are without any true
mental culture or knowledge, and consequently have no objective
interests which would qualify them for intellectual occupations. For
beyond the satisfaction of some real and natural necessities, all that
the possession of wealth can achieve has a very small influence upon
our happiness, in the proper sense of the word; indeed, wealth rather
disturbs it, because the preservation of property entails a great many
unavoidable anxieties. And still men are a thousand times more intent
on becoming rich than on acquiring culture, though it is quite certain
that what a man _is_ contributes much more to his happiness than
what he _has_. So you may see many a man, as industrious as an ant,
ceaselessly occupied from morning to night in the endeavor to increase
his heap of gold. Beyond the narrow horizon of means to this end, he
knows nothing; his mind is a blank, and consequently unsusceptible to
any other influence. The highest pleasures, those of the intellect,
are to him inaccessible, and he tries in vain to replace them by the
fleeting pleasures of sense in which he indulges, lasting but a brief
hour and at tremendous cost. And if he is lucky, his struggles result
in his having a really great pile of gold, which he leaves to
his heir, either to make it still larger, or to squander it in
extravagance. A life like this, though pursued with a sense of
earnestness and an air of importance, is just as silly as many another
which has a fool's cap for its symbol.

_What a man has in himself_ is, then, the chief element in his
happiness. Because this is, as a rule, so very little, most of those
who are placed beyond the struggle with penury feel at bottom quite as
unhappy as those who are still engaged in it. Their minds are vacant,
their imagination dull, their spirits poor, and so they are driven to
the company of those like them--for _similis simili gaudet_--where
they make common pursuit of pastime and entertainment, consisting
for the most part in sensual pleasure, amusement of every kind, and
finally, in excess and libertinism. A young man of rich family enters
upon life with a large patrimony, and often runs through it in an
incredibly short space of time, in vicious extravagance; and why?
Simply because, here too, the mind is empty and void, and so the man
is bored with existence. He was sent forth into the world outwardly
rich but inwardly poor, and his vain endeavor was to make his
external wealth compensate for his inner poverty, by trying to obtain
everything _from without_, like an old man who seeks to strengthen
himself as King David or Maréchal de Rex tried to do. And so in the
end one who is inwardly poor comes to be also poor outwardly.

I need not insist upon the importance of the other two kinds of
blessings which make up the happiness of human life; now-a-days the
value of possessing them is too well known to require advertisement.
The third class, it is true, may seem, compared with the second, of
a very ethereal character, as it consists only of other people's
opinions. Still every one has to strive for reputation, that is to
say, a good name. Rank, on the other hand, should be aspired to only
by those who serve the state, and fame by very few indeed. In any
case, reputation is looked upon as a priceless treasure, and fame as
the most precious of all the blessings a man can attain,--the Golden
Fleece, as it were, of the elect: whilst only fools will prefer rank
to property. The second and third classes, moreover, are reciprocally
cause and effect; so far, that is, as Petronius' maxim, _habes
habeberis_, is true; and conversely, the favor of others, in all its
forms, often puts us in the way of getting what we want.




CHAPTER II.

PERSONALITY, OR WHAT A MAN IS.


We have already seen, in general, that what a man _is_ contributes
much more to his happiness than what he _has_, or how he is regarded
by others. What a man is, and so what he has in his own person, is
always the chief thing to consider; for his individuality accompanies
him always and everywhere, and gives its color to all his experiences.
In every kind of enjoyment, for instance, the pleasure depends
principally upon the man himself. Every one admits this in regard to
physical, and how much truer it is of intellectual, pleasure. When we
use that English expression, "to enjoy one's self," we are employing a
very striking and appropriate phrase; for observe--one says, not "he
enjoys Paris," but "he enjoys himself in Paris." To a man possessed of
an ill-conditioned individuality, all pleasure is like delicate wine
in a mouth made bitter with gall. Therefore, in the blessings as well
as in the ills of life, less depends upon what befalls us than upon
the way in which it is met, that is, upon the kind and degree of our
general susceptibility. What a man is and has in himself,--in a word
personality, with all it entails, is the only immediate and direct
factor in his happiness and welfare. All else is mediate and indirect,
and its influence can be neutralized and frustrated; but the influence
of personality never. This is why the envy which personal qualities
excite is the most implacable of all,--as it is also the most
carefully dissembled.

Further, the constitution of our consciousness is the ever present
and lasting element in all we do or suffer; our individuality is
persistently at work, more or less, at every moment of our life: all
other influences are temporal, incidental, fleeting, and subject to
every kind of chance and change. This is why Aristotle says: _It is
not wealth but character that lasts_.[1]

  [Greek: --hae gar phusis bebion ou ta chraemata]

[Footnote 1: Eth. Eud., vii. 2. 37:]

And just for the same reason we can more easily bear a misfortune
which comes to us entirely from without, than one which we have drawn
upon ourselves; for fortune may always change, but not character.
Therefore, subjective blessings,--a noble nature, a capable head, a
joyful temperament, bright spirits, a well-constituted, perfectly
sound physique, in a word, _mens sana in corpore sano_, are the first
and most important elements in happiness; so that we should be
more intent on promoting and preserving such qualities than on the
possession of external wealth and external honor.

And of all these, the one which makes us the most directly happy is
a genial flow of good spirits; for this excellent quality is its own
immediate reward. The man who is cheerful and merry has always a
good reason for being so,--the fact, namely, that he is so. There is
nothing which, like this quality, can so completely replace the loss
of every other blessing. If you know anyone who is young, handsome,
rich and esteemed, and you want to know, further, if he is happy, ask,
Is he cheerful and genial?--and if he is, what does it matter whether
he is young or old, straight or humpbacked, poor or rich?--he is
happy. In my early days I once opened an old book and found these
words: _If you laugh a great deal, you are happy; if you cry a great
deal, you are unhappy_;--a very simple remark, no doubt; but just
because it is so simple I have never been able to forget it, even
though it is in the last degree a truism. So if cheerfulness knocks
at our door, we should throw it wide open, for it never comes
inopportunely; instead of that, we often make scruples about letting
it in. We want to be quite sure that we have every reason to be
contented; then we are afraid that cheerfulness of spirits may
interfere with serious reflections or weighty cares. Cheerfulness is a
direct and immediate gain,--the very coin, as it were, of happiness,
and not, like all else, merely a cheque upon the bank; for it alone
makes us immediately happy in the present moment, and that is the
highest blessing for beings like us, whose existence is but an
infinitesimal moment between two eternities. To secure and promote
this feeling of cheerfulness should be the supreme aim of all our
endeavors after happiness.

Now it is certain that nothing contributes so little to cheerfulness
as riches, or so much, as health. Is it not in the lower classes, the
so-called working classes, more especially those of them who live in
the country, that we see cheerful and contented faces? and is it
not amongst the rich, the upper classes, that we find faces full of
ill-humor and vexation? Consequently we should try as much as possible
to maintain a high degree of health; for cheerfulness is the very
flower of it. I need hardly say what one must do to be healthy--avoid
every kind of excess, all violent and unpleasant emotion, all mental
overstrain, take daily exercise in the open air, cold baths and such
like hygienic measures. For without a proper amount of daily exercise
no one can remain healthy; all the processes of life demand exercise
for the due performance of their functions, exercise not only of the
parts more immediately concerned, but also of the whole body. For, as
Aristotle rightly says, _Life is movement_; it is its very essence.
Ceaseless and rapid motion goes on in every part of the organism.
The heart, with its complicated double systole and diastole, beats
strongly and untiringly; with twenty-eight beats it has to drive the
whole of the blood through arteries, veins and capillaries; the lungs
pump like a steam-engine, without intermission; the intestines are
always in peristaltic action; the glands are all constantly absorbing
and secreting; even the brain has a double motion of its own, with
every beat of the pulse and every breath we draw. When people can get
no exercise at all, as is the case with the countless numbers who
are condemned to a sedentary life, there is a glaring and fatal
disproportion between outward inactivity and inner tumult. For this
ceaseless internal motion requires some external counterpart, and the
want of it produces effects like those of emotion which we are obliged
to suppress. Even trees must be shaken by the wind, if they are to
thrive. The rule which finds its application here may be most briefly
expressed in Latin: _omnis motus, quo celerior, eo magis motus_.

How much our happiness depends upon our spirits, and these again upon
our state of health, may be seen by comparing the influence which the
same external circumstances or events have upon us when we are well
and strong with the effects which they have when we are depressed and
troubled with ill-health. It is not what things are objectively and in
themselves, but what they are for us, in our way of looking at them,
that makes us happy or the reverse. As Epictetus says, _Men are not
influenced by things, but by their thoughts about things_. And, in
general, nine-tenths of our happiness depends upon health alone. With
health, everything is a source of pleasure; without it, nothing
else, whatever it may be, is enjoyable; even the other personal
blessings,--a great mind, a happy temperament--are degraded and
dwarfed for want of it. So it is really with good reason that, when
two people meet, the first thing they do is to inquire after each
other's health, and to express the hope that it is good; for good
health is by far the most important element in human happiness. It
follows from all this that the greatest of follies is to sacrifice
health for any other kind of happiness, whatever it may be, for gain,
advancement, learning or fame, let alone, then, for fleeting sensual
pleasures. Everything else should rather be postponed to it.

But however much health may contribute to that flow of good spirits
which is so essential to our happiness, good spirits do not entirely
depend upon health; for a man may be perfectly sound in his physique
and still possess a melancholy temperament and be generally given up
to sad thoughts. The ultimate cause of this is undoubtedly to be
found in innate, and therefore unalterable, physical constitution,
especially in the more or less normal relation of a man's
sensitiveness to his muscular and vital energy. Abnormal sensitiveness
produces inequality of spirits, a predominating melancholy, with
periodical fits of unrestrained liveliness. A genius is one whose
nervous power or sensitiveness is largely in excess; as Aristotle[1]
has very correctly observed, _Men distinguished in philosophy,
politics, poetry or art appear to be all of a melancholy temperament_.
This is doubtless the passage which Cicero has in his mind when
he says, as he often does, _Aristoteles ait omnes ingeniosos
melancholicos esse_.[2] Shakespeare has very neatly expressed this
radical and innate diversity of temperament in those lines in _The
Merchant of Venice_:

[Footnote 1: Probl. xxx., ep. 1]

[Footnote 2: Tusc. i., 33.]

  _Nature has framed strange fellows in her time;
  Some that will evermore peep through their eyes,
  And laugh, like parrots at a bag-piper;
  And others of such vinegar aspect,
  That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile,
  Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable_.

This is the difference which Plato draws between [Greek: eukolos]
and [Greek: dyskolos]--the man of _easy_, and the man of _difficult_
disposition--in proof of which he refers to the varying degrees of
susceptibility which different people show to pleasurable and painful
impressions; so that one man will laugh at what makes another despair.
As a rule, the stronger the susceptibility to unpleasant impressions,
the weaker is the susceptibility to pleasant ones, and _vice versa_.
If it is equally possible for an event to turn out well or ill,
the [Greek: dyskolos] will be annoyed or grieved if the issue is
unfavorable, and will not rejoice, should it be happy. On the other
hand, the [Greek: eukolos] will neither worry nor fret over an
unfavorable issue, but rejoice if it turns out well. If the one is
successful in nine out of ten undertakings, he will not be pleased,
but rather annoyed that one has miscarried; whilst the other, if only
a single one succeeds, will manage to find consolation in the fact
and remain cheerful. But here is another instance of the truth,
that hardly any evil is entirely without its compensation; for the
misfortunes and sufferings which the [Greek: auskoloi], that is,
people of gloomy and anxious character, have to overcome, are, on the
whole, more imaginary and therefore less real than those which befall
the gay and careless; for a man who paints everything black, who
constantly fears the worst and takes measures accordingly, will not be
disappointed so often in this world, as one who always looks upon the
bright side of things. And when a morbid affection of the nerves, or a
derangement of the digestive organs, plays into the hands of an
innate tendency to gloom, this tendency may reach such a height that
permanent discomfort produces a weariness of life. So arises an
inclination to suicide, which even the most trivial unpleasantness may
actually bring about; nay, when the tendency attains its worst form,
it may be occasioned by nothing in particular, but a man may resolve
to put an end to his existence, simply because he is permanently
unhappy, and then coolly and firmly carry out his determination;
as may be seen by the way in which the sufferer, when placed under
supervision, as he usually is, eagerly waits to seize the first
unguarded moment, when, without a shudder, without a struggle or
recoil, he may use the now natural and welcome means of effecting his
release.[1] Even the healthiest, perhaps even the most cheerful
man, may resolve upon death under certain circumstances; when, for
instance, his sufferings, or his fears of some inevitable misfortune,
reach such a pitch as to outweigh the terrors of death. The only
difference lies in the degree of suffering necessary to bring about
the fatal act, a degree which will be high in the case of a cheerful,
and low in that of a gloomy man. The greater the melancholy, the lower
need the degree be; in the end, it may even sink to zero. But if a man
is cheerful, and his spirits are supported by good health, it requires
a high degree of suffering to make him lay hands upon himself. There
are countless steps in the scale between the two extremes of suicide,
the suicide which springs merely from a morbid intensification of
innate gloom, and the suicide of the healthy and cheerful man, who has
entirely objective grounds for putting an end to his existence.

[Footnote 1: For a detailed description of this condition of mind _Cf_
Esquirol, _Des maladies mentales_.]

Beauty is partly an affair of health. It may be reckoned as a personal
advantage; though it does not, properly speaking, contribute directly
to our happiness. It does so indirectly, by impressing other people;
and it is no unimportant advantage, even in man. Beauty is an open
letter of recommendation, predisposing the heart to favor the person
who presents it. As is well said in these lines of Homer, the gift of
beauty is not lightly to be thrown away, that glorious gift which none
can bestow save the gods alone--

  [Greek: outoi hapoblaet erti theon erikuoea dora,
  ossa ken autoi dosin, ekon douk an tis eloito].[1]

[Footnote 1: _Iliad_ 3, 65.]

The most general survey shows us that the two foes of human happiness
are pain and boredom. We may go further, and say that in the degree in
which we are fortunate enough to get away from the one, we approach
the other. Life presents, in fact, a more or less violent oscillation
between the two. The reason of this is that each of these two poles
stands in a double antagonism to the other, external or objective,
and inner or subjective. Needy surroundings and poverty produce pain;
while, if a man is more than well off, he is bored. Accordingly, while
the lower classes are engaged in a ceaseless struggle with need,
in other words, with pain, the upper carry on a constant and often
desperate battle with boredom.[1] The inner or subjective antagonism
arises from the fact that, in the individual, susceptibility to
pain varies inversely with susceptibility to boredom, because
susceptibility is directly proportionate to mental power. Let
me explain. A dull mind is, as a rule, associated with dull
sensibilities, nerves which no stimulus can affect, a temperament, in
short, which does not feel pain or anxiety very much, however great
or terrible it may be. Now, intellectual dullness is at the bottom of
that _vacuity of soul_ which is stamped on so many faces, a state of
mind which betrays itself by a constant and lively attention to all
the trivial circumstances in the external world. This is the true
source of boredom--a continual panting after excitement, in order to
have a pretext for giving the mind and spirits something to occupy
them. The kind of things people choose for this purpose shows that
they are not very particular, as witness the miserable pastimes they
have recourse to, and their ideas of social pleasure and conversation:
or again, the number of people who gossip on the doorstep or gape out
of the window. It is mainly because of this inner vacuity of soul that
people go in quest of society, diversion, amusement, luxury of every
sort, which lead many to extravagance and misery. Nothing is so good
a protection against such misery as inward wealth, the wealth of
the mind, because the greater it grows, the less room it leaves for
boredom. The inexhaustible activity of thought! Finding ever new
material to work upon in the multifarious phenomena of self and
nature, and able and ready to form new combinations of them,--there
you have something that invigorates the mind, and apart from moments
of relaxation, sets it far above the reach of boredom.

[Footnote 1: And the extremes meet; for the lowest state of
civilization, a nomad or wandering life, finds its counterpart in the
highest, where everyone is at times a tourist. The earlier stage was a
case of necessity; the latter is a remedy for boredom.]

But, on the other hand, this high degree of intelligence is rooted in
a high degree of susceptibility, greater strength of will, greater
passionateness; and from the union of these qualities comes an
increased capacity for emotion, an enhanced sensibility to all mental
and even bodily pain, greater impatience of obstacles, greater
resentment of interruption;--all of which tendencies are augmented by
the power of the imagination, the vivid character of the whole range
of thought, including what is disagreeable. This applies, in various
degrees, to every step in the long scale of mental power, from the
veriest dunce to the greatest genius that ever lived. Therefore the
nearer anyone is, either from a subjective or from an objective point
of view, to one of those sources of suffering in human life, the
farther he is from the other. And so a man's natural bent will lead
him to make his objective world conform to his subjective as much as
possible; that is to say, he will take the greatest measures against
that form of suffering to which he is most liable. The wise man will,
above all, strive after freedom from pain and annoyance, quiet and
leisure, consequently a tranquil, modest life, with as few encounters
as may be; and so, after a little experience of his so-called
fellowmen, he will elect to live in retirement, or even, if he is
a man of great intellect, in solitude. For the more a man has in
himself, the less he will want from other people,--the less, indeed,
other people can be to him. This is why a high degree of intellect
tends to make a man unsocial. True, if _quality_ of intellect could be
made up for by quantity, it might be worth while to live even in the
great world; but unfortunately, a hundred fools together will not make
one wise man.

But the individual who stands at the other end of the scale is no
sooner free from the pangs of need than he endeavors to get pastime
and society at any cost, taking up with the first person he meets, and
avoiding nothing so much as himself. For in solitude, where every one
is thrown upon his own resources, what a man has in himself comes
to light; the fool in fine raiment groans under the burden of his
miserable personality, a burden which he can never throw off, whilst
the man of talent peoples the waste places with his animating
thoughts. Seneca declares that folly is its own burden,--_omnis
stultitia laborat fastidio sui_,--a very true saying, with which may
be compared the words of Jesus, the son of Sirach, _The life of a fool
is worse than death_[1]. And, as a rule, it will be found that a man
is sociable just in the degree in which he is intellectually poor and
generally vulgar. For one's choice in this world does not go much
beyond solitude on one side and vulgarity on the other. It is said
that the most sociable of all people are the negroes; and they are at
the bottom of the scale in intellect. I remember reading once in a
French paper[2] that the blacks in North America, whether free or
enslaved, are fond of shutting themselves up in large numbers in the
smallest space, because they cannot have too much of one another's
snub-nosed company.

[Footnote 1: Ecclesiasticus, xxii. 11.]

[Footnote 2: _Le Commerce_, Oct. 19th, 1837.]

The brain may be regarded as a kind of parasite of the organism, a
pensioner, as it were, who dwells with the body: and leisure, that
is, the time one has for the free enjoyment of one's consciousness or
individuality, is the fruit or produce of the rest of existence, which
is in general only labor and effort. But what does most people's
leisure yield?--boredom and dullness; except, of course, when it is
occupied with sensual pleasure or folly. How little such leisure is
worth may be seen in the way in which it is spent: and, as Ariosto
observes, how miserable are the idle hours of ignorant men!--_ozio
lungo d'uomini ignoranti_. Ordinary people think merely how they shall
_spend_ their time; a man of any talent tries to _use_ it. The reason
why people of limited intellect are apt to be bored is that their
intellect is absolutely nothing more than the means by which the
motive power of the will is put into force: and whenever there is
nothing particular to set the will in motion, it rests, and their
intellect takes a holiday, because, equally with the will, it requires
something external to bring it into play. The result is an awful
stagnation of whatever power a man has--in a word, boredom. To
counteract this miserable feeling, men run to trivialities which
please for the moment they are taken up, hoping thus to engage the
will in order to rouse it to action, and so set the intellect in
motion; for it is the latter which has to give effect to these motives
of the will. Compared with real and natural motives, these are but as
paper money to coin; for their value is only arbitrary--card games and
the like, which have been invented for this very purpose. And if there
is nothing else to be done, a man will twirl his thumbs or beat the
devil's tattoo; or a cigar may be a welcome substitute for exercising
his brains. Hence, in all countries the chief occupation of society is
card-playing,[1] and it is the gauge of its value, and an outward sign
that it is bankrupt in thought. Because people have no thoughts to
deal in, they deal cards, and try and win one another's money. Idiots!
But I do not wish to be unjust; so let me remark that it may certainly
be said in defence of card-playing that it is a preparation for the
world and for business life, because one learns thereby how to make a
clever use of fortuitous but unalterable circumstances (cards, in this
case), and to get as much out of them as one can: and to do this a man
must learn a little dissimulation, and how to put a good face upon a
bad business. But, on the other hand, it is exactly for this reason
that card-playing is so demoralizing, since the whole object of it is
to employ every kind of trick and machination in order to win
what belongs to another. And a habit of this sort, learnt at the
card-table, strikes root and pushes its way into practical life; and
in the affairs of every day a man gradually comes to regard _meum_ and
_tuum_ in much the same light as cards, and to consider that he may
use to the utmost whatever advantages he possesses, so long as he does
not come within the arm of the law. Examples of what I mean are of
daily occurrence in mercantile life. Since, then, leisure is the
flower, or rather the fruit, of existence, as it puts a man into
possession of himself, those are happy indeed who possess something
real in themselves. But what do you get from most people's
leisure?--only a good-for-nothing fellow, who is terribly bored and a
burden to himself. Let us, therefore, rejoice, dear brethren, for _we
are not children of the bondwoman, but of the free_.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Card-playing to this extent is now,
no doubt, a thing of the past, at any rate amongst the nations
of northern Europe. The present fashion is rather in favor of a
dilettante interest in art or literature.]

Further, as no land is so well off as that which requires few imports,
or none at all, so the happiest man is one who has enough in his own
inner wealth, and requires little or nothing from outside for his
maintenance, for imports are expensive things, reveal dependence,
entail danger, occasion trouble, and when all is said and done, are
a poor substitute for home produce. No man ought to expect much from
others, or, in general, from the external world. What one human being
can be to another is not a very great deal: in the end every one
stands alone, and the important thing is _who_ it is that stands
alone. Here, then, is another application of the general truth which
Goethe recognizes in _Dichtung und Wahrheit_ (Bk. III.), that in
everything a man has ultimately to appeal to himself; or, as Goldsmith
puts it in _The Traveller_:

  _Still to ourselves in every place consign'd
  Our own felicity we make or find_.

Himself is the source of the best and most a man can be or achieve.
The more this is so--the more a man finds his sources of pleasure in
himself--the happier he will be. Therefore, it is with great truth
that Aristotle[1] says, _To be happy means to be self-sufficient_. For
all other sources of happiness are in their nature most uncertain,
precarious, fleeting, the sport of chance; and so even under the most
favorable circumstances they can easily be exhausted; nay, this is
unavoidable, because they are not always within reach. And in old age
these sources of happiness must necessarily dry up:--love leaves us
then, and wit, desire to travel, delight in horses, aptitude for
social intercourse; friends and relations, too, are taken from us by
death. Then more than ever, it depends upon what a man has in himself;
for this will stick to him longest; and at any period of life it is
the only genuine and lasting source of happiness. There is not much to
be got anywhere in the world. It is filled with misery and pain; and
if a man escapes these, boredom lies in wait for him at every corner.
Nay more; it is evil which generally has the upper hand, and folly
makes the most noise. Fate is cruel, and mankind is pitiable. In such
a world as this, a man who is rich in himself is like a bright, warm,
happy room at Christmastide, while without are the frost and snow of
a December night. Therefore, without doubt, the happiest destiny on
earth is to have the rare gift of a rich individuality, and, more
especially to be possessed of a good endowment of intellect; this
is the happiest destiny, though it may not be, after all, a very
brilliant one.

[Footnote 1: Eth. Eud, vii 2]

There was a great wisdom in that remark which Queen Christina of
Sweden made, in her nineteenth year, about Descartes, who had then
lived for twenty years in the deepest solitude in Holland, and, apart
from report, was known to her only by a single essay: _M. Descartes_,
she said, _is the happiest of men, and his condition seems to me much
to be envied.[1]_ Of course, as was the case with Descartes, external
circumstances must be favorable enough to allow a man to be master of
his life and happiness; or, as we read in _Ecclesiastes_[2]--_Wisdom
is good together with an inheritance, and profitable unto them that
see the sun_. The man to whom nature and fate have granted the
blessing of wisdom, will be most anxious and careful to keep open
the fountains of happiness which he has in himself; and for this,
independence and leisure are necessary. To obtain them, he will be
willing to moderate his desires and harbor his resources, all the more
because he is not, like others, restricted to the external world for
his pleasures. So he will not be misled by expectations of office, or
money, or the favor and applause of his fellowmen, into surrendering
himself in order to conform to low desires and vulgar tastes; nay, in
such a case he will follow the advice that Horace gives in his epistle
to Maecenas.[3]

[Footnote 1: _Vie de Descartes_, par Baillet. Liv. vii., ch. 10.]

[Footnote 2: vii. 12.]

[Footnote 3: Lib. 1., ep. 7.]

  _Nec somnum plebis laudo, satur altilium, nec
  Otia divitiis Arabum liberrima muto_.

It is a great piece of folly to sacrifice the inner for the outer man,
to give the whole or the greater part of one's quiet, leisure and
independence for splendor, rank, pomp, titles and honor. This is what
Goethe did. My good luck drew me quite in the other direction.

The truth which I am insisting upon here, the truth, namely, that the
chief source of human happiness is internal, is confirmed by that most
accurate observation of Aristotle in the _Nichomachean Ethics_[1] that
every pleasure presupposes some sort of activity, the application of
some sort of power, without which it cannot exist. The doctrine of
Aristotle's, that a man's happiness consists in the free exercise
of his highest faculties, is also enunciated by Stobaeus in his
exposition of the Peripatetic philosophy[2]: _happiness_, he says,
_means vigorous and successful activity in all your undertakings_; and
he explains that by _vigor [Greek: aretae]_ he means _mastery_ in any
thing, whatever it be. Now, the original purpose of those forces with
which nature has endowed man is to enable him to struggle against the
difficulties which beset him on all sides. But if this struggle comes
to an end, his unemployed forces become a burden to him; and he has to
set to work and play with them,--to use them, I mean, for no purpose
at all, beyond avoiding the other source of human suffering, boredom,
to which he is at once exposed. It is the upper classes, people of
wealth, who are the greatest victims of boredom. Lucretius long ago
described their miserable state, and the truth of his description may
be still recognized to-day, in the life of every great capital--where
the rich man is seldom in his own halls, because it bores him to be
there, and still he returns thither, because he is no better off
outside;--or else he is away in post-haste to his house in the
country, as if it were on fire; and he is no sooner arrived there,
than he is bored again, and seeks to forget everything in sleep, or
else hurries back to town once more.

[Footnote 1: i. 7 and vii. 13, 14.]

[Footnote 2: Ecl. eth. ii., ch 7.]

  _Exit saepe foras magnis ex aedibus ille,
  Esse domi quem pertaesum est, subitoque reventat,
  Quippe foris nihilo melius qui sentiat esse.
  Currit, agens mannos, ad villam precipitanter,
  Auxilium tectis quasi ferre ardentibus instans:
  Oscitat extemplo, tetigit quum limina villae;
  Aut abit in somnum gravis, atque oblivia quaerit;
  Aut etiam properans urbem petit atque revisit_.[1]

[Footnote 1: III 1073.]

In their youth, such people must have had a superfluity of muscular
and vital energy,--powers which, unlike those of the mind, cannot
maintain their full degree of vigor very long; and in later years they
either have no mental powers at all, or cannot develop any for want
of employment which would bring them into play; so that they are in a
wretched plight. _Will_, however, they still possess, for this is the
only power that is inexhaustible; and they try to stimulate their
will by passionate excitement, such as games of chance for high
stakes--undoubtedly a most degrading form of vice. And one may say
generally that if a man finds himself with nothing to do, he is sure
to choose some amusement suited to the kind of power in which he
excels,--bowls, it may be, or chess; hunting or painting; horse-racing
or music; cards, or poetry, heraldry, philosophy, or some other
dilettante interest. We might classify these interests methodically,
by reducing them to expressions of the three fundamental powers,
the factors, that is to say, which go to make up the physiological
constitution of man; and further, by considering these powers by
themselves, and apart from any of the definite aims which they may
subserve, and simply as affording three sources of possible pleasure,
out of which every man will choose what suits him, according as he
excels in one direction or another.

First of all come the pleasures of _vital energy_, of food, drink,
digestion, rest and sleep; and there are parts of the world where it
can be said that these are characteristic and national pleasures.
Secondly, there are the pleasures of _muscular energy_, such as
walking, running, wrestling, dancing, fencing, riding and similar
athletic pursuits, which sometimes take the form of sport, and
sometimes of a military life and real warfare. Thirdly, there are the
pleasures of sensibility, such as observation, thought, feeling, or
a taste for poetry or culture, music, learning, reading, meditation,
invention, philosophy and the like. As regards the value, relative
worth and duration of each of these kinds of pleasure, a great deal
might be said, which, however, I leave the reader to supply. But every
one will see that the nobler the power which is brought into play,
the greater will be the pleasure which it gives; for pleasure always
involves the use of one's own powers, and happiness consists in a
frequent repetition of pleasure. No one will deny that in this respect
the pleasures of sensibility occupy a higher place than either of
the other two fundamental kinds; which exist in an equal, nay, in
a greater degree in brutes; it is this preponderating amount of
sensibility which distinguishes man from other animals. Now, our
mental powers are forms of sensibility, and therefore a preponderating
amount of it makes us capable of that kind of pleasure which has to do
with mind, so-called intellectual pleasure; and the more sensibility
predominates, the greater the pleasure will be.[1]

[Footnote 1: Nature exhibits a continual progress, starting from the
mechanical and chemical activity of the inorganic world, proceeding
to the vegetable, with its dull enjoyment of self, from that to the
animal world, where intelligence and consciousness begin, at first
very weak, and only after many intermediate stages attaining its last
great development in man, whose intellect is Nature's crowning point,
the goal of all her efforts, the most perfect and difficult of all her
works. And even within the range of the human intellect, there are a
great many observable differences of degree, and it is very seldom
that intellect reaches its highest point, intelligence properly
so-called, which in this narrow and strict sense of the word, is
Nature's most consummate product, and so the rarest and most precious
thing of which the world can boast. The highest product of Nature
is the clearest degree of consciousness, in which the world mirrors
itself more plainly and completely than anywhere else. A man endowed
with this form of intelligence is in possession of what is noblest
and best on earth; and accordingly, he has a source of pleasure in
comparison with which all others are small. From his surroundings he
asks nothing but leisure for the free enjoyment of what he has got,
time, as it were, to polish his diamond. All other pleasures that are
not of the intellect are of a lower kind; for they are, one and all,
movements of will--desires, hopes, fears and ambitions, no matter to
what directed: they are always satisfied at the cost of pain, and in
the case of ambition, generally with more or less of illusion. With
intellectual pleasure, on the other hand, truth becomes clearer and
clearer. In the realm of intelligence pain has no power. Knowledge is
all in all. Further, intellectual pleasures are accessible entirely
and only through the medium of the intelligence, and are limited by
its capacity. _For all the wit there is in the world is useless to him
who has none_. Still this advantage is accompanied by a substantial
disadvantage; for the whole of Nature shows that with the growth of
intelligence comes increased capacity for pain, and it is only with
the highest degree of intelligence that suffering reaches its supreme
point.]

The normal, ordinary man takes a vivid interest in anything only in so
far as it excites his will, that is to say, is a matter of personal
interest to him. But constant excitement of the will is never an
unmixed good, to say the least; in other words, it involves pain.
Card-playing, that universal occupation of "good society" everywhere,
is a device for providing this kind of excitement, and that, too,
by means of interests so small as to produce slight and momentary,
instead of real and permanent, pain. Card-playing is, in fact, a mere
tickling of the will.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Vulgarity_ is, at bottom, the kind of consciousness in
which the will completely predominates over the intellect, where the
latter does nothing more than perform the service of its master, the
will. Therefore, when the will makes no demands, supplies no motives,
strong or weak, the intellect entirely loses its power, and the result
is complete vacancy of mind. Now _will without intellect_ is the most
vulgar and common thing in the world, possessed by every blockhead,
who, in the gratification of his passions, shows the stuff of which he
is made. This is the condition of mind called _vulgarity_, in which
the only active elements are the organs of sense, and that small
amount of intellect which is necessary for apprehending the data of
sense. Accordingly, the vulgar man is constantly open to all sorts of
impressions, and immediately perceives all the little trifling things
that go on in his environment: the lightest whisper, the most trivial
circumstance, is sufficient to rouse his attention; he is just like an
animal. Such a man's mental condition reveals itself in his face, in
his whole exterior; and hence that vulgar, repulsive appearance, which
is all the more offensive, if, as is usually the case, his will--the
only factor in his consciousness--is a base, selfish and altogether
bad one.]

On the other hand, a man of powerful intellect is capable of taking
a vivid interest in things in the way of mere _knowledge_, with no
admixture of _will_; nay, such an interest is a necessity to him. It
places him in a sphere where pain is an alien,--a diviner air, where
the gods live serene.

  _[Greek: phusis bebion ou ta chraematatheoi reia xoontes][1]_

[Footnote 1: Odyssey IV., 805.]

Look on these two pictures--the life of the masses, one long, dull
record of struggle and effort entirely devoted to the petty interests
of personal welfare, to misery in all its forms, a life beset by
intolerable boredom as soon as ever those aims are satisfied and the
man is thrown back upon himself, whence he can be roused again to some
sort of movement only by the wild fire of passion. On the other side
you have a man endowed with a high degree of mental power, leading an
existence rich in thought and full of life and meaning, occupied by
worthy and interesting objects as soon as ever he is free to give
himself to them, bearing in himself a source of the noblest pleasure.
What external promptings he wants come from the works of nature, and
from the contemplation of human affairs and the achievements of the
great of all ages and countries, which are thoroughly appreciated by a
man of this type alone, as being the only one who can quite understand
and feel with them. And so it is for him alone that those great ones
have really lived; it is to him that they make their appeal; the rest
are but casual hearers who only half understand either them or their
followers. Of course, this characteristic of the intellectual man
implies that he has one more need than the others, the need of
reading, observing, studying, meditating, practising, the need, in
short, of undisturbed leisure. For, as Voltaire has very rightly said,
_there are no real pleasures without real needs_; and the need of them
is why to such a man pleasures are accessible which are denied to
others,--the varied beauties of nature and art and literature. To
heap these pleasures round people who do not want them and cannot
appreciate them, is like expecting gray hairs to fall in love. A man
who is privileged in this respect leads two lives, a personal and an
intellectual life; and the latter gradually comes to be looked upon
as the true one, and the former as merely a means to it. Other people
make this shallow, empty and troubled existence an end in itself. To
the life of the intellect such a man will give the preference over
all his other occupations: by the constant growth of insight and
knowledge, this intellectual life, like a slowly-forming work of art,
will acquire a consistency, a permanent intensity, a unity which
becomes ever more and more complete; compared with which, a life
devoted to the attainment of personal comfort, a life that may broaden
indeed, but can never be deepened, makes but a poor show: and yet,
as I have said, people make this baser sort of existence an end in
itself.

The ordinary life of every day, so far as it is not moved by passion,
is tedious and insipid; and if it is so moved, it soon becomes
painful. Those alone are happy whom nature has favored with some
superfluity of intellect, something beyond what is just necessary to
carry out the behests of their will; for it enables them to lead an
intellectual life as well, a life unattended by pain and full of vivid
interests. Mere leisure, that is to say, intellect unoccupied in the
service of the will, is not of itself sufficient: there must be a
real superfluity of power, set free from the service of the will and
devoted to that of the intellect; for, as Seneca says, _otium sine
litteris mors est et vivi hominis sepultura_--illiterate leisure is
a form of death, a living tomb. Varying with the amount of the
superfluity, there will be countless developments in this second life,
the life of the mind; it may be the mere collection and labelling of
insects, birds, minerals, coins, or the highest achievements of poetry
and philosophy. The life of the mind is not only a protection against
boredom; it also wards off the pernicious effects of boredom; it keeps
us from bad company, from the many dangers, misfortunes, losses and
extravagances which the man who places his happiness entirely in the
objective world is sure to encounter, My philosophy, for instance, has
never brought me in a six-pence; but it has spared me many an expense.

The ordinary man places his life's happiness in things external to
him, in property, rank, wife and children, friends, society, and the
like, so that when he loses them or finds them disappointing, the
foundation of his happiness is destroyed. In other words, his centre
of gravity is not in himself; it is constantly changing its place,
with every wish and whim. If he is a man of means, one day it will
be his house in the country, another buying horses, or entertaining
friends, or traveling,--a life, in short, of general luxury, the
reason being that he seeks his pleasure in things outside him. Like
one whose health and strength are gone, he tries to regain by the use
of jellies and drugs, instead of by developing his own vital power,
the true source of what he has lost. Before proceeding to the
opposite, let us compare with this common type the man who comes
midway between the two, endowed, it may be, not exactly with
distinguished powers of mind, but with somewhat more than the ordinary
amount of intellect. He will take a dilettante interest in art, or
devote his attention to some branch of science--botany, for example,
or physics, astronomy, history, and find a great deal of pleasure in
such studies, and amuse himself with them when external forces of
happiness are exhausted or fail to satisfy him any more. Of a man like
this it may be said that his centre of gravity is partly in himself.
But a dilettante interest in art is a very different thing from
creative activity; and an amateur pursuit of science is apt to be
superficial and not to penetrate to the heart of the matter. A man
cannot entirely identify himself with such pursuits, or have his whole
existence so completely filled and permeated with them that he loses
all interest in everything else. It is only the highest intellectual
power, what we call _genius_, that attains to this degree of
intensity, making all time and existence its theme, and striving to
express its peculiar conception of the world, whether it contemplates
life as the subject of poetry or of philosophy. Hence, undisturbed
occupation with himself, his own thoughts and works, is a matter of
urgent necessity to such a man; solitude is welcome, leisure is
the highest good, and everything else is unnecessary, nay, even
burdensome.

This is the only type of man of whom it can be said that his centre of
gravity is entirely in himself; which explains why it is that people
of this sort--and they are very rare--no matter how excellent their
character may be, do not show that warm and unlimited interest in
friends, family, and the community in general, of which others are
so often capable; for if they have only themselves they are not
inconsolable for the loss of everything else. This gives an isolation
to their character, which is all the more effective since other
people never really quite satisfy them, as being, on the whole, of
a different nature: nay more, since this difference is constantly
forcing itself upon their notice they get accustomed to move about
amongst mankind as alien beings, and in thinking of humanity in
general, to say _they_ instead of _we_.

So the conclusion we come to is that the man whom nature has endowed
with intellectual wealth is the happiest; so true it is that the
subjective concerns us more than the objective; for whatever the
latter may be, it can work only indirectly, secondly, and through the
medium of the former--a truth finely expressed by Lucian:--

  [Greek: _Aeloutos ho taes psychaes ploutus monos estin alaethaes
  Talla dechei ataen pleiona ton kteanon_--][1]

[Footnote 1: Epigrammata, 12.]

the wealth of the soul is the only true wealth, for with all other
riches comes a bane even greater than they. The man of inner wealth
wants nothing from outside but the negative gift of undisturbed
leisure, to develop and mature his intellectual faculties, that is,
to enjoy his wealth; in short, he wants permission to be himself,
his whole life long, every day and every hour. If he is destined to
impress the character of his mind upon a whole race, he has only one
measure of happiness or unhappiness--to succeed or fail in perfecting
his powers and completing his work. All else is of small consequence.
Accordingly, the greatest minds of all ages have set the highest value
upon undisturbed leisure, as worth exactly as much as the man himself.
_Happiness appears to consist in leisure_, says Aristotle;[1] and
Diogenes Laertius reports that _Socrates praised leisure as the
fairest of all possessions_. So, in the _Nichomachean Ethics_,
Aristotle concludes that a life devoted to philosophy is the happiest;
or, as he says in the _Politics,[2] the free exercise of any power,
whatever it may be, is happiness_. This again, tallies with what
Goethe says in _Wilhelm Meister: The man who is born with a talent
which he is meant to use, finds his greatest happiness in using it_.

[Footnote 1: Eth. Nichom. x. 7.]

[Footnote 2: iv. 11.]

But to be in possession of undisturbed leisure, is far from being
the common lot; nay, it is something alien to human nature, for the
ordinary man's destiny is to spend life in procuring what is necessary
for the subsistence of himself and his family; he is a son of struggle
and need, not a free intelligence. So people as a rule soon get tired
of undisturbed leisure, and it becomes burdensome if there are no
fictitious and forced aims to occupy it, play, pastime and hobbies of
every kind. For this very reason it is full of possible danger, and
_difficilis in otio quies_ is a true saying,--it is difficult to keep
quiet if you have nothing to do. On the other hand, a measure of
intellect far surpassing the ordinary, is as unnatural as it is
abnormal. But if it exists, and the man endowed with it is to be
happy, he will want precisely that undisturbed leisure which the
others find burdensome or pernicious; for without it he is a Pegasus
in harness, and consequently unhappy. If these two unnatural
circumstances, external, and internal, undisturbed leisure and great
intellect, happen to coincide in the same person, it is a great piece
of fortune; and if the fate is so far favorable, a man can lead the
higher life, the life protected from the two opposite sources of human
suffering, pain and boredom, from the painful struggle for existence,
and the incapacity for enduring leisure (which is free existence
itself)--evils which may be escaped only by being mutually
neutralized.

But there is something to be said in opposition to this view. Great
intellectual gifts mean an activity pre-eminently nervous in its
character, and consequently a very high degree of susceptibility to
pain in every form. Further, such gifts imply an intense temperament,
larger and more vivid ideas, which, as the inseparable accompaniment
of great intellectual power, entail on its possessor a corresponding
intensity of the emotions, making them incomparably more violent than
those to which the ordinary man is a prey. Now, there are more things
in the world productive of pain than of pleasure. Again, a large
endowment of intellect tends to estrange the man who has it from other
people and their doings; for the more a man has in himself, the less
he will be able to find in them; and the hundred things in which they
take delight, he will think shallow and insipid. Here, then, perhaps,
is another instance of that law of compensation which makes itself
felt everywhere. How often one hears it said, and said, too, with some
plausibility, that the narrow-minded man is at bottom the happiest,
even though his fortune is unenviable. I shall make no attempt to
forestall the reader's own judgment on this point; more especially as
Sophocles himself has given utterance to two diametrically opposite
opinions:--

  [Greek: Pollo to phronein eudaimonias
  proton uparchei.][1]

he says in one place--wisdom is the greatest part of happiness;
and again, in another passage, he declares that the life of the
thoughtless is the most pleasant of all--

  [Greek: En ta phronein gar maeden aedistos bios.][2]

The philosophers of the _Old Testament_ find themselves in a like
contradiction.

_The life of a fool is worse than death_[3]

and--

_In much wisdom is much grief; and he that increaseth knowledge
increaseth sorrow_.[4]

[Footnote 1: Antigone, 1347-8.]

[Footnote 2: Ajax, 554.]

[Footnote 3: Ecclesiasticus, xxii. 11.]

[Footnote 4: Ecclesiastes, i. 18.]

I may remark, however, that a man who has no mental needs, because his
intellect is of the narrow and normal amount, is, in the strict sense
of the word, what is called a _philistine_--an expression at first
peculiar to the German language, a kind of slang term at the
Universities, afterwards used, by analogy, in a higher sense, though
still in its original meaning, as denoting one who is not _a Son of
the Muses_. A philistine is and remains [Greek: amousos anaer]. I
should prefer to take a higher point of view, and apply the term
_philistine_ to people who are always seriously occupied with
realities which are no realities; but as such a definition would be a
transcendental one, and therefore not generally intelligible, it
would hardly be in place in the present treatise, which aims at
being popular. The other definition can be more easily elucidated,
indicating, as it does, satisfactorily enough, the essential nature of
all those qualities which distinguish the philistine. He is defined to
be _a man without mental needs_. From this is follows, firstly, _in
relation to himself_, that he has _no intellectual pleasures_; for, as
was remarked before, there are no real pleasures without real needs.
The philistine's life is animated by no desire to gain knowledge and
insight for their own sake, or to experience that true aeesthetic
pleasure which is so nearly akin to them. If pleasures of this kind
are fashionable, and the philistine finds himself compelled to pay
attention to them, he will force himself to do so, but he will take as
little interest in them as possible. His only real pleasures are of a
sensual kind, and he thinks that these indemnify him for the loss of
the others. To him oysters and champagne are the height of existence;
the aim of his life is to procure what will contribute to his bodily
welfare, and he is indeed in a happy way if this causes him some
trouble. If the luxuries of life are heaped upon him, he will
inevitably be bored, and against boredom he has a great many fancied
remedies, balls, theatres, parties, cards, gambling, horses, women,
drinking, traveling and so on; all of which can not protect a man
from being bored, for where there are no intellectual needs, no
intellectual pleasures are possible. The peculiar characteristic
of the philistine is a dull, dry kind of gravity, akin to that of
animals. Nothing really pleases, or excites, or interests him, for
sensual pleasure is quickly exhausted, and the society of philistines
soon becomes burdensome, and one may even get tired of playing cards.
True, the pleasures of vanity are left, pleasures which he enjoys in
his own way, either by feeling himself superior in point of wealth, or
rank, or influence and power to other people, who thereupon pay
him honor; or, at any rate, by going about with those who have a
superfluity of these blessings, sunning himself in the reflection of
their splendor--what the English call a _snob_.

From the essential nature of the philistine it follows, secondly, _in
regard to others_, that, as he possesses no intellectual, but only
physical need, he will seek the society of those who can satisfy the
latter, but not the former. The last thing he will expect from his
friends is the possession of any sort of intellectual capacity; nay,
if he chances to meet with it, it will rouse his antipathy and
even hatred; simply because in addition to an unpleasant sense of
inferiority, he experiences, in his heart, a dull kind of envy, which
has to be carefully concealed even from himself. Nevertheless, it
sometimes grows into a secret feeling of rancor. But for all that,
it will never occur to him to make his own ideas of worth or value
conform to the standard of such qualities; he will continue to give
the preference to rank and riches, power and influence, which in his
eyes seem to be the only genuine advantages in the world; and his wish
will be to excel in them himself. All this is the consequence of his
being a man _without intellectual needs_. The great affliction of all
philistines is that they have no interest in _ideas_, and that, to
escape being bored, they are in constant need of _realities_. But
realities are either unsatisfactory or dangerous; when they lose their
interest, they become fatiguing. But the ideal world is illimitable
and calm,

  _something afar
  From the sphere of our sorrow_.


NOTE.--In these remarks on the personal qualities which go to make
happiness, I have been mainly concerned with the physical and
intellectual nature of man. For an account of the direct and immediate
influence of _morality_ upon happiness, let me refer to my prize essay
on _The Foundation of Morals_ (Sec. 22.)




CHAPTER III.

PROPERTY, OR WHAT A MAN HAS.


Epicurus divides the needs of mankind into three classes, and the
division made by this great professor of happiness is a true and a
fine one. First come natural and necessary needs, such as, when not
satisfied, produce pain,--food and clothing, _victus et amictus_,
needs which can easily be satisfied. Secondly, there are those needs
which, though natural, are not necessary, such as the gratification of
certain of the senses. I may add, however, that in the report given by
Diogenes Laertius, Epicurus does not mention which of the senses he
means; so that on this point my account of his doctrine is somewhat
more definite and exact than the original. These are needs rather more
difficult to satisfy. The third class consists of needs which are
neither natural nor necessary, the need of luxury and prodigality,
show and splendor, which never come to an end, and are very hard to
satisfy.[1]

[Footnote 1: Cf. Diogenes Laertius, Bk. x., ch. xxvii., pp. 127 and
149; also Cicero _de finibus_, i., 13.]

It is difficult, if not impossible, to define the limits which reason
should impose on the desire for wealth; for there is no absolute or
definite amount of wealth which will satisfy a man. The amount is
always relative, that is to say, just so much as will maintain the
proportion between what he wants and what he gets; for to measure a
man's happiness only by what he gets, and not also by what he expects
to get, is as futile as to try and express a fraction which shall have
a numerator but no denominator. A man never feels the loss of things
which it never occurs to him to ask for; he is just as happy without
them; whilst another, who may have a hundred times as much, feels
miserable because he has not got the one thing he wants. In fact, here
too, every man has an horizon of his own, and he will expect as much
as he thinks it is possible for him to get. If an object within his
horizon looks as though he could confidently reckon on getting it, he
is happy; but if difficulties come in the way, he is miserable. What
lies beyond his horizon has no effect at all upon him. So it is
that the vast possessions of the rich do not agitate the poor, and
conversely, that a wealthy man is not consoled by all his wealth for
the failure of his hopes. Riches, one may say, are like sea-water; the
more you drink the thirstier you become; and the same is true of fame.
The loss of wealth and prosperity leaves a man, as soon as the first
pangs of grief are over, in very much the same habitual temper as
before; and the reason of this is, that as soon as fate diminishes the
amount of his possessions, he himself immediately reduces the amount
of his claims. But when misfortune comes upon us, to reduce the amount
of our claims is just what is most painful; once that we have done so,
the pain becomes less and less, and is felt no more; like an old wound
which has healed. Conversely, when a piece of good fortune befalls us,
our claims mount higher and higher, as there is nothing to regulate
them; it is in this feeling of expansion that the delight of it lies.
But it lasts no longer than the process itself, and when the expansion
is complete, the delight ceases; we have become accustomed to the
increase in our claims, and consequently indifferent to the amount of
wealth which satisfies them. There is a passage in the _Odyssey_[1]
illustrating this truth, of which I may quote the last two lines:

  [Greek: Toios gar noos estin epichthonion anthropon
  Oion eth aemar agei pataer andron te theou te]

--the thoughts of man that dwells on the earth are as the day granted
him by the father of gods and men. Discontent springs from a constant
endeavor to increase the amount of our claims, when we are powerless
to increase the amount which will satisfy them.

[Footnote 1: xviii., 130-7.]

When we consider how full of needs the human race is, how its whole
existence is based upon them, it is not a matter for surprise that
_wealth_ is held in more sincere esteem, nay, in greater honor, than
anything else in the world; nor ought we to wonder that gain is made
the only good of life, and everything that does not lead to it pushed
aside or thrown overboard--philosophy, for instance, by those who
profess it. People are often reproached for wishing for money above
all things, and for loving it more than anything else; but it is
natural and even inevitable for people to love that which, like an
unwearied Proteus, is always ready to turn itself into whatever object
their wandering wishes or manifold desires may for the moment fix
upon. Everything else can satisfy only _one_ wish, _one_ need: food is
good only if you are hungry; wine, if you are able to enjoy it; drugs,
if you are sick; fur for the winter; love for youth, and so on. These
are all only relatively good, [Greek: agatha pros ti]. Money alone is
absolutely good, because it is not only a concrete satisfaction of one
need in particular; it is an abstract satisfaction of all.

If a man has an independent fortune, he should regard it as a bulwark
against the many evils and misfortunes which he may encounter; he
should not look upon it as giving him leave to get what pleasure he
can out of the world, or as rendering it incumbent upon him to spend
it in this way. People who are not born with a fortune, but end by
making a large one through the exercise of whatever talents they
possess, almost always come to think that their talents are their
capital, and that the money they have gained is merely the interest
upon it; they do not lay by a part of their earnings to form a
permanent capital, but spend their money much as they have earned it.
Accordingly, they often fall into poverty; their earnings decreased,
or come to an end altogether, either because their talent is exhausted
by becoming antiquated,--as, for instance, very often happens in
the case of fine art; or else it was valid only under a special
conjunction of circumstances which has now passed away. There is
nothing to prevent those who live on the common labor of their hands
from treating their earnings in that way if they like; because their
kind of skill is not likely to disappear, or, if it does, it can be
replaced by that of their fellow-workmen; morever, the kind of work
they do is always in demand; so that what the proverb says is quite
true, _a useful trade is a mine of gold_. But with artists and
professionals of every kind the case is quite different, and that is
the reason why they are well paid. They ought to build up a capital
out of their earnings; but they recklessly look upon them as merely
interest, and end in ruin. On the other hand, people who inherit money
know, at least, how to distinguish between capital and interest, and
most of them try to make their capital secure and not encroach
upon it; nay, if they can, they put by at least an eighth of their
interests in order to meet future contingencies. So most of them
maintain their position. These few remarks about capital and interest
are not applicable to commercial life, for merchants look upon money
only as a means of further gain, just as a workman regards his tools;
so even if their capital has been entirely the result of their
own efforts, they try to preserve and increase it by using it.
Accordingly, wealth is nowhere so much at home as in the merchant
class.

It will generally be found that those who know what it is to have
been in need and destitution are very much less afraid of it, and
consequently more inclined to extravagance, than those who know
poverty only by hearsay. People who have been born and bred in good
circumstances are as a rule much more careful about the future, more
economical, in fact, than those who, by a piece of good luck, have
suddenly passed from poverty to wealth. This looks as if poverty were
not really such a very wretched thing as it appears from a distance.
The true reason, however, is rather the fact that the man who has been
born into a position of wealth comes to look upon it as something
without which he could no more live than he could live without air; he
guards it as he does his very life; and so he is generally a lover of
order, prudent and economical. But the man who has been born into a
poor position looks upon it as the natural one, and if by any chance
he comes in for a fortune, he regards it as a superfluity, something
to be enjoyed or wasted, because, if it comes to an end, he can get on
just as well as before, with one anxiety the less; or, as Shakespeare
says in Henry VI.,[1]

        .... _the adage must be verified
  That beggars mounted run their horse to death_.

[Footnote 1: Part III., Act 1., Sc. 4.]

But it should be said that people of this kind have a firm and
excessive trust, partly in fate, partly in the peculiar means which
have already raised them out of need and poverty,--a trust not only of
the head, but of the heart also; and so they do not, like the man born
rich, look upon the shallows of poverty as bottomless, but console
themselves with the thought that once they have touched ground again,
they can take another upward flight. It is this trait in human
character which explains the fact that women who were poor before
their marriage often make greater claims, and are more extravagant,
than those who have brought their husbands a rich dowry; because, as
a rule, rich girls bring with them, not only a fortune, but also more
eagerness, nay, more of the inherited instinct, to preserve it, than
poor girls do. If anyone doubts the truth of this, and thinks that it
is just the opposite, he will find authority for his view in Ariosto's
first Satire; but, on the other hand, Dr. Johnson agrees with my
opinion. _A woman of fortune_, he says, _being used to the handling
of money, spends it judiciously; but a woman who gets the command
of money for the first time upon her marriage, has such a gusto in
spending it, that she throws it away with great profusion_.[1] And in
any case let me advise anyone who marries a poor girl not to leave her
the capital but only the interest, and to take especial care that she
has not the management of the children's fortune.

[Footnote 1: Boswell's Life of Johnson: ann: 1776, aetat: 67.]

I do not by any means think that I am touching upon a subject which is
not worth my while to mention when I recommend people to be careful to
preserve what they have earned or inherited. For to start life with
just as much as will make one independent, that is, allow one to live
comfortably without having to work--even if one has only just enough
for oneself, not to speak of a family--is an advantage which cannot be
over-estimated; for it means exemption and immunity from that chronic
disease of penury, which fastens on the life of man like a plague; it
is emancipation from that forced labor which is the natural lot of
every mortal. Only under a favorable fate like this can a man be said
to be born free, to be, in the proper sense of the word, _sui juris_,
master of his own time and powers, and able to say every morning,
_This day is my own_. And just for the same reason the difference
between the man who has a hundred a year and the man who has a
thousand, is infinitely smaller than the difference between the former
and a man who has nothing at all. But inherited wealth reaches its
utmost value when it falls to the individual endowed with mental
powers of a high order, who is resolved to pursue a line of life not
compatible with the making of money; for he is then doubly endowed by
fate and can live for his genius; and he will pay his debt to mankind
a hundred times, by achieving what no other could achieve, by
producing some work which contributes to the general good, and
redounds to the honor of humanity at large. Another, again, may
use his wealth to further philanthropic schemes, and make himself
well-deserving of his fellowmen. But a man who does none of these
things, who does not even try to do them, who never attempts to learn
the rudiments of any branch of knowledge so that he may at least do
what he can towards promoting it--such a one, born as he is into
riches, is a mere idler and thief of time, a contemptible fellow. He
will not even be happy, because, in his case, exemption from need
delivers him up to the other extreme of human suffering, boredom,
which is such martyrdom to him, that he would have been better off if
poverty had given him something to do. And as he is bored he is apt to
be extravagant, and so lose the advantage of which he showed himself
unworthy. Countless numbers of people find themselves in want, simply
because, when they had money, they spent it only to get momentary
relief from the feeling of boredom which oppressed them.

It is quite another matter if one's object is success in political
life, where favor, friends and connections are all-important, in order
to mount by their aid step by step on the ladder of promotion, and
perhaps gain the topmost rung. In this kind of life, it is much better
to be cast upon the world without a penny; and if the aspirant is not
of noble family, but is a man of some talent, it will redound to his
advantage to be an absolute pauper. For what every one most aims at
in ordinary contact with his fellows is to prove them inferior to
himself; and how much more is this the case in politics. Now, it is
only an absolute pauper who has such a thorough conviction of his own
complete, profound and positive inferiority from every point of view,
of his own utter insignificance and worthlessness, that he can take
his place quietly in the political machine.[1] He is the only one who
can keep on bowing low enough, and even go right down upon his face if
necessary; he alone can submit to everything and laugh at it; he alone
knows the entire worthlessness of merit; he alone uses his loudest
voice and his boldest type whenever he has to speak or write of those
who are placed over his head, or occupy any position of influence;
and if they do a little scribbling, he is ready to applaud it as a
masterwork. He alone understands how to beg, and so betimes, when he
is hardly out of his boyhood, he becomes a high priest of that hidden
mystery which Goethe brings to light.

  _Uber's Niederträchtige
  Niemand sich beklage:
  Denn es ist das Machtige
  Was man dir auch sage_:

--it is no use to complain of low aims; for, whatever people may say,
they rule the world.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Schopenhauer is probably here
making one of his most virulent attacks upon Hegel; in this case on
account of what he thought to be the philosopher's abject servility
to the government of his day. Though the Hegelian system has been the
fruitful mother of many liberal ideas, there can be no doubt that
Hegel's influence, in his own lifetime, was an effective support of
Prussian bureaucracy.]

On the other hand, the man who is born with enough to live upon is
generally of a somewhat independent turn of mind; he is accustomed
to keep his head up; he has not learned all the arts of the beggar;
perhaps he even presumes a little upon the possession of talents
which, as he ought to know, can never compete with cringing
mediocrity; in the long run he comes to recognize the inferiority of
those who are placed over his head, and when they try to put insults
upon him, he becomes refractory and shy. This is not the way to get
on in the world. Nay, such a man may at least incline to the opinion
freely expressed by Voltaire: _We have only two days to live; it
is not worth our while to spend them_ in cringing to contemptible
rascals. But alas! let me observe by the way, that _contemptible
rascal_ is an attribute which may be predicated of an abominable
number of people. What Juvenal says--it is difficult to rise if your
poverty is greater than your talent--

  _Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat
  Res angusta domi_--

is more applicable to a career of art and literature than to a
political and social ambition.

Wife and children I have not reckoned amongst a man's possessions: he
is rather in their possession. It would be easier to include friends
under that head; but a man's friends belong to him not a whit more
than he belongs to them.




CHAPTER IV.

POSITION, OR A MAN'S PLACE IN THE ESTIMATION OF OTHERS.


_Section 1.--Reputation_.


By a peculiar weakness of human nature, people generally think too
much about the opinion which others form of them; although the
slightest reflection will show that this opinion, whatever it may
be, is not in itself essential to happiness. Therefore it is hard to
understand why everybody feels so very pleased when he sees that other
people have a good opinion of him, or say anything flattering to his
vanity. If you stroke a cat, it will purr; and, as inevitably, if you
praise a man, a sweet expression of delight will appear on his face;
and even though the praise is a palpable lie, it will be welcome, if
the matter is one on which he prides himself. If only other people
will applaud him, a man may console himself for downright misfortune
or for the pittance he gets from the two sources of human happiness
already discussed: and conversely, it is astonishing how infallibly
a man will be annoyed, and in some cases deeply pained, by any wrong
done to his feeling of self-importance, whatever be the nature,
degree, or circumstances of the injury, or by any depreciation,
slight, or disregard.

If the feeling of honor rests upon this peculiarity of human nature,
it may have a very salutary effect upon the welfare of a great many
people, as a substitute for morality; but upon their happiness, more
especially upon that peace of mind and independence which are so
essential to happiness, its effect will be disturbing and prejudicial
rather than salutary. Therefore it is advisable, from our point of
view, to set limits to this weakness, and duly to consider and rightly
to estimate the relative value of advantages, and thus temper, as far
as possible, this great susceptibility to other people's opinion,
whether the opinion be one flattering to our vanity, or whether it
causes us pain; for in either case it is the same feeling which is
touched. Otherwise, a man is the slave of what other people are
pleased to think,--and how little it requires to disconcert or soothe
the mind that is greedy of praise:

  _Sic leve, sic parvum est, animum quod laudis avarum
  Subruit ac reficit_.[1]

[Footnote 1: Horace, Epist: II., 1, 180.]

Therefore it will very much conduce to our happiness if we duly
compare the value of what a man is in and for himself with what he is
in the eyes of others. Under the former conies everything that fills
up the span of our existence and makes it what it is, in short, all
the advantages already considered and summed up under the heads of
personality and property; and the sphere in which all this takes place
is the man's own consciousness. On the other hand, the sphere of what
we are for other people is their consciousness, not ours; it is the
kind of figure we make in their eyes, together with the thoughts
which this arouses.[1] But this is something which has no direct and
immediate existence for us, but can affect us only mediately and
indirectly, so far, that is, as other people's behavior towards us is
directed by it; and even then it ought to affect us only in so far as
it can move us to modify _what we are in and for ourselves_. Apart
from this, what goes on in other people's consciousness is, as such, a
matter of indifference to us; and in time we get really indifferent to
it, when we come to see how superficial and futile are most people's
thoughts, how narrow their ideas, how mean their sentiments, how
perverse their opinions, and how much of error there is in most of
them; when we learn by experience with what depreciation a man will
speak of his fellow, when he is not obliged to fear him, or thinks
that what he says will not come to his ears. And if ever we have
had an opportunity of seeing how the greatest of men will meet with
nothing but slight from half-a-dozen blockheads, we shall understand
that to lay great value upon what other people say is to pay them too
much honor.

[Footnote 1: Let me remark that people in the highest positions in
life, with all their brilliance, pomp, display, magnificence and
general show, may well say:--Our happiness lies entirely outside us;
for it exists only in the heads of others.]

At all events, a man is in a very bad way, who finds no source of
happiness in the first two classes of blessings already treated of,
but has to seek it in the third, in other words, not in what he is in
himself, but in what he is in the opinion of others. For, after all,
the foundation of our whole nature, and, therefore, of our happiness,
is our physique, and the most essential factor in happiness is
health, and, next in importance after health, the ability to maintain
ourselves in independence and freedom from care. There can be no
competition or compensation between these essential factors on the one
side, and honor, pomp, rank and reputation on the other, however much
value we may set upon the latter. No one would hesitate to sacrifice
the latter for the former, if it were necessary. We should add very
much to our happiness by a timely recognition of the simple truth that
every man's chief and real existence is in his own skin, and not in
other people's opinions; and, consequently, that the actual conditions
of our personal life,--health, temperament, capacity, income, wife,
children, friends, home, are a hundred times more important for our
happiness than what other people are pleased to think of us: otherwise
we shall be miserable. And if people insist that honor is dearer than
life itself, what they really mean is that existence and well-being
are as nothing compared with other people's opinions. Of course, this
may be only an exaggerated way of stating the prosaic truth that
reputation, that is, the opinion others have of us, is indispensable
if we are to make any progress in the world; but I shall come back to
that presently. When we see that almost everything men devote their
lives to attain, sparing no effort and encountering a thousand toils
and dangers in the process, has, in the end, no further object than
to raise themselves in the estimation of others; when we see that
not only offices, titles, decorations, but also wealth, nay, even
knowledge[1] and art, are striven for only to obtain, as the ultimate
goal of all effort, greater respect from one's fellowmen,--is not this
a lamentable proof of the extent to which human folly can go? To set
much too high a value on other people's opinion is a common error
everywhere; an error, it may be, rooted in human nature itself, or
the result of civilization, and social arrangements generally; but,
whatever its source, it exercises a very immoderate influence on all
we do, and is very prejudicial to our happiness. We can trace it from
a timorous and slavish regard for what other people will say, up to
the feeling which made Virginius plunge the dagger into his daughter's
heart, or induces many a man to sacrifice quiet, riches, health and
even life itself, for posthumous glory. Undoubtedly this feeling is a
very convenient instrument in the hands of those who have the control
or direction of their fellowmen; and accordingly we find that in
every scheme for training up humanity in the way it should go, the
maintenance and strengthening of the feeling of honor occupies an
important place. But it is quite a different matter in its effect
on human happiness, of which it is here our object to treat; and we
should rather be careful to dissuade people from setting too much
store by what others think of them. Daily experience shows us,
however, that this is just the mistake people persist in making; most
men set the utmost value precisely on what other people think, and
are more concerned about it than about what goes on in their own
consciousness, which is the thing most immediately and directly
present to them. They reverse the natural order,--regarding the
opinions of others as real existence and their own consciousness
as something shadowy; making the derivative and secondary into the
principal, and considering the picture they present to the world of
more importance than their own selves. By thus trying to get a direct
and immediate result out of what has no really direct or immediate
existence, they fall into the kind of folly which is called
_vanity_--the appropriate term for that which has no solid or
instrinsic value. Like a miser, such people forget the end in their
eagerness to obtain the means.

[Footnote 1: _Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc sciat alter_,
(Persins i, 27)--knowledge is no use unless others know that you have
it.]

The truth is that the value we set upon the opinion of others, and our
constant endeavor in respect of it, are each quite out of proportion
to any result we may reasonably hope to attain; so that this attention
to other people's attitude may be regarded as a kind of universal
mania which every one inherits. In all we do, almost the first thing
we think about is, what will people say; and nearly half the troubles
and bothers of life may be traced to our anxiety on this score; it
is the anxiety which is at the bottom of all that feeling of
self-importance, which is so often mortified because it is so very
morbidly sensitive. It is solicitude about what others will say that
underlies all our vanity and pretension, yes, and all our show and
swagger too. Without it, there would not be a tenth part of the luxury
which exists. Pride in every form, _point d'honneur_ and _punctilio_,
however varied their kind or sphere, are at bottom nothing but
this--anxiety about what others will say--and what sacrifices it
costs! One can see it even in a child; and though it exists at every
period of life, it is strongest in age; because, when the capacity for
sensual pleasure fails, vanity and pride have only avarice to share
their dominion. Frenchmen, perhaps, afford the best example of
this feeling, and amongst them it is a regular epidemic, appearing
sometimes in the most absurd ambition, or in a ridiculous kind of
national vanity and the most shameless boasting. However, they
frustrate their own gains, for other people make fun of them and call
them _la grande nation_.

By way of specially illustrating this perverse and exuberant respect
for other people's opinion, let me take passage from the _Times_ of
March 31st, 1846, giving a detailed account of the execution of one
Thomas Wix, an apprentice who, from motives of vengeance, had
murdered his master. Here we have very unusual circumstances and an
extraordinary character, though one very suitable for our purpose; and
these combine to give a striking picture of this folly, which is so
deeply rooted in human nature, and allow us to form an accurate notion
of the extent to which it will go. On the morning of the execution,
says the report, _the rev. ordinary was early in attendance upon
him, but Wix, beyond a quiet demeanor, betrayed no interest in his
ministrations, appearing to feel anxious only to acquit himself
"bravely" before the spectators of his ignomininous end.... In the
procession Wix fell into his proper place with alacrity, and, as he
entered the Chapel-yard, remarked, sufficiently loud to be heard by
several persons near him, "Now, then, as Dr. Dodd said, I shall soon
know the grand secret." On reaching the scaffold, the miserable wretch
mounted the drop without the slightest assistance, and when he got
to the centre, he bowed to the spectators twice, a proceeding which
called forth a tremendous cheer from the degraded crowd beneath_.

This is an admirable example of the way in which a man, with death in
the most dreadful form before his very eyes, and eternity beyond it,
will care for nothing but the impression he makes upon a crowd of
gapers, and the opinion he leaves behind him in their heads. There was
much the same kind of thing in the case of Lecompte, who was executed
at Frankfurt, also in 1846, for an attempt on the king's life. At the
trial he was very much annoyed that he was not allowed to appear, in
decent attire, before the Upper House; and on the day of the execution
it was a special grief to him that he was not permitted to shave. It
is not only in recent times that this kind of thing has been known to
happen. Mateo Aleman tells us, in the Introduction to his celebrated
romance, _Juzman de Alfarache_, that many infatuated criminals,
instead of devoting their last hours to the welfare of their souls,
as they ought to have done, neglect this duty for the purpose of
preparing and committing to memory a speech to be made from the
scaffold.

I take these extreme cases as being the best illustrations to what I
mean; for they give us a magnified reflection of our own nature. The
anxieties of all of us, our worries, vexations, bothers, troubles,
uneasy apprehensions and strenuous efforts are due, in perhaps the
large majority of instances, to what other people will say; and we are
just as foolish in this respect as those miserable criminals. Envy and
hatred are very often traceable to a similar source.

Now, it is obvious that happiness, which consists for the most part in
peace of mind and contentment, would be served by nothing so much
as by reducing this impulse of human nature within reasonable
limits,--which would perhaps make it one fiftieth part of what it is
now. By doing so, we should get rid of a thorn in the flesh which is
always causing us pain. But it is a very difficult task, because
the impulse in question is a natural and innate perversity of human
nature. Tacitus says, _The lust of fame is the last that a wise man
shakes off_[1] The only way of putting an end to this universal
folly is to see clearly that it is a folly; and this may be done by
recognizing the fact that most of the opinions in men's heads are apt
to be false, perverse, erroneous and absurd, and so in themselves
unworthy of attention; further, that other people's opinions can
have very little real and positive influence upon us in most of the
circumstances and affairs of life. Again, this opinion is generally of
such an unfavorable character that it would worry a man to death to
hear everything that was said of him, or the tone in which he was
spoken of. And finally, among other things, we should be clear about
the fact that honor itself has no really direct, but only an indirect,
value. If people were generally converted from this universal folly,
the result would be such an addition to our piece of mind and
cheerfulness as at present seems inconceivable; people would present
a firmer and more confident front to the world, and generally behave
with less embarrassment and restraint. It is observable that a retired
mode of life has an exceedingly beneficial influence on our peace
of mind, and this is mainly because we thus escape having to live
constantly in the sight of others, and pay everlasting regard to their
casual opinions; in a word, we are able to return upon ourselves. At
the same time a good deal of positive misfortune might be avoided,
which we are now drawn into by striving after shadows, or, to speak
more correctly, by indulging a mischievous piece of folly; and we
should consequently have more attention to give to solid realities and
enjoy them with less interruption that at present. But [Greek: chalepa
ga kala]--what is worth doing is hard to do.

[Footnote 1: Hist., iv., 6.]


_Section 2.--Pride_.


The folly of our nature which we are discussing puts forth three
shoots, ambition, vanity and pride. The difference between the last
two is this: _pride_ is an established conviction of one's own
paramount worth in some particular respect; while _vanity_ is the
desire of rousing such a conviction in others, and it is generally
accompanied by the secret hope of ultimately coming to the same
conviction oneself. Pride works _from within_; it is the direct
appreciation of oneself. Vanity is the desire to arrive at this
appreciation indirectly, _from without_. So we find that vain people
are talkative, proud, and taciturn. But the vain person ought to be
aware that the good opinion of others, which he strives for, may be
obtained much more easily and certainly by persistent silence than by
speech, even though he has very good things to say. Anyone who wishes
to affect pride is not therefore a proud man; but he will soon have to
drop this, as every other, assumed character.

It is only a firm, unshakeable conviction of pre-eminent worth and
special value which makes a man proud in the true sense of the
word,--a conviction which may, no doubt, be a mistaken one or rest on
advantages which are of an adventitious and conventional character:
still pride is not the less pride for all that, so long as it be
present in real earnest. And since pride is thus rooted in conviction,
it resembles every other form of knowledge in not being within our own
arbitrament. Pride's worst foe,--I mean its greatest obstacle,--is
vanity, which courts the applause of the world in order to gain the
necessary foundation for a high opinion of one's own worth, whilst
pride is based upon a pre-existing conviction of it.

It is quite true that pride is something which is generally found
fault with, and cried down; but usually, I imagine, by those who have
nothing upon which they can pride themselves. In view of the impudence
and foolhardiness of most people, anyone who possesses any kind of
superiority or merit will do well to keep his eyes fixed on it, if
he does not want it to be entirely forgotten; for if a man is
good-natured enough to ignore his own privileges, and hob-nob with the
generality of other people, as if he were quite on their level, they
will be sure to treat him, frankly and candidly, as one of themselves.
This is a piece of advice I would specially offer to those whose
superiority is of the highest kind--real superiority, I mean, of a
purely personal nature--which cannot, like orders and titles, appeal
to the eye or ear at every moment; as, otherwise, they will find that
familiarity breeds contempt, or, as the Romans used to say, _sus
Minervam. Joke with a slave, and he'll soon show his heels_, is an
excellent Arabian proverb; nor ought we to despise what Horace says,

    _Sume superbiam
  Quaesitam meritis_.

--usurp the fame you have deserved. No doubt, when modesty was made a
virtue, it was a very advantageous thing for the fools; for everybody
is expected to speak of himself as if he were one. This is leveling
down indeed; for it comes to look as if there were nothing but fools
in the world.

The cheapest sort of pride is national pride; for if a man is proud of
his own nation, it argues that he has no qualities of his own of which
he can be proud; otherwise he would not have recourse to those which
he shares with so many millions of his fellowmen. The man who is
endowed with important personal qualities will be only too ready to
see clearly in what respects his own nation falls short, since their
failings will be constantly before his eyes. But every miserable fool
who has nothing at all of which he can be proud adopts, as a last
resource, pride in the nation to which he belongs; he is ready and
glad to defend all its faults and follies tooth and nail, thus
reimbursing himself for his own inferiority. For example, if you speak
of the stupid and degrading bigotry of the English nation with the
contempt it deserves, you will hardly find one Englishman in fifty to
agree with you; but if there should be one, he will generally happen
to be an intelligent man.

The Germans have no national pride, which shows how honest they are,
as everybody knows! and how dishonest are those who, by a piece
of ridiculous affectation, pretend that they are proud of their
country--the _Deutsche Bruder_ and the demagogues who flatter the
mob in order to mislead it. I have heard it said that gunpowder was
invented by a German. I doubt it. Lichtenberg asks, _Why is it that a
man who is not a German does not care about pretending that he is one;
and that if he makes any pretence at all, it is to be a Frenchman or
an Englishman_?[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--It should be remembered that these
remarks were written in the earlier part of the present century, and
that a German philosopher now-a-days, even though he were as apt to
say bitter things as Schopenhauer, could hardly write in a similar
strain.]

However that may be, individuality is a far more important thing
than nationality, and in any given man deserves a thousand-fold more
consideration. And since you cannot speak of national character
without referring to large masses of people, it is impossible to be
loud in your praises and at the same time honest. National character
is only another name for the particular form which the littleness,
perversity and baseness of mankind take in every country. If we become
disgusted with one, we praise another, until we get disgusted with
this too. Every nation mocks at other nations, and all are right.

The contents of this chapter, which treats, as I have said, of what we
represent in the world, or what we are in the eyes of others, may be
further distributed under three heads: honor rank and fame.


_Section 3.--Rank_.


Let us take rank first, as it may be dismissed in a few words,
although it plays an important part in the eyes of the masses and of
the philistines, and is a most useful wheel in the machinery of the
State.

It has a purely conventional value. Strictly speaking, it is a sham;
its method is to exact an artificial respect, and, as a matter of
fact, the whole thing is a mere farce.

Orders, it may be said, are bills of exchange drawn on public opinion,
and the measure of their value is the credit of the drawer. Of course,
as a substitute for pensions, they save the State a good deal of
money; and, besides, they serve a very useful purpose, if they are
distributed with discrimination and judgment. For people in general
have eyes and ears, it is true; but not much else, very little
judgment indeed, or even memory. There are many services of the State
quite beyond the range of their understanding; others, again, are
appreciated and made much of for a time, and then soon forgotten. It
seems to me, therefore, very proper, that a cross or a star should
proclaim to the mass of people always and everywhere, _This man is not
like you; he has done something_. But orders lose their value when
they are distributed unjustly, or without due selection, or in too
great numbers: a prince should be as careful in conferring them as a
man of business is in signing a bill. It is a pleonasm to inscribe on
any order _for distinguished service_; for every order ought to be for
distinguished service. That stands to reason.


_Section 4.--Honor_.


Honor is a much larger question than rank, and more difficult to
discuss. Let us begin by trying to define it.

If I were to say _Honor is external conscience, and conscience is
inward honor_, no doubt a good many people would assent; but there
would be more show than reality about such a definition, and it would
hardly go to the root of the matter. I prefer to say, _Honor is, on
its objective side, other people's opinion of what we are worth; on
its subjective side, it is the respect we pay to this opinion_. From
the latter point of view, to be _a man of honor_ is to exercise what
is often a very wholesome, but by no means a purely moral, influence.

The feelings of honor and shame exist in every man who is not utterly
depraved, and honor is everywhere recognized as something particularly
valuable. The reason of this is as follows. By and in himself a man
can accomplish very little; he is like Robinson Crusoe on a desert
island. It is only in society that a man's powers can be called into
full activity. He very soon finds this out when his consciousness
begins to develop, and there arises in him the desire to be looked
upon as a useful member of society, as one, that is, who is capable
of playing his part as a man--_pro parte virili_--thereby acquiring a
right to the benefits of social life. Now, to be a useful member of
society, one must do two things: firstly, what everyone is expected to
do everywhere; and, secondly, what one's own particular position in
the world demands and requires.

But a man soon discovers that everything depends upon his being
useful, not in his own opinion, but in the opinion of others; and so
he tries his best to make that favorable impression upon the world, to
which he attaches such a high value. Hence, this primitive and innate
characteristic of human nature, which is called the feeling of honor,
or, under another aspect, the feeling of shame--_verecundia_. It is
this which brings a blush to his cheeks at the thought of having
suddenly to fall in the estimation of others, even when he knows that
he is innocent, nay, even if his remissness extends to no absolute
obligation, but only to one which he has taken upon himself of his own
free will. Conversely, nothing in life gives a man so much courage as
the attainment or renewal of the conviction that other people regard
him with favor; because it means that everyone joins to give him help
and protection, which is an infinitely stronger bulwark against the
ills of life than anything he can do himself.

The variety of relations in which a man can stand to other people so
as to obtain their confidence, that is, their good opinion, gives rise
to a distinction between several kinds of honor, resting chiefly on
the different bearings that _meum_ may take to _tuum_; or, again, on
the performance of various pledges; or finally, on the relation of the
sexes. Hence, there are three main kinds of honor, each of which takes
various forms--civic honor, official honor, and sexual honor.

_Civic honor_ has the widest sphere of all. It consists in the
assumption that we shall pay unconditional respect to the rights of
others, and, therefore, never use any unjust or unlawful means of
getting what we want. It is the condition of all peaceable intercourse
between man and man; and it is destroyed by anything that openly and
manifestly militates against this peaceable intercourse, anything,
accordingly, which entails punishment at the hands of the law, always
supposing that the punishment is a just one.

The ultimate foundation of honor is the conviction that moral
character is unalterable: a single bad action implies that future
actions of the same kind will, under similar circumstances, also be
bad. This is well expressed by the English use of the word _character_
as meaning credit, reputation, honor. Hence honor, once lost, can
never be recovered; unless the loss rested on some mistake, such as
may occur if a man is slandered or his actions viewed in a false
light. So the law provides remedies against slander, libel, and even
insult; for insult though it amounts to no more than mere abuse, is a
kind of summary slander with a suppression of the reasons. What I
mean may be well put in the Greek phrase--not quoted from any
author--[Greek: estin hae loidoria diabolae]. It is true that if a
man abuses another, he is simply showing that he has no real or true
causes of complaint against him; as, otherwise, he would bring these
forward as the premises, and rely upon his hearers to draw the
conclusion themselves: instead of which, he gives the conclusion and
leaves out the premises, trusting that people will suppose that he has
done so only for the sake of being brief.

Civic honor draws its existence and name from the middle classes;
but it applies equally to all, not excepting the highest. No man can
disregard it, and it is a very serious thing, of which every one
should be careful not to make light. The man who breaks confidence has
for ever forfeited confidence, whatever he may do, and whoever he may
be; and the bitter consequences of the loss of confidence can never be
averted.

There is a sense in which honor may be said to have a _negative_
character in opposition to the _positive_ character of fame. For honor
is not the opinion people have of particular qualities which a man may
happen to possess exclusively: it is rather the opinion they have of
the qualities which a man may be expected to exhibit, and to which
he should not prove false. Honor, therefore, means that a man is not
exceptional; fame, that he is. Fame is something which must be won;
honor, only something which must not be lost. The absence of fame is
obscurity, which is only a negative; but loss of honor is shame, which
is a positive quality. This negative character of honor must not be
confused with anything _passive_; for honor is above all things active
in its working. It is the only quality which proceeds _directly_ from
the man who exhibits it; it is concerned entirely with what he does
and leaves undone, and has nothing to do with the actions of others or
the obstacles they place in his way. It is something entirely in our
own power--[Greek: ton ephaemon]. This distinction, as we shall see
presently, marks off true honor from the sham honor of chivalry.

Slander is the only weapon by which honor can be attacked from
without; and the only way to repel the attack is to confute the
slander with the proper amount of publicity, and a due unmasking of
him who utters it.

The reason why respect is paid to age is that old people have
necessarily shown in the course of their lives whether or not they
have been able to maintain their honor unblemished; while that of
young people has not been put to the proof, though they are credited
with the possession of it. For neither length of years,--equalled,
as it is, and even excelled, in the case of the lower animals,--nor,
again, experience, which is only a closer knowledge of the world's
ways, can be any sufficient reason for the respect which the young are
everywhere required to show towards the old: for if it were merely a
matter of years, the weakness which attends on age would call rather
for consideration than for respect. It is, however, a remarkable fact
that white hair always commands reverence--a reverence really innate
and instinctive. Wrinkles--a much surer sign of old age--command
no reverence at all; you never hear any one speak of _venerable
wrinkles_; but _venerable white hair_ is a common expression.

Honor has only an indirect value. For, as I explained at the beginning
of this chapter, what other people think of us, if it affects us at
all, can affect us only in so far as it governs their behavior towards
us, and only just so long as we live with, or have to do with, them.
But it is to society alone that we owe that safety which we and our
possessions enjoy in a state of civilization; in all we do we need the
help of others, and they, in their turn, must have confidence in
us before they can have anything to do with us. Accordingly, their
opinion of us is, indirectly, a matter of great importance; though I
cannot see how it can have a direct or immediate value. This is an
opinion also held by Cicero. I _quite agree_, he writes, _with what
Chrysippus and Diogenes used to say, that a good reputation is not
worth raising a finger to obtain, if it were not that it is so
useful_.[1] This truth has been insisted upon at great length by
Helvetius in his chief work _De l'Esprit_,[2] the conclusion of which
is that _we love esteem not for its own sake, but solely for the
advantages which it brings_. And as the means can never be more than
the end, that saying, of which so much is made, _Honor is dearer than
life itself_, is, as I have remarked, a very exaggerated statement. So
much then, for civic honor.

[Footnote 1: _De finilus_ iii., 17.]

[Footnote 2: _Disc_: iii. 17.]

_Official honor_ is the general opinion of other people that a man who
fills any office really has the necessary qualities for the proper
discharge of all the duties which appertain to it. The greater and
more important the duties a man has to discharge in the State, and the
higher and more influential the office which he fills, the stronger
must be the opinion which people have of the moral and intellectual
qualities which render him fit for his post. Therefore, the higher
his position, the greater must be the degree of honor paid to him,
expressed, as it is, in titles, orders and the generally subservient
behavior of others towards him. As a rule, a man's official rank
implies the particular degree of honor which ought to be paid to him,
however much this degree may be modified by the capacity of the masses
to form any notion of its importance. Still, as a matter of fact,
greater honor is paid to a man who fulfills special duties than to
the common citizen, whose honor mainly consists in keeping clear of
dishonor.

Official honor demands, further, that the man who occupies an office
must maintain respect for it, for the sake both of his colleagues
and of those who will come after him. This respect an official can
maintain by a proper observance of his duties, and by repelling any
attack that may be made upon the office itself or upon its occupant:
he must not, for instance, pass over unheeded any statement to the
effect that the duties of the office are not properly discharged, or
that the office itself does not conduce to the public welfare. He must
prove the unwarrantable nature of such attacks by enforcing the legal
penalty for them.

Subordinate to the honor of official personages comes that of those
who serve the State in any other capacity, as doctors, lawyers,
teachers, anyone, in short, who, by graduating in any subject, or by
any other public declaration that he is qualified to exercise some
special skill, claims to practice it; in a word, the honor of all
those who take any public pledges whatever. Under this head comes
military honor, in the true sense of the word, the opinion that people
who have bound themselves to defend their country really possess
the requisite qualities which will enable them to do so, especially
courage, personal bravery and strength, and that they are perfectly
ready to defend their country to the death, and never and under
any circumstances desert the flag to which they have once sworn
allegiance. I have here taken official honor in a wider sense than
that in which it is generally used, namely, the respect due by
citizens to an office itself.

In treating of _sexual honor_ and the principles on which it rests, a
little more attention and analysis are necessary; and what I shall
say will support my contention that all honor really rests upon a
utilitarian basis. There are two natural divisions of the subject--the
honor of women and the honor of men, in either side issuing in a
well-understood _esprit de corps_. The former is by far the more
important of the two, because the most essential feature in woman's
life is her relation to man.

Female honor is the general opinion in regard to a girl that she is
pure, and in regard to a wife that she is faithful. The importance of
this opinion rests upon the following considerations. Women depend
upon men in all the relations of life; men upon women, it might
be said, in one only. So an arrangement is made for mutual
interdependence--man undertaking responsibility for all woman's needs
and also for the children that spring from their union--an arrangement
on which is based the welfare of the whole female race. To carry out
this plan, women have to band together with a show of _esprit de
corps_, and present one undivided front to their common enemy,
man,--who possesses all the good things of the earth, in virtue of his
superior physical and intellectual power,--in order to lay siege to
and conquer him, and so get possession of him and a share of those
good things. To this end the honor of all women depends upon the
enforcement of the rule that no woman should give herself to a man
except in marriage, in order that every man may be forced, as it
were, to surrender and ally himself with a woman; by this arrangement
provision is made for the whole of the female race. This is a result,
however, which can be obtained only by a strict observance of the
rule; and, accordingly, women everywhere show true _esprit de corps_
in carefully insisting upon its maintenance. Any girl who commits a
breach of the rule betrays the whole female race, because its welfare
would be destroyed if every woman were to do likewise; so she is cast
out with shame as one who has lost her honor. No woman will have
anything more to do with her; she is avoided like the plague. The same
doom is awarded to a woman who breaks the marriage tie; for in so
doing she is false to the terms upon which the man capitulated; and
as her conduct is such as to frighten other men from making a similar
surrender, it imperils the welfare of all her sisters. Nay, more; this
deception and coarse breach of troth is a crime punishable by the
loss, not only of personal, but also of civic honor. This is why we
minimize the shame of a girl, but not of a wife; because, in the
former case, marriage can restore honor, while in the latter, no
atonement can be made for the breach of contract.

Once this _esprit de corps_ is acknowledged to be the foundation
of female honor, and is seen to be a wholesome, nay, a necessary
arrangement, as at bottom a matter of prudence and interest, its
extreme importance for the welfare of women will be recognized. But
it does not possess anything more than a relative value. It is no
absolute end, lying beyond all other aims of existence and valued
above life itself. In this view, there will be nothing to applaud
in the forced and extravagant conduct of a Lucretia or a
Virginius--conduct which can easily degenerate into tragic farce, and
produce a terrible feeling of revulsion. The conclusion of _Emilia
Galotti_, for instance, makes one leave the theatre completely ill at
ease; and, on the other hand, all the rules of female honor cannot
prevent a certain sympathy with Clara in _Egmont_. To carry this
principle of female honor too far is to forget the end in thinking
of the means--and this is just what people often do; for such
exaggeration suggests that the value of sexual honor is absolute;
while the truth is that it is more relative than any other kind. One
might go so far as to say that its value is purely conventional, when
one sees from Thomasius how in all ages and countries, up to the time
of the Reformation, irregularities were permitted and recognized by
law, with no derogation to female honor,--not to speak of the temple
of Mylitta at Babylon.[1]

[Footnote 1: Heroditus, i. 199.]

There are also of course certain circumstances in civil life which
make external forms of marriage impossible, especially in Catholic
countries, where there is no such thing as divorce. Ruling princes
everywhere, would, in my opinion, do much better, from a moral point
of view, to dispense with forms altogether rather than contract a
morganatic marriage, the descendants of which might raise claims to
the throne if the legitimate stock happened to die out; so that there
is a possibility, though, perhaps, a remote one, that a morganatic
marriage might produce a civil war. And, besides, such a marriage,
concluded in defiance of all outward ceremony, is a concession made to
women and priests--two classes of persons to whom one should be most
careful to give as little tether as possible. It is further to be
remarked that every man in a country can marry the woman of his
choice, except one poor individual, namely, the prince. His hand
belongs to his country, and can be given in marriage only for reasons
of State, that is, for the good of the country. Still, for all that,
he is a man; and, as a man, he likes to follow whither his heart
leads. It is an unjust, ungrateful and priggish thing to forbid, or
to desire to forbid, a prince from following his inclinations in this
matter; of course, as long as the lady has no influence upon the
Government of the country. From her point of view she occupies an
exceptional position, and does not come under the ordinary rules of
sexual honor; for she has merely given herself to a man who loves her,
and whom she loves but cannot marry. And in general, the fact that the
principle of female honor has no origin in nature, is shown by the
many bloody sacrifices which have been offered to it,--the murder of
children and the mother's suicide. No doubt a girl who contravenes the
code commits a breach of faith against her whole sex; but this faith
is one which is only secretly taken for granted, and not sworn to. And
since, in most cases, her own prospects suffer most immediately, her
folly is infinitely greater than her crime.

The corresponding virtue in men is a product of the one I have been
discussing. It is their _esprit de corps_, which demands that, once
a man has made that surrender of himself in marriage which is so
advantageous to his conqueror, he shall take care that the terms of
the treaty are maintained; both in order that the agreement itself
may lose none of its force by the permission of any laxity in its
observance, and that men, having given up everything, may, at
least, be assured of their bargain, namely, exclusive possession.
Accordingly, it is part of a man's honor to resent a breach of the
marriage tie on the part of his wife, and to punish it, at the
very least by separating from her. If he condones the offence, his
fellowmen cry shame upon him; but the shame in this case is not nearly
so foul as that of the woman who has lost her honor; the stain is by
no means of so deep a dye--_levioris notae macula_;--because a man's
relation to woman is subordinate to many other and more important
affairs in his life. The two great dramatic poets of modern times
have each taken man's honor as the theme of two plays; Shakespeare in
_Othello_ and _The Winter's Tale_, and Calderon in _El medico de su
honra_, (The Physician of his Honor), and _A secreto agravio secreta
venganza_, (for Secret Insult Secret Vengeance). It should be said,
however, that honor demands the punishment of the wife only; to punish
her paramour too, is a work of supererogation. This confirms the view
I have taken, that a man's honor originates in _esprit de corps_.

The kind of honor which I have been discussing hitherto has always
existed in its various forms and principles amongst all nations and
at all times; although the history of female honor shows that its
principles have undergone certain local modifications at different
periods. But there is another species of honor which differs from this
entirely, a species of honor of which the Greeks and Romans had
no conception, and up to this day it is perfectly unknown amongst
Chinese, Hindoos or Mohammedans. It is a kind of honor which arose
only in the Middle Age, and is indigenous only to Christian Europe,
nay, only to an extremely small portion of the population, that is
to say, the higher classes of society and those who ape them. It is
_knightly honor_, or _point d'honneur_. Its principles are quite
different from those which underlie the kind of honor I have been
treating until now, and in some respects are even opposed to them. The
sort I am referring to produces the _cavalier_; while the other kind
creates the _man of honor_. As this is so, I shall proceed to give an
explanation of its principles, as a kind of code or mirror of knightly
courtesy.

(1.) To begin with, honor of this sort consists, not in other people's
opinion of what we are worth, but wholly and entirely in whether they
express it or not, no matter whether they really have any opinion at
all, let alone whether they know of reasons for having one. Other
people may entertain the worst opinion of us in consequence of what we
do, and may despise us as much as they like; so long as no one dares
to give expression to his opinion, our honor remains untarnished. So
if our actions and qualities compel the highest respect from other
people, and they have no option but to give this respect,--as soon as
anyone, no matter how wicked or foolish he may be, utters something
depreciatory of us, our honor is offended, nay, gone for ever, unless
we can manage to restore it. A superfluous proof of what I say,
namely, that knightly honor depends, not upon what people think, but
upon what they say, is furnished by the fact that insults can be
withdrawn, or, if necessary, form the subject of an apology, which
makes them as though they had never been uttered. Whether the opinion
which underlays the expression has also been rectified, and why
the expression should ever have been used, are questions which are
perfectly unimportant: so long as the statement is withdrawn, all is
well. The truth is that conduct of this kind aims, not at earning
respect, but at extorting it.

(2.) In the second place, this sort of honor rests, not on what a man
does, but on what he suffers, the obstacles he encounters; differing
from the honor which prevails in all else, in consisting, not in what
he says or does himself, but in what another man says or does. His
honor is thus at the mercy of every man who can talk it away on the
tip of his tongue; and if he attacks it, in a moment it is gone for
ever,--unless the man who is attacked manages to wrest it back again
by a process which I shall mention presently, a process which involves
danger to his life, health, freedom, property and peace of mind. A
man's whole conduct may be in accordance with the most righteous and
noble principles, his spirit may be the purest that ever breathed, his
intellect of the very highest order; and yet his honor may disappear
the moment that anyone is pleased to insult him, anyone at all who has
not offended against this code of honor himself, let him be the most
worthless rascal or the most stupid beast, an idler, gambler, debtor,
a man, in short, of no account at all. It is usually this sort of
fellow who likes to insult people; for, as Seneca[1] rightly remarks,
_ut quisque contemtissimus et ludibrio est, ita solutissimae est_, the
more contemptible and ridiculous a man is,--the readier he is with his
tongue. His insults are most likely to be directed against the very
kind of man I have described, because people of different tastes can
never be friends, and the sight of pre-eminent merit is apt to
raise the secret ire of a ne'er-do-well. What Goethe says in the
_Westöstlicher Divan_ is quite true, that it is useless to complain
against your enemies; for they can never become your friends, if your
whole being is a standing reproach to them:--

  _Was klagst du über Feinde?
  Sollten Solche je warden Freunde
  Denen das Wesen, wie du bist,
  Im stillen ein ewiger Vorwurf ist_?

[Footnote 1: _De Constantia_, 11.]

It is obvious that people of this worthless description have good
cause to be thankful to the principle of honor, because it puts them
on a level with people who in every other respect stand far above
them. If a fellow likes to insult any one, attribute to him,
for example, some bad quality, this is taken _prima facie_ as a
well-founded opinion, true in fact; a decree, as it were, with all the
force of law; nay, if it is not at once wiped out in blood, it is a
judgment which holds good and valid to all time. In other words,
the man who is insulted remains--in the eyes of all _honorable
people_--what the man who uttered the insult--even though he were the
greatest wretch on earth--was pleased to call him; for he has _put
up with_ the insult--the technical term, I believe. Accordingly, all
_honorable people_ will have nothing more to do with him, and treat
him like a leper, and, it may be, refuse to go into any company where
he may be found, and so on.

This wise proceeding may, I think, be traced back to the fact that in
the Middle Age, up to the fifteenth century, it was not the accuser in
any criminal process who had to prove the guilt of the accused, but
the accused who had to prove his innocence.[1] This he could do by
swearing he was not guilty; and his backers--_consacramentales_--had
to come and swear that in their opinion he was incapable of perjury.
If he could find no one to help him in this way, or the accuser took
objection to his backers, recourse was had to trial by _the Judgment
of God_, which generally meant a duel. For the accused was now _in
disgrace_,[2] and had to clear himself. Here, then, is the origin
of the notion of disgrace, and of that whole system which prevails
now-a-days amongst _honorable people_--only that the oath is omitted.
This is also the explanation of that deep feeling of indignation which
_honorable people_ are called upon to show if they are given the lie;
it is a reproach which they say must be wiped out in blood. It seldom
comes to this pass, however, though lies are of common occurrence; but
in England, more than elsewhere, it is a superstition which has taken
very deep root. As a matter of order, a man who threatens to kill
another for telling a lie should never have told one himself. The
fact is, that the criminal trial of the Middle Age also admitted of a
shorter form. In reply to the charge, the accused answered: _That is
a lie_; whereupon it was left to be decided by _the Judgment of God_.
Hence, the code of knightly honor prescribes that, when the lie is
given, an appeal to arms follows as a matter of course. So much, then,
for the theory of insult.

[Footnote 1: See C.G. von Waehter's _Beiträge zur deutschen
Geschichte_, especially the chapter on criminal law.]

[Footnote 2: _Translator's Note_.--It is true that this expression has
another special meaning in the technical terminology of Chivalry,
but it is the nearest English equivalent which I can find for the
German--_ein Bescholtener_]

But there is something even worse than insult, something so dreadful
that I must beg pardon of all _honorable people_ for so much as
mentioning it in this code of knightly honor; for I know they will
shiver, and their hair will stand on end, at the very thought of
it--the _summum malum_, the greatest evil on earth, worse than death
and damnation. A man may give another--_horrible dictu_!--a slap or a
blow. This is such an awful thing, and so utterly fatal to all
honor, that, while any other species of insult may be healed by
blood-letting, this can be cured only by the _coup-de-grace_.

(3.) In the third place, this kind of honor has absolutely nothing
to do with what a man may be in and for himself; or, again, with the
question whether his moral character can ever become better or worse,
and all such pedantic inquiries. If your honor happens to be attacked,
or to all appearances gone, it can very soon be restored in its
entirety if you are only quick enough in having recourse to the one
universal remedy--_a duel_. But if the aggressor does not belong to
the classes which recognize the code of knightly honor, or has himself
once offended against it, there is a safer way of meeting any attack
upon your honor, whether it consists in blows, or merely in words.
If you are armed, you can strike down your opponent on the spot, or
perhaps an hour later. This will restore your honor.

But if you wish to avoid such an extreme step, from fear of any
unpleasant consequences arising therefrom, or from uncertainty as to
whether the aggressor is subject to the laws of knightly honor or
not, there is another means of making your position good, namely, the
_Avantage_. This consists in returning rudeness with still greater
rudeness; and if insults are no use, you can try a blow, which forms a
sort of climax in the redemption of your honor; for instance, a box on
the ear may be cured by a blow with a stick, and a blow with a stick
by a thrashing with a horsewhip; and, as the approved remedy for this
last, some people recommend you to spit at your opponent.[1] If all
these means are of no avail, you must not shrink from drawing blood.
And the reason for these methods of wiping out insult is, in this
code, as follows:

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_. It must be remembered that
Schopenhauer is here describing, or perhaps caricaturing the manners
and customs of the German aristocracy of half a century ago. Now, of
course, _nous avons change tout cela_!]

(4.) To receive an insult is disgraceful; to give one, honorable. Let
me take an example. My opponent has truth, right and reason on his
side. Very well. I insult him. Thereupon right and honor leave him and
come to me, and, for the time being, he has lost them--until he gets
them back, not by the exercise of right or reason, but by shooting and
sticking me. Accordingly, rudeness is a quality which, in point of
honor, is a substitute for any other and outweighs them all. The
rudest is always right. What more do you want? However stupid, bad or
wicked a man may have been, if he is only rude into the bargain, he
condones and legitimizes all his faults. If in any discussion or
conversation, another man shows more knowledge, greater love of
truth, a sounder judgment, better understanding than we, or generally
exhibits intellectual qualities which cast ours into the shade, we can
at once annul his superiority and our own shallowness, and in our turn
be superior to him, by being insulting and offensive. For rudeness
is better than any argument; it totally eclipses intellect. If our
opponent does not care for our mode of attack, and will not answer
still more rudely, so as to plunge us into the ignoble rivalry of
the _Avantage_, we are the victors and honor is on our side. Truth,
knowledge, understanding, intellect, wit, must beat a retreat and
leave the field to this almighty insolence.

_Honorable people_ immediately make a show of mounting their
war-horse, if anyone utters an opinion adverse to theirs, or shows
more intelligence than they can muster; and if in any controversy
they are at a loss for a reply, they look about for some weapon of
rudeness, which will serve as well and come readier to hand; so they
retire masters of the position. It must now be obvious that people are
quite right in applauding this principle of honor as having ennobled
the tone of society. This principle springs from another, which forms
the heart and soul of the entire code.

(5.) Fifthly, the code implies that the highest court to which a man
can appeal in any differences he may have with another on a point of
honor is the court of physical force, that is, of brutality. Every
piece of rudeness is, strictly speaking, an appeal to brutality; for
it is a declaration that intellectual strength and moral insight are
incompetent to decide, and that the battle must be fought out by
physical force--a struggle which, in the case of man, whom Franklin
defines as _a tool-making animal_, is decided by the weapons peculiar
to the species; and the decision is irrevocable. This is the
well-known principle of _right of might_--irony, of course, like _the
wit of a fool_, a parallel phrase. The honor of a knight may be called
the glory of might.

(6.) Lastly, if, as we saw above, civic honor is very scrupulous in
the matter of _meum_ and _tuum_, paying great respect to obligations
and a promise once made, the code we are here discussing displays, on
the other hand, the noblest liberality. There is only one word which
may not be broken, _the word of honor_--upon my _honor_, as people
say--the presumption being, of course, that every other form of
promise may be broken. Nay, if the worst comes to the worst, it
is easy to break even one's word of honor, and still remain
honorable--again by adopting that universal remedy, the duel, and
fighting with those who maintain that we pledged our word. Further,
there is one debt, and one alone, that under no circumstances must be
left unpaid--a gambling debt, which has accordingly been called _a
debt of honor_. In all other kinds of debt you may cheat Jews and
Christians as much as you like; and your knightly honor remains
without a stain.

The unprejudiced reader will see at once that such a strange, savage
and ridiculous code of honor as this has no foundation in human
nature, nor any warrant in a healthy view of human affairs. The
extremely narrow sphere of its operation serves only to intensify the
feeling, which is exclusively confined to Europe since the Middle Age,
and then only to the upper classes, officers and soldiers, and people
who imitate them. Neither Greeks nor Romans knew anything of this code
of honor or of its principles; nor the highly civilized nations of
Asia, ancient or modern. Amongst them no other kind of honor is
recognized but that which I discussed first, in virtue of which a man
is what he shows himself to be by his actions, not what any wagging
tongue is pleased to say of him. They thought that what a man said or
did might perhaps affect his own honor, but not any other man's. To
them, a blow was but a blow--and any horse or donkey could give a
harder one--a blow which under certain circumstances might make a man
angry and demand immediate vengeance; but it had nothing to do with
honor. No one kept account of blows or insulting words, or of the
_satisfaction_ which was demanded or omitted to be demanded. Yet in
personal bravery and contempt of death, the ancients were certainly
not inferior to the nations of Christian Europe. The Greeks and Romans
were thorough heroes, if you like; but they knew nothing about
_point d'honneur_. If _they_ had any idea of a duel, it was totally
unconnected with the life of the nobles; it was merely the exhibition
of mercenary gladiators, slaves devoted to slaughter, condemned
criminals, who, alternately with wild beasts, were set to butcher one
another to make a Roman holiday. When Christianity was introduced,
gladiatorial shows were done away with, and their place taken, in
Christian times, by the duel, which was a way of settling difficulties
by _the Judgment of God_.

If the gladiatorial fight was a cruel sacrifice to the prevailing
desire for great spectacles, dueling is a cruel sacrifice to existing
prejudices--a sacrifice, not of criminals, slaves and prisoners, but
of the noble and the free.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_. These and other remarks on dueling
will no doubt wear a belated look to English readers; but they are
hardly yet antiquated for most parts of the Continent.]

There are a great many traits in the character of the ancients which
show that they were entirely free from these prejudices. When, for
instance, Marius was summoned to a duel by a Teutonic chief, he
returned answer to the effect that, if the chief were tired of his
life, he might go and hang himself; at the same time he offered him a
veteran gladiator for a round or two. Plutarch relates in his life of
Themistocles that Eurybiades, who was in command of the fleet, once
raised his stick to strike him; whereupon Themistocles, instead of
drawing his sword, simply said: _Strike, but hear me_. How sorry the
reader must be, if he is an _honorable_ man, to find that we have no
information that the Athenian officers refused in a body to serve any
longer under Themistocles, if he acted like that! There is a modern
French writer who declares that if anyone considers Demosthenes a man
of honor, his ignorance will excite a smile of pity; and that Cicero
was not a man of honor either![1] In a certain passage in Plato's
_Laws_[2] the philosopher speaks at length of [Greek: aikia] or
_assault_, showing us clearly enough that the ancients had no notion
of any feeling of honor in connection with such matters. Socrates'
frequent discussions were often followed by his being severely
handled, and he bore it all mildly. Once, for instance, when somebody
kicked him, the patience with which he took the insult surprised
one of his friends. _Do you think_, said Socrates, _that if an ass
happened to kick me, I should resent it_?[3] On another occasion, when
he was asked, _Has not that fellow abused and insulted you? No_, was
his answer, _what he says is not addressed to me_[4] Stobaeus has
preserved a long passage from Musonius, from which we can see how the
ancients treated insults. They knew no other form of satisfaction than
that which the law provided, and wise people despised even this. If a
Greek received a box on the ear, he could get satisfaction by the aid
of the law; as is evident from Plato's _Gorgias_, where Socrates'
opinion may be found. The same thing may be seen in the account given
by Gellius of one Lucius Veratius, who had the audacity to give some
Roman citizens whom he met on the road a box on the ear, without any
provocation whatever; but to avoid any ulterior consequences, he
told a slave to bring a bag of small money, and on the spot paid
the trivial legal penalty to the men whom he had astonished by his
conduct.

[Footnote 1:_litteraires_: par C. Durand. Rouen, 1828.]

[Footnote 2: Bk. IX.].

[Footnote 3: Diogenes Laertius, ii., 21.]

[Footnote 4: _Ibid_ 36.]

Crates, the celebrated Cynic philosopher, got such a box on the ear
from Nicodromus, the musician, that his face swelled up and became
black and blue; whereupon he put a label on his forehead, with the
inscription, _Nicodromus fecit_, which brought much disgrace to the
fluteplayer who had committed such a piece of brutality upon the man
whom all Athens honored as a household god.[1] And in a letter to
Melesippus, Diogenes of Sinope tells us that he got a beating from the
drunken sons of the Athenians; but he adds that it was a matter of no
importance.[2] And Seneca devotes the last few chapters of his _De
Constantia_ to a lengthy discussion on insult--_contumelia_; in order
to show that a wise man will take no notice of it. In Chapter XIV, he
says, _What shall a wise man do, if he is given a blow? What Cato did,
when some one struck him on the mouth;--not fire up or avenge the
insult, or even return the blow, but simply ignore it_.

[Footnote 1: Diogenes Laertius, vi. 87, and Apul: Flor: p. 126.]

[Footnote 2: Cf. Casaubon's Note, Diog. Laert., vi. 33.]

_Yes_, you say, _but these men were philosophers_.--And you are fools,
eh? Precisely.

It is clear that the whole code of knightly honor was utterly unknown
to the ancients; for the simple reason that they always took a natural
and unprejudiced view of human affairs, and did not allow themselves
to be influenced by any such vicious and abominable folly. A blow
in the face was to them a blow and nothing more, a trivial physical
injury; whereas the moderns make a catastrophe out of it, a theme for
a tragedy; as, for instance, in the _Cid_ of Corneille, or in a
recent German comedy of middle-class life, called _The Power of
Circumstance_, which should have been entitled _The Power of
Prejudice_. If a member of the National Assembly at Paris got a blow
on the ear, it would resound from one end of Europe to the other. The
examples which I have given of the way in which such an occurrence
would have been treated in classic times may not suit the ideas of
_honorable people_; so let me recommend to their notice, as a kind of
antidote, the story of Monsieur Desglands in Diderot's masterpiece,
_Jacques le fataliste_. It is an excellent specimen of modern knightly
honor, which, no doubt, they will find enjoyable and edifying.[1]

[Footnote: 1: _Translator's Note_. The story to which Schopenhauer
here refers is briefly as follows: Two gentlemen, one of whom was
named Desglands, were paying court to the same lady. As they sat at
table side by side, with the lady opposite, Desglands did his best to
charm her with his conversation; but she pretended not to hear him,
and kept looking at his rival. In the agony of jealousy, Desglands, as
he was holding a fresh egg in his hand, involuntarily crushed it; the
shell broke, and its contents bespattered his rival's face. Seeing him
raise his hand, Desglands seized it and whispered: _Sir, I take it as
given_. The next day Desglands appeared with a large piece of black
sticking-plaster upon his right cheek. In the duel which followed,
Desglands severely wounded his rival; upon which he reduced the size
of the plaster. When his rival recovered, they had another duel;
Desglands drew blood again, and again made his plaster a little
smaller; and so on for five or six times. After every duel Desglands'
plaster grew less and less, until at last his rival.]

From what I have said it must be quite evident that the principle
of knightly honor has no essential and spontaneous origin in human
nature. It is an artificial product, and its source is not hard to
find. Its existence obviously dates from the time when people used
their fists more than their heads, when priestcraft had enchained the
human intellect, the much bepraised Middle Age, with its system of
chivalry. That was the time when people let the Almighty not only care
for them but judge for them too; when difficult cases were decided by
an ordeal, a _Judgment of God_; which, with few exceptions, meant
a duel, not only where nobles were concerned, but in the case of
ordinary citizens as well. There is a neat illustration of this in
Shakespeare's Henry VI.[1] Every judicial sentence was subject to an
appeal to arms--a court, as it were, of higher instance, namely, _the
Judgment of God_: and this really meant that physical strength and
activity, that is, our animal nature, usurped the place of reason on
the judgment seat, deciding in matters of right and wrong, not by what
a man had done, but by the force with which he was opposed, the same
system, in fact, as prevails to-day under the principles of knightly
honor. If any one doubts that such is really the origin of our modern
duel, let him read an excellent work by J.B. Millingen, _The History
of Dueling_.[2] Nay, you may still find amongst the supporters of
the system,--who, by the way are not usually the most educated or
thoughtful of men,--some who look upon the result of a duel as really
constituting a divine judgment in the matter in dispute; no doubt in
consequence of the traditional feeling on the subject.

But leaving aside the question of origin, it must now be clear to us
that the main tendency of the principle is to use physical menace for
the purpose of extorting an appearance of respect which is deemed too
difficult or superfluous to acquire in reality; a proceeding which
comes to much the same thing as if you were to prove the warmth of
your room by holding your hand on the thermometer and so make it rise.
In fact, the kernel of the matter is this: whereas civic honor aims
at peaceable intercourse, and consists in the opinion of other people
that _we deserve full confidence_, because we pay unconditional
respect to their rights; knightly honor, on the other hand, lays
down that _we are to be feared_, as being determined at all costs to
maintain our own.

As not much reliance can be placed upon human integrity, the principle
that it is more essential to arouse fear than to invite confidence
would not, perhaps, be a false one, if we were living in a state of
nature, where every man would have to protect himself and directly
maintain his own rights. But in civilized life, where the State
undertakes the protection of our person and property, the principle is
no longer applicable: it stands, like the castles and watch-towers of
the age when might was right, a useless and forlorn object, amidst
well-tilled fields and frequented roads, or even railways.

Accordingly, the application of knightly honor, which still recognizes
this principle, is confined to those small cases of personal assault
which meet with but slight punishment at the hands of the law, or even
none at all, for _de minimis non_,--mere trivial wrongs, committed
sometimes only in jest. The consequence of this limited application of
the principle is that it has forced itself into an exaggerated respect
for the value of the person,--a respect utterly alien to the nature,
constitution or destiny of man--which it has elated into a species
of sanctity: and as it considers that the State has imposed a very
insufficient penalty on the commission of such trivial injuries, it
takes upon itself to punish them by attacking the aggressor in life
or limb. The whole thing manifestly rests upon an excessive degree
of arrogant pride, which, completely forgetting what man really is,
claims that he shall be absolutely free from all attack or even
censure. Those who determine to carry out this principle by main
force, and announce, as their rule of action, _whoever insults or
strikes me shall die_! ought for their pains to be banished the
country.[1]

[Footnote 1: Knightly honor is the child of pride and folly, and it is
_needy_ not pride, which is the heritage of the human race. It is a
very remarkable fact that this extreme form of pride should be found
exclusively amongst the adherents of the religion which teaches the
deepest humility. Still, this pride must not be put down to religion,
but, rather, to the feudal system, which made every nobleman a petty
sovereign who recognized no human judge, and learned to regard his
person as sacred and inviolable, and any attack upon it, or any blow
or insulting word, as an offence punishable with death. The principle
of knightly honor and of the duel were at first confined to the
nobles, and, later on, also to officers in the army, who, enjoying a
kind of off-and-on relationship with the upper classes, though they
were never incorporated with them, were anxious not to be behind them.
It is true that duels were the product of the old ordeals; but
the latter are not the foundation, but rather the consequence and
application of the principle of honor: the man who recognized no human
judge appealed to the divine. Ordeals, however, are not peculiar to
Christendom: they may be found in great force among the Hindoos,
especially of ancient times; and there are traces of them even now.]

As a palliative to this rash arrogance, people are in the habit of
giving way on everything. If two intrepid persons meet, and neither
will give way, the slightest difference may cause a shower of abuse,
then fisticuffs, and, finally, a fatal blow: so that it would really
be a more decorous proceeding to omit the intermediate steps and
appeal to arms at once. An appeal to arms has its own special
formalities; and these have developed into a rigid and precise system
of laws and regulations, together forming the most solemn farce there
is--a regular temple of honor dedicated to folly! For if two intrepid
persons dispute over some trivial matter, (more important affairs are
dealt with by law), one of them, the cleverer of the two, will of
course yield; and they will agree to differ. That this is so is proved
by the fact that common people,--or, rather, the numerous classes of
the community who do not acknowledge the principle of knightly honor,
let any dispute run its natural course. Amongst these classes homicide
is a hundredfold rarer than amongst those--and they amount, perhaps,
in all, to hardly one in a thousand,--who pay homage to the principle:
and even blows are of no very frequent occurrence.

Then it has been said that the manners and tone of good society are
ultimately based upon this principle of honor, which, with its system
of duels, is made out to be a bulwark against the assaults of savagery
and rudeness. But Athens, Corinth and Rome could assuredly boast of
good, nay, excellent society, and manners and tone of a high order,
without any support from the bogey of knightly honor. It is true that
women did not occupy that prominent place in ancient society which
they hold now, when conversation has taken on a frivolous and
trifling character, to the exclusion of that weighty discourse which
distinguished the ancients.

This change has certainly contributed a great deal to bring about the
tendency, which is observable in good society now-a-days, to prefer
personal courage to the possession of any other quality. The fact is
that personal courage is really a very subordinate virtue,--merely the
distinguishing mark of a subaltern,--a virtue, indeed, in which we are
surpassed by the lower animals; or else you would not hear people say,
_as brave as a lion_. Far from being the pillar of society, knightly
honor affords a sure asylum, in general for dishonesty and wickedness,
and also for small incivilities, want of consideration and
unmannerliness. Rude behavior is often passed over in silence because
no one cares to risk his neck in correcting it.

After what I have said, it will not appear strange that the dueling
system is carried to the highest pitch of sanguinary zeal precisely in
that nation whose political and financial records show that they
are not too honorable. What that nation is like in its private and
domestic life, is a question which may be best put to those who are
experienced in the matter. Their urbanity and social culture have long
been conspicuous by their absence.

There is no truth, then, in such pretexts. It can be urged with more
justice that as, when you snarl at a dog, he snarls in return, and
when you pet him, he fawns; so it lies in the nature of men to return
hostility by hostility, and to be embittered and irritated at any
signs of depreciatory treatment or hatred: and, as Cicero says, _there
is something so penetrating in the shaft of envy that even men of
wisdom and worth find its wound a painful one_; and nowhere in the
world, except, perhaps, in a few religious sects, is an insult or a
blow taken with equanimity. And yet a natural view of either would
in no case demand anything more than a requital proportionate to the
offence, and would never go to the length of assigning _death_ as the
proper penalty for anyone who accuses another of lying or stupidity or
cowardice. The old German theory of _blood for a blow_ is a revolting
superstition of the age of chivalry. And in any case the return or
requital of an insult is dictated by anger, and not by any such
obligation of honor and duty as the advocates of chivalry seek to
attach to it. The fact is that, the greater the truth, the greater
the slander; and it is clear that the slightest hint of some real
delinquency will give much greater offence than a most terrible
accusation which is perfectly baseless: so that a man who is quite
sure that he has done nothing to deserve a reproach may treat it with
contempt, and will be safe in doing so. The theory of honor demands
that he shall show a susceptibility which he does not possess, and
take bloody vengeance for insults which he cannot feel. A man must
himself have but a poor opinion of his own worth who hastens to
prevent the utterance of an unfavorable opinion by giving his enemy a
black eye.

True appreciation of his own value will make a man really indifferent
to insult; but if he cannot help resenting it, a little shrewdness and
culture will enable him to save appearances and dissemble his anger.
If he could only get rid of this superstition about honor--the idea, I
mean, that it disappears when you are insulted, and can be restored by
returning the insult; if we could only stop people from thinking
that wrong, brutality and insolence can be legalized by expressing
readiness to give satisfaction, that is, to fight in defence of it,
we should all soon come to the general opinion that insult and
depreciation are like a battle in which the loser wins; and that, as
Vincenzo Monti says, abuse resembles a church-procession, because it
always returns to the point from which it set out. If we could only
get people to look upon insult in this light, we should no longer have
to say something rude in order to prove that we are in the right. Now,
unfortunately, if we want to take a serious view of any question, we
have first of all to consider whether it will not give offence in some
way or other to the dullard, who generally shows alarm and resentment
at the merest sign of intelligence; and it may easily happen that the
head which contains the intelligent view has to be pitted against the
noodle which is empty of everything but narrowness and stupidity. If
all this were done away with, intellectual superiority could take
the leading place in society which is its due--a place now occupied,
though people do not like to confess it, by excellence of physique,
mere fighting pluck, in fact; and the natural effect of such a change
would be that the best kind of people would have one reason the
less for withdrawing from society. This would pave the way for the
introduction of real courtesy and genuinely good society, such as
undoubtedly existed in Athens, Corinth and Rome. If anyone wants
to see a good example of what I mean, I should like him to read
Xenophon's _Banquet_.

The last argument in defence of knightly honor no doubt is, that,
but for its existence, the world--awful thought!--would be a regular
bear-garden. To which I may briefly reply that nine hundred and
ninety-nine people out of a thousand who do not recognize the code,
have often given and received a blow without any fatal consequences:
whereas amongst the adherents of the code a blow usually means death
to one of the parties. But let me examine this argument more closely.

I have often tried to find some tenable, or at any rate, plausible
basis--other than a merely conventional one--some positive reasons,
that is to say, for the rooted conviction which a portion of mankind
entertains, that a blow is a very dreadful thing; but I have looked
for it in vain, either in the animal or in the rational side of human
nature. A blow is, and always will be, a trivial physical injury which
one man can do to another; proving, thereby, nothing more than his
superiority in strength or skill, or that his enemy was off his guard.
Analysis will carry us no further. The same knight who regards a blow
from the human hand as the greatest of evils, if he gets a ten times
harder blow from his horse, will give you the assurance, as he limps
away in suppressed pain, that it is a matter of no consequence
whatever. So I have come to think that it is the human hand which is
at the bottom of the mischief. And yet in a battle the knight may get
cuts and thrusts from the same hand, and still assure you that his
wounds are not worth mentioning. Now, I hear that a blow from the flat
of a sword is not by any means so bad as a blow from a stick; and
that, a short time ago, cadets were liable to be punished by the one
but not the other, and that the very greatest honor of all is the
_accolade_. This is all the psychological or moral basis that I can
find; and so there is nothing left me but to pronounce the whole thing
an antiquated superstition that has taken deep root, and one more
of the many examples which show the force of tradition. My view is
confirmed by the well-known fact that in China a beating with a bamboo
is a very frequent punishment for the common people, and even for
officials of every class; which shows that human nature, even in a
highly civilized state, does not run in the same groove here and in
China.

On the contrary, an unprejudiced view of human nature shows that it is
just as natural for a man to beat as it is for savage animals to bite
and rend in pieces, or for horned beasts to butt or push. Man may be
said to be the animal that beats. Hence it is revolting to our sense
of the fitness of things to hear, as we sometimes do, that one man
bitten another; on the other hand, it is a natural and everyday
occurrence for him to get blows or give them. It is intelligible
enough that, as we become educated, we are glad to dispense with blows
by a system of mutual restraint. But it is a cruel thing to compel a
nation or a single class to regard a blow as an awful misfortune which
must have death and murder for its consequences. There are too
many genuine evils in the world to allow of our increasing them by
imaginary misfortunes, which brings real ones in their train: and yet
this is the precise effect of the superstition, which thus proves
itself at once stupid and malign.

It does not seem to me wise of governments and legislative bodies to
promote any such folly by attempting to do away with flogging as a
punishment in civil or military life. Their idea is that they are
acting in the interests of humanity; but, in point of fact, they are
doing just the opposite; for the abolition of flogging will serve only
to strengthen this inhuman and abominable superstition, to which so
many sacrifices have already been made. For all offences, except the
worst, a beating is the obvious, and therefore the natural penalty;
and a man who will not listen to reason will yield to blows. It seems
to me right and proper to administer corporal punishment to the man
who possesses nothing and therefore cannot be fined, or cannot be put
in prison because his master's interests would suffer by the loss of
his service. There are really no arguments against it: only mere talk
about _the dignity of man_--talk which proceeds, not from any clear
notions on the subject, but from the pernicious superstition I have
been describing. That it is a superstition which lies at the bottom of
the whole business is proved by an almost laughable example. Not
long ago, in the military discipline of many countries, the cat was
replaced by the stick. In either case the object was to produce
physical pain; but the latter method involved no disgrace, and was not
derogatory to honor.

By promoting this superstition, the State is playing into the hands of
the principle of knightly honor, and therefore of the duel; while at
the same time it is trying, or at any rate it pretends it is trying,
to abolish the duel by legislative enactment. As a natural consequence
we find that this fragment of the theory that _might is right_, which
has come down to us from the most savage days of the Middle Age, has
still in this nineteenth century a good deal of life left in it--more
shame to us! It is high time for the principle to be driven out bag
and baggage. Now-a-days no one is allowed to set dogs or cocks to
fight each other,--at any rate, in England it is a penal offence,--but
men are plunged into deadly strife, against their will, by the
operation of this ridiculous, superstitious and absurd principle,
which imposes upon us the obligation, as its narrow-minded supporters
and advocates declare, of fighting with one another like gladiators,
for any little trifle. Let me recommend our purists to adopt the
expression _baiting_[1] instead of _duel_, which probably comes to us,
not from the Latin _duellum_, but from the Spanish _duelo_,--meaning
suffering, nuisance, annoyance.

[Footnote 1: _Ritterhetze_]

In any case, we may well laugh at the pedantic excess to which this
foolish system has been carried. It is really revolting that this
principle, with its absurd code, can form a power within the
State--_imperium in imperio_--a power too easily put in motion, which,
recognizing no right but might, tyrannizes over the classes which come
within its range, by keeping up a sort of inquisition, before which
any one may be haled on the most flimsy pretext, and there and then be
tried on an issue of life and death between himself and his opponent.
This is the lurking place from which every rascal, if he only belongs
to the classes in question, may menace and even exterminate the
noblest and best of men, who, as such, must of course be an object of
hatred to him. Our system of justice and police-protection has made it
impossible in these days for any scoundrel in the street to attack us
with--_Your money or your life_! An end should be put to the burden
which weighs upon the higher classes--the burden, I mean, of having to
be ready every moment to expose life and limb to the mercy of anyone
who takes it into his rascally head to be coarse, rude, foolish or
malicious. It is perfectly atrocious that a pair of silly, passionate
boys should be wounded, maimed or even killed, simply because they
have had a few words.

The strength of this tyrannical power within the State, and the force
of the superstition, may be measured by the fact that people who are
prevented from restoring their knightly honor by the superior or
inferior rank of their aggressor, or anything else that puts the
persons on a different level, often come to a tragic-comic end by
committing suicide in sheer despair. You may generally know a thing
to be false and ridiculous by finding that, if it is carried to its
logical conclusion, it results in a contradiction; and here, too, we
have a very glaring absurdity. For an officer is forbidden to take
part in a duel; but if he is challenged and declines to come out, he
is punished by being dismissed the service.

As I am on the matter, let me be more frank still. The important
distinction, which is often insisted upon, between killing your enemy
in a fair fight with equal weapons, and lying in ambush for him, is
entirely a corollary of the fact that the power within the State, of
which I have spoken, recognizes no other right than might, that is,
the right of the stronger, and appeals to a _Judgment of God_ as the
basis of the whole code. For to kill a man in a fair fight, is to
prove that you are superior to him in strength or skill; and to
justify the deed, _you must assume that the right of the stronger is
really a right_.

But the truth is that, if my opponent is unable to defend himself, it
gives me the possibility, but not by any means the right, of killing
him. The _right_, the _moral justification_, must depend entirely upon
the _motives_ which I have for taking his life. Even supposing that I
have sufficient motive for taking a man's life, there is no reason
why I should make his death depend upon whether I can shoot or fence
better than he. In such a case, it is immaterial in what way I kill
him, whether I attack him from the front or the rear. From a moral
point of view, the right of the stronger is no more convincing than
the right of the more skillful; and it is skill which is employed if
you murder a a man treacherously. Might and skill are in this case
equally right; in a duel, for instance, both the one and the other
come into play; for a feint is only another name for treachery. If I
consider myself morally justified in taking a man's life, it is stupid
of me to try first of all whether he can shoot or fence better than
I; as, if he can, he will not only have wronged me, but have taken my
life into the bargain.

It is Rousseau's opinion that the proper way to avenge an insult is,
not to fight a duel with your aggressor, but to assassinate him,--an
opinion, however, which he is cautious enough only to barely indicate
in a mysterious note to one of the books of his _Emile_. This shows
the philosopher so completely under the influence of the mediaeval
superstition of knightly honor that he considers it justifiable to
murder a man who accuses you of lying: whilst he must have known that
every man, and himself especially, has deserved to have the lie given
him times without number.

The prejudice which justifies the killing of your adversary, so long
as it is done in an open contest and with equal weapons, obviously
looks upon might as really right, and a duel as the interference of
God. The Italian who, in a fit of rage, falls upon his aggressor
wherever he finds him, and despatches him without any ceremony, acts,
at any rate, consistently and naturally: he may be cleverer, but he is
not worse, than the duelist. If you say, I am justified in killing my
adversary in a duel, because he is at the moment doing his best to
kill me; I can reply that it is your challenge which has placed him
under the necessity of defending himself; and that by mutually putting
it on the ground of self-defence, the combatants are seeking a
plausible pretext for committing murder. I should rather justify the
deed by the legal maxim _Volenti non fit injuria_; because the parties
mutually agree to set their life upon the issue.

This argument may, however, be rebutted by showing that the injured
party is not injured _volens_; because it is this tyrannical principle
of knightly honor, with its absurd code, which forcibly drags one at
least of the combatants before a bloody inquisition.

I have been rather prolix on the subject of knightly honor, but I
had good reason for being so, because the Augean stable of moral and
intellectual enormity in this world can be cleaned out only with the
besom of philosophy. There are two things which more than all
else serve to make the social arrangements of modern life compare
unfavorably with those of antiquity, by giving our age a gloomy, dark
and sinister aspect, from which antiquity, fresh, natural and, as it
were, in the morning of life, is completely free; I mean modern honor
and modern disease,--_par nobile fratrum_!--which have combined to
poison all the relations of life, whether public or private. The
second of this noble pair extends its influence much farther than at
first appears to be the case, as being not merely a physical, but also
a moral disease. From the time that poisoned arrows have been found
in Cupid's quiver, an estranging, hostile, nay, devilish element has
entered into the relations of men and women, like a sinister thread
of fear and mistrust in the warp and woof of their intercourse;
indirectly shaking the foundations of human fellowship, and so more or
less affecting the whole tenor of existence. But it would be beside my
present purpose to pursue the subject further.

An influence analogous to this, though working on other lines, is
exerted by the principle of knightly honor,--that solemn farce,
unknown to the ancient world, which makes modern society stiff, gloomy
and timid, forcing us to keep the strictest watch on every word that
falls. Nor is this all. The principle is a universal Minotaur; and the
goodly company of the sons of noble houses which it demands in yearly
tribute, comes, not from one country alone, as of old, but from every
land in Europe. It is high time to make a regular attack upon this
foolish system; and this is what I am trying to do now. Would that
these two monsters of the modern world might disappear before the end
of the century!

Let us hope that medicine may be able to find some means of preventing
the one, and that, by clearing our ideals, philosophy may put an end
to the other: for it is only by clearing our ideas that the evil can
be eradicated. Governments have tried to do so by legislation, and
failed.

Still, if they are really concerned to stop the dueling system; and if
the small success that has attended their efforts is really due only
to their inability to cope with the evil, I do not mind proposing a
law the success of which I am prepared to guarantee. It will involve
no sanguinary measures, and can be put into operation without recourse
either to the scaffold or the gallows, or to imprisonment for life. It
is a small homeopathic pilule, with no serious after effects. If any
man send or accept a challenge, let the corporal take him before the
guard house, and there give him, in broad daylight, twelve strokes
with a stick _a la Chinoise_; a non-commissioned officer or a private
to receive six. If a duel has actually taken place, the usual criminal
proceedings should be instituted.

A person with knightly notions might, perhaps, object that, if such
a punishment were carried out, a man of honor would possibly shoot
himself; to which I should answer that it is better for a fool like
that to shoot himself rather than other people. However, I know very
well that governments are not really in earnest about putting down
dueling. Civil officials, and much more so, officers in the army,
(except those in the highest positions), are paid most inadequately
for the services they perform; and the deficiency is made up by honor,
which is represented by titles and orders, and, in general, by the
system of rank and distinction. The duel is, so to speak, a very
serviceable extra-horse for people of rank: so they are trained in the
knowledge of it at the universities. The accidents which happen to
those who use it make up in blood for the deficiency of the pay.

Just to complete the discussion, let me here mention the subject
of _national honor_. It is the honor of a nation as a unit in the
aggregate of nations. And as there is no court to appeal to but the
court of force; and as every nation must be prepared to defend its own
interests, the honor of a nation consists in establishing the opinion,
not only that it may be trusted (its credit), but also that it is to
be feared. An attack upon its rights must never be allowed to pass
unheeded. It is a combination of civic and knightly honor.


_Section 5.--Fame_.


Under the heading of place in the estimation of the world we have put
_Fame_; and this we must now proceed to consider.

Fame and honor are twins; and twins, too, like Castor and Pollux, of
whom the one was mortal and the other was not. Fame is the undying
brother of ephemeral honor. I speak, of course, of the highest kind of
fame, that is, of fame in the true and genuine sense of the word; for,
to be sure, there are many sorts of fame, some of which last but a
day. Honor is concerned merely with such qualities as everyone may be
expected to show under similar circumstances; fame only of those which
cannot be required of any man. Honor is of qualities which everyone
has a right to attribute to himself; fame only of those which should
be left to others to attribute. Whilst our honor extends as far as
people have knowledge of us; fame runs in advance, and makes us known
wherever it finds its way. Everyone can make a claim to honor; very
few to fame, as being attainable only in virtue of extraordinary
achievements.

These achievements may be of two kinds, either _actions_ or _works_;
and so to fame there are two paths open. On the path of actions, a
great heart is the chief recommendation; on that of works, a great
head. Each of the two paths has its own peculiar advantages and
detriments; and the chief difference between them is that actions are
fleeting, while works remain. The influence of an action, be it never
so noble, can last but a short time; but a work of genius is a living
influence, beneficial and ennobling throughout the ages. All that can
remain of actions is a memory, and that becomes weak and disfigured by
time--a matter of indifference to us, until at last it is extinguished
altogether; unless, indeed, history takes it up, and presents it,
fossilized, to posterity. Works are immortal in themselves, and once
committed to writing, may live for ever. Of Alexander the Great we
have but the name and the record; but Plato and Aristotle, Homer and
Horace are alive, and as directly at work to-day as they were in their
own lifetime. The _Vedas_, and their _Upanishads_, are still with us:
but of all contemporaneous actions not a trace has come down to us.[1]

[Footnote 1: Accordingly it is a poor compliment, though sometimes
a fashionable one, to try to pay honor to a work by calling it an
action. For a work is something essentially higher in its nature.
An action is always something based on motive, and, therefore,
fragmentary and fleeting--a part, in fact, of that Will which is the
universal and original element in the constitution of the world. But
a great and beautiful work has a permanent character, as being of
universal significance, and sprung from the Intellect, which rises,
like a perfume, above the faults and follies of the world of Will.

The fame of a great action has this advantage, that it generally
starts with a loud explosion; so loud, indeed, as to be heard all over
Europe: whereas the fame of a great work is slow and gradual in its
beginnings; the noise it makes is at first slight, but it goes on
growing greater, until at last, after a hundred years perhaps, it
attains its full force; but then it remains, because the works
remain, for thousands of years. But in the other case, when the first
explosion is over, the noise it makes grows less and less, and is
heard by fewer and fewer persons; until it ends by the action having
only a shadowy existence in the pages of history.]

Another disadvantage under which actions labor is that they depend
upon chance for the possibility of coming into existence; and hence,
the fame they win does not flow entirely from their intrinsic value,
but also from the circumstances which happened to lend them importance
and lustre. Again, the fame of actions, if, as in war, they are purely
personal, depends upon the testimony of fewer witnesses; and these
are not always present, and even if present, are not always just or
unbiased observers. This disadvantage, however, is counterbalanced
by the fact that actions have the advantage of being of a practical
character, and, therefore, within the range of general human
intelligence; so that once the facts have been correctly reported,
justice is immediately done; unless, indeed, the motive underlying the
action is not at first properly understood or appreciated. No action
can be really understood apart from the motive which prompted it.

It is just the contrary with works. Their inception does not depend
upon chance, but wholly and entirely upon their author; and whoever
they are in and for themselves, that they remain as long as they live.
Further, there is a difficulty in properly judging them, which becomes
all the harder, the higher their character; often there are no persons
competent to understand the work, and often no unbiased or honest
critics. Their fame, however, does not depend upon one judge only;
they can enter an appeal to another. In the case of actions, as I have
said, it is only their memory which comes down to posterity, and then
only in the traditional form; but works are handed down themselves,
and, except when parts of them have been lost, in the form in
which they first appeared. In this case there is no room for any
disfigurement of the facts; and any circumstance which may have
prejudiced them in their origin, fall away with the lapse of time.
Nay, it is often only after the lapse of time that the persons really
competent to judge them appear--exceptional critics sitting in
judgment on exceptional works, and giving their weighty verdicts in
succession. These collectively form a perfectly just appreciation; and
though there are cases where it has taken some hundreds of years to
form it, no further lapse of time is able to reverse the verdict;--so
secure and inevitable is the fame of a great work.

Whether authors ever live to see the dawn of their fame depends upon
the chance of circumstance; and the higher and more important their
works are, the less likelihood there is of their doing so. That was
an incomparable fine saying of Seneca's, that fame follows merit as
surely as the body casts a shadow; sometimes falling in front, and
sometimes behind. And he goes on to remark that _though the envy of
contemporaries be shown by universal silence, there will come those
who will judge without enmity or favor_. From this remark it is
manifest that even in Seneca's age there were rascals who understood
the art of suppressing merit by maliciously ignoring its existence,
and of concealing good work from the public in order to favor the bad:
it is an art well understood in our day, too, manifesting itself, both
then and now, in _an envious conspiracy of silence_.

As a general rule, the longer a man's fame is likely to last, the
later it will be in coming; for all excellent products require time
for their development. The fame which lasts to posterity is like an
oak, of very slow growth; and that which endures but a little while,
like plants which spring up in a year and then die; whilst false fame
is like a fungus, shooting up in a night and perishing as soon.

And why? For this reason; the more a man belongs to posterity, in
other words, to humanity in general, the more of an alien he is to his
contemporaries; since his work is not meant for them as such, but only
for them in so far as they form part of mankind at large; there is
none of that familiar local color about his productions which would
appeal to them; and so what he does, fails of recognition because it
is strange.

People are more likely to appreciate the man who serves the
circumstances of his own brief hour, or the temper of the
moment,--belonging to it, living and dying with it.

The general history of art and literature shows that the highest
achievements of the human mind are, as a rule, not favorably received
at first; but remain in obscurity until they win notice from
intelligence of a high order, by whose influence they are brought into
a position which they then maintain, in virtue of the authority thus
given them.

If the reason of this should be asked, it will be found that
ultimately, a man can really understand and appreciate those things
only which are of like nature with himself. The dull person will like
what is dull, and the common person what is common; a man whose ideas
are mixed will be attracted by confusion of thought; and folly will
appeal to him who has no brains at all; but best of all, a man will
like his own works, as being of a character thoroughly at one with
himself. This is a truth as old as Epicharmus of fabulous memory--

  [Greek: Thaumaston ouden esti me tauth outo legein
  Kal andanein autoisin autous kal dokein
  Kalos pethukenai kal gar ho kuon kuni
  Kalloton eimen phainetai koi bous boi
  Onos dono kalliston [estin], us dut.]

The sense of this passage--for it should not be lost--is that we
should not be surprised if people are pleased with themselves, and
fancy that they are in good case; for to a dog the best thing in the
world is a dog; to an ox, an ox; to an ass, an ass; and to a sow, a
sow.

The strongest arm is unavailing to give impetus to a featherweight;
for, instead of speeding on its way and hitting its mark with effect,
it will soon fall to the ground, having expended what little energy
was given to it, and possessing no mass of its own to be the vehicle
of momentum. So it is with great and noble thoughts, nay, with the
very masterpieces of genius, when there are none but little, weak, and
perverse minds to appreciate them,--a fact which has been deplored
by a chorus of the wise in all ages. Jesus, the son of Sirach, for
instance, declares that _He that telleth a tale to a fool speaketh to
one in slumber: when he hath told his tale, he will say, What is the
matter_?[1] And Hamlet says, _A knavish speech sleeps in a fool's
ear_.[2] And Goethe is of the same opinion, that a dull ear mocks at
the wisest word,

  _Das glücktichste Wort es wird verhöhnt,
  Wenn der Hörer ein Schiefohr ist_:

and again, that we should not be discouraged if people are stupid, for
you can make no rings if you throw your stone into a marsh.

  _Du iwirkest nicht, Alles bleibt so stumpf:
    Sei guter Dinge!
  Der Stein in Sumpf
    Macht keine Ringe_.

[Footnote 1: Ecclesiasticus, xxii., 8.]

[Footnote 2: Act iv., Sc. 2.]

Lichtenberg asks: _When a head and a book come into collision, and one
sounds hollow, is it always the book_? And in another place: _Works
like this are as a mirror; if an ass looks in, you cannot expect an
apostle to look out_. We should do well to remember old Gellert's
fine and touching lament, that the best gifts of all find the fewest
admirers, and that most men mistake the bad for the good,--a daily
evil that nothing can prevent, like a plague which no remedy can cure.
There is but one thing to be done, though how difficult!--the foolish
must become wise,--and that they can never be. The value of life they
never know; they see with the outer eye but never with the mind, and
praise the trivial because the good is strange to them:--

  _Nie kennen sie den Werth der Dinge,
    Ihr Auge schliesst, nicht ihr Verstand;
  Sie loben ewig das Geringe
    Weil sie das Gute nie gekannt_.

To the intellectual incapacity which, as Goethe says, fails to
recognize and appreciate the good which exists, must be added
something which comes into play everywhere, the moral baseness of
mankind, here taking the form of envy. The new fame that a man wins
raises him afresh over the heads of his fellows, who are thus degraded
in proportion. All conspicuous merit is obtained at the cost of those
who possess none; or, as Goethe has it in the _Westöstlicher Divan_,
another's praise is one's own depreciation--

  _Wenn wir Andern Ehre geben
  Müssen wir uns selbst entadeln_.

We see, then, how it is that, whatever be the form which excellence
takes, mediocrity, the common lot of by far the greatest number, is
leagued against it in a conspiracy to resist, and if possible, to
suppress it. The pass-word of this league is _à bas le mérite_. Nay
more; those who have done something themselves, and enjoy a certain
amount of fame, do not care about the appearance of a new reputation,
because its success is apt to throw theirs into the shade. Hence,
Goethe declares that if we had to depend for our life upon the favor
of others, we should never have lived at all; from their desire
to appear important themselves, people gladly ignore our very
existence:--

  _Hätte ich gezaudert zu werden,
  Bis man mir's Leben geögnut,
  Ich wäre noch nicht auf Erden,
  Wie ihr begreifen könnt,
  Wenn ihr seht, wie sie sich geberden,
  Die, um etwas zu scheinen,
  Mich gerne mochten verneinen_.

Honor, on the contrary, generally meets with fair appreciation, and is
not exposed to the onslaught of envy; nay, every man is credited with
the possession of it until the contrary is proved. But fame has to be
won in despite of envy, and the tribunal which awards the laurel is
composed of judges biased against the applicant from the very first.
Honor is something which we are able and ready to share with everyone;
fame suffers encroachment and is rendered more unattainable in
proportion as more people come by it. Further, the difficulty of
winning fame by any given work stands in reverse ratio to the number
of people who are likely to read it; and hence it is so much harder
to become famous as the author of a learned work than as a writer
who aspires only to amuse. It is hardest of all in the case of
philosophical works, because the result at which they aim is rather
vague, and, at the same time, useless from a material point of view;
they appeal chiefly to readers who are working on the same lines
themselves.

It is clear, then, from what I have said as to the difficulty of
winning fame, that those who labor, not out of love for their subject,
nor from pleasure in pursuing it, but under the stimulus of ambition,
rarely or never leave mankind a legacy of immortal works. The man who
seeks to do what is good and genuine, must avoid what is bad, and be
ready to defy the opinions of the mob, nay, even to despise it and its
misleaders. Hence the truth of the remark, (especially insisted upon
by Osorius _de Gloria_), that fame shuns those who seek it, and seeks
those who shun it; for the one adapt themselves to the taste of their
contemporaries, and the others work in defiance of it.

But, difficult though it be to acquire fame, it is an easy thing to
keep when once acquired. Here, again, fame is in direct opposition to
honor, with which everyone is presumably to be accredited. Honor
has not to be won; it must only not be lost. But there lies the
difficulty! For by a single unworthy action, it is gone irretrievably.
But fame, in the proper sense of the word, can never disappear; for
the action or work by which it was acquired can never be undone; and
fame attaches to its author, even though he does nothing to deserve it
anew. The fame which vanishes, or is outlived, proves itself thereby
to be spurious, in other words, unmerited, and due to a momentary
overestimate of a man's work; not to speak of the kind of fame which
Hegel enjoyed, and which Lichtenberg describes as _trumpeted forth by
a clique of admiring undergraduates_--_the resounding echo of empty
heads_;--_such a fame as will make posterity smile when it lights upon
a grotesque architecture of words, a fine nest with the birds long
ago flown; it will knock at the door of this decayed structure of
conventionalities and find it utterly empty_!--_not even a trace of
thought there to invite the passer-by_.

The truth is that fame means nothing but what a man is in comparison
with others. It is essentially relative in character, and therefore
only indirectly valuable; for it vanishes the moment other people
become what the famous man is. Absolute value can be predicated only
of what a man possesses under any and all circumstances,--here, what a
man is directly and in himself. It is the possession of a great heart
or a great head, and not the mere fame of it, which is worth having,
and conducive to happiness. Not fame, but that which deserves to be
famous, is what a man should hold in esteem. This is, as it were, the
true underlying substance, and fame is only an accident, affecting its
subject chiefly as a kind of external symptom, which serves to confirm
his own opinion of himself. Light is not visible unless it meets with
something to reflect it; and talent is sure of itself only when its
fame is noised abroad. But fame is not a certain symptom of merit;
because you can have the one without the other; or, as Lessing nicely
puts it, _Some people obtain fame, and others deserve it_.

It would be a miserable existence which should make its value or want
of value depend upon what other people think; but such would be the
life of a hero or a genius if its worth consisted in fame, that is,
in the applause of the world. Every man lives and exists on his own
account, and, therefore, mainly in and for himself; and what he is and
the whole manner of his being concern himself more than anyone else;
so if he is not worth much in this respect, he cannot be worth much
otherwise. The idea which other people form of his existence is
something secondary, derivative, exposed to all the chances of fate,
and in the end affecting him but very indirectly. Besides, other
people's heads are a wretched place to be the home of a man's true
happiness--a fanciful happiness perhaps, but not a real one.

And what a mixed company inhabits the Temple of Universal
Fame!--generals, ministers, charlatans, jugglers, dancers, singers,
millionaires and Jews! It is a temple in which more sincere
recognition, more genuine esteem, is given to the several excellencies
of such folk, than to superiority of mind, even of a high order, which
obtains from the great majority only a verbal acknowledgment.

From the point of view of human happiness, fame is, surely, nothing
but a very rare and delicate morsel for the appetite that feeds on
pride and vanity--an appetite which, however carefully concealed,
exists to an immoderate degree in every man, and is, perhaps strongest
of all in those who set their hearts on becoming famous at any cost.
Such people generally have to wait some time in uncertainty as to
their own value, before the opportunity comes which will put it to the
proof and let other people see what they are made of; but until then,
they feel as if they were suffering secret injustice.[1]

[Footnote 1: Our greatest pleasure consists in being admired; but
those who admire us, even if they have every reason to do so, are slow
to express their sentiments. Hence he is the happiest man who, no
matter how, manages sincerely to admire himself--so long as other
people leave him alone.]

But, as I explained at the beginning of this chapter, an
unreasonable value is set upon other people's opinion, and one quite
disproportionate to its real worth. Hobbes has some strong remarks on
this subject; and no doubt he is quite right. _Mental pleasure_, he
writes, _and ecstacy of any kind, arise when, on comparing ourselves
with others, we come to the conclusion that we may think well of
ourselves_. So we can easily understand the great value which is
always attached to fame, as worth any sacrifices if there is the
slightest hope of attaining it.

  _Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise_
  _(That hath infirmity of noble mind)_
  _To scorn delights and live laborious days_[1]

And again:

        _How hard it is to climb
  The heights where Fame's proud temple shines afar_!

[Footnote 1: Milton. _Lycidas_.]

We can thus understand how it is that the vainest people in the world
are always talking about _la gloire_, with the most implicit faith in
it as a stimulus to great actions and great works. But there can he no
doubt that fame is something secondary in its character, a mere echo
or reflection--as it were, a shadow or symptom--of merit: and, in
any case, what excites admiration must be of more value than the
admiration itself. The truth is that a man is made happy, not by fame,
but by that which brings him fame, by his merits, or to speak more
correctly, by the disposition and capacity from which his merits
proceed, whether they be moral or intellectual. The best side of a
man's nature must of necessity be more important for him than for
anyone else: the reflection of it, the opinion which exists in the
heads of others, is a matter that can affect him only in a very
subordinate degree. He who deserves fame without getting it possesses
by far the more important element of happiness, which should console
him for the loss of the other. It is not that a man is thought to be
great by masses of incompetent and often infatuated people, but that
he really is great, which should move us to envy his position; and his
happiness lies, not in the fact that posterity will hear of him, but
that he is the creator of thoughts worthy to be treasured up and
studied for hundreds of years.

Besides, if a man has done this, he possesses something which cannot
be wrested from him; and, unlike fame, it is a possession dependent
entirely upon himself. If admiration were his chief aim, there would
be nothing in him to admire. This is just what happens in the case
of false, that is, unmerited, fame; for its recipient lives upon it
without actually possessing the solid substratum of which fame is the
outward and visible sign. False fame must often put its possessor out
of conceit with himself; for the time may come when, in spite of the
illusions borne of self-love, he will feel giddy on the heights which
he was never meant to climb, or look upon himself as spurious
coin; and in the anguish of threatened discovery and well-merited
degradation, he will read the sentence of posterity on the foreheads
of the wise--like a man who owes his property to a forged will.

The truest fame, the fame that comes after death, is never heard of by
its recipient; and yet he is called a happy man.

His happiness lay both in the possession of those great qualities
which won him fame, and in the opportunity that was granted him of
developing them--the leisure he had to act as he pleased, to dedicate
himself to his favorite pursuits. It is only work done from the heart
that ever gains the laurel.

Greatness of soul, or wealth of intellect, is what makes a man
happy--intellect, such as, when stamped on its productions, will
receive the admiration of centuries to come,--thoughts which make him
happy at the time, and will in their turn be a source of study and
delight to the noblest minds of the most remote posterity. The value
of posthumous fame lies in deserving it; and this is its own reward.
Whether works destined to fame attain it in the lifetime of their
author is a chance affair, of no very great importance. For the
average man has no critical power of his own, and is absolutely
incapable of appreciating the difficulty of a great work. People are
always swayed by authority; and where fame is widespread, it means
that ninety-nine out of a hundred take it on faith alone. If a man is
famed far and wide in his own lifetime, he will, if he is wise, not
set too much value upon it, because it is no more than the echo of a
few voices, which the chance of a day has touched in his favor.

Would a musician feel flattered by the loud applause of an audience
if he knew that they were nearly all deaf, and that, to conceal their
infirmity, they set to work to clap vigorously as soon as ever they
saw one or two persons applauding? And what would he say if he got to
know that those one or two persons had often taken bribes to secure
the loudest applause for the poorest player!

It is easy to see why contemporary praise so seldom develops into
posthumous fame. D'Alembert, in an extremely fine description of the
temple of literary fame, remarks that the sanctuary of the temple is
inhabited by the great dead, who during their life had no place there,
and by a very few living persons, who are nearly all ejected on their
death. Let me remark, in passing, that to erect a monument to a man
in his lifetime is as much as declaring that posterity is not to be
trusted in its judgment of him. If a man does happen to see his own
true fame, it can very rarely be before he is old, though there have
been artists and musicians who have been exceptions to this rule, but
very few philosophers. This is confirmed by the portraits of people
celebrated by their works; for most of them are taken only after their
subjects have attained celebrity, generally depicting them as old and
grey; more especially if philosophy has been the work of their lives.
From the eudaemonistic standpoint, this is a very proper arrangement;
as fame and youth are too much for a mortal at one and the same time.
Life is such a poor business that the strictest economy must be
exercised in its good things. Youth has enough and to spare in itself,
and must rest content with what it has. But when the delights and joys
of life fall away in old age, as the leaves from a tree in autumn,
fame buds forth opportunely, like a plant that is green in winter.
Fame is, as it were, the fruit that must grow all the summer before it
can be enjoyed at Yule. There is no greater consolation in age than
the feeling of having put the whole force of one's youth into works
which still remain young.

Finally, let us examine a little more closely the kinds of fame which
attach to various intellectual pursuits; for it is with fame of this
sort that my remarks are more immediately concerned.

I think it may be said broadly that the intellectual superiority it
denotes consists in forming theories, that is, new combinations of
certain facts. These facts may be of very different kinds; but
the better they are known, and the more they come within everyday
experience, the greater and wider will be the fame which is to be won
by theorizing about them.

For instance, if the facts in question are numbers or lines or special
branches of science, such as physics, zoology, botany, anatomy, or
corrupt passages in ancient authors, or undecipherable inscriptions,
written, it may be, in some unknown alphabet, or obscure points
in history; the kind of fame that may be obtained by correctly
manipulating such facts will not extend much beyond those who make a
study of them--a small number of persons, most of whom live retired
lives and are envious of others who become famous in their special
branch of knowledge.

But if the facts be such as are known to everyone, for example, the
fundamental characteristics of the human mind or the human heart,
which are shared by all alike; or the great physical agencies which
are constantly in operation before our eyes, or the general course of
natural laws; the kind of fame which is to be won by spreading the
light of a new and manifestly true theory in regard to them, is such
as in time will extend almost all over the civilized world: for if the
facts be such as everyone can grasp, the theory also will be generally
intelligible. But the extent of the fame will depend upon the
difficulties overcome; and the more generally known the facts are, the
harder it will be to form a theory that shall be both new and true:
because a great many heads will have been occupied with them, and
there will be little or no possibility of saying anything that has not
been said before.

On the other hand, facts which are not accessible to everybody, and
can be got at only after much difficulty and labor, nearly
always admit of new combinations and theories; so that, if sound
understanding and judgment are brought to bear upon them--qualities
which do not involve very high intellectual power--a man may easily be
so fortunate as to light upon some new theory in regard to them which
shall be also true. But fame won on such paths does not extend much
beyond those who possess a knowledge of the facts in question. To
solve problems of this sort requires, no doubt, a great ideal of study
and labor, if only to get at the facts; whilst on the path where the
greatest and most widespread fame is to be won, the facts may be
grasped without any labor at all. But just in proportion as less labor
is necessary, more talent or genius is required; and between such
qualities and the drudgery of research no comparison is possible, in
respect either of their intrinsic value, or of the estimation in which
they are held.

And so people who feel that they possess solid intellectual capacity
and a sound judgment, and yet cannot claim the highest mental powers,
should not be afraid of laborious study; for by its aid they may
work themselves above the great mob of humanity who have the facts
constantly before their eyes, and reach those secluded spots which are
accessible to learned toil.

For this is a sphere where there are infinitely fewer rivals, and
a man of only moderate capacity may soon find an opportunity of
proclaiming a theory which shall be both new and true; nay, the merit
of his discovery will partly rest upon the difficulty of coming at
the facts. But applause from one's fellow-students, who are the only
persons with a knowledge of the subject, sounds very faint to the
far-off multitude. And if we follow up this sort of fame far enough,
we shall at last come to a point where facts very difficult to get at
are in themselves sufficient to lay a foundation of fame, without any
necessity for forming a theory;--travels, for instance, in remote and
little-known countries, which make a man famous by what he has seen,
not by what he has thought. The great advantage of this kind of fame
is that to relate what one has seen, is much easier than to impart
one's thoughts, and people are apt to understand descriptions better
than ideas, reading the one more readily than the other: for, as Asmus
says,

  _When one goes forth a-voyaging
  He has a tale to tell_.

And yet for all that, a personal acquaintance with celebrated
travelers often remind us of a line from Horace--new scenes do not
always mean new ideas--

  _Caelum non animum mutant qui trans mare currunt_.[1]

[Footnote 1: Epist. I. II.]

But if a man finds himself in possession of great mental faculties,
such as alone should venture on the solution of the hardest of all
problems--those which concern nature as a whole and humanity in its
widest range, he will do well to extend his view equally in all
directions, without ever straying too far amid the intricacies of
various by-paths, or invading regions little known; in other words,
without occupying himself with special branches of knowledge, to say
nothing of their petty details. There is no necessity for him to
seek out subjects difficult of access, in order to escape a crowd of
rivals; the common objects of life will give him material for new
theories at once serious and true; and the service he renders will be
appreciated by all those--and they form a great part of mankind--who
know the facts of which he treats. What a vast distinction there is
between students of physics, chemistry, anatomy, mineralogy, zoology,
philology, history, and the men who deal with the great facts of human
life, the poet and the philosopher!


================================================================================
[The Wisdom of Life (인생의 지혜)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Essays of Arthur Schopenhauer; Studies in Pessimism
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Essays of Arthur Schopenhauer; Studies in Pessimism

Author: Arthur Schopenhauer

Translator: T. Bailey Saunders


        
Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #10732]
                Most recently updated: October 28, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10732

Credits: E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Josephine Paolucci, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ESSAYS OF ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER; STUDIES IN PESSIMISM ***

THE ESSAYS OF ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER: STUDIES IN PESSIMISM

TRANSLATED BY

T. BAILEY SAUNDERS, M.A.







CONTENTS.


  ON THE SUFFERINGS OF THE WORLD
  ON THE VANITY OF EXISTENCE
  ON SUICIDE
  IMMORTALITY: A DIALOGUE
  PSYCHOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS
  ON EDUCATION
  OF WOMEN
  ON NOISE
  A FEW PARABLES




NOTE.

The Essays here presented form a further selection from Schopenhauer's
_Parerga_, brought together under a title which is not to be found
in the original, and does not claim to apply to every chapter in
the volume. The first essay is, in the main, a rendering of the
philosopher's remarks under the heading of _Nachträge zur Lehre vom
Leiden der Welt_, together with certain parts of another section
entitled _Nachträge zur Lehre von der Bejahung und Verneinung des
Willens zum Leben_. Such omissions as I have made are directed chiefly
by the desire to avoid repeating arguments already familiar to readers
of the other volumes in this series. The _Dialogue on Immortality_
sums up views expressed at length in the philosopher's chief work, and
treated again in the _Parerga_. The _Psychological Observations_ in
this and the previous volume practically exhaust the chapter of the
original which bears this title.

The essay on _Women_ must not be taken in jest. It expresses
Schopenhauer's serious convictions; and, as a penetrating observer
of the faults of humanity, he may be allowed a hearing on a question
which is just now receiving a good deal of attention among us.

T.B.S.




ON THE SUFFERINGS OF THE WORLD.


Unless _suffering_ is the direct and immediate object of life, our
existence must entirely fail of its aim. It is absurd to look upon
the enormous amount of pain that abounds everywhere in the world, and
originates in needs and necessities inseparable from life itself, as
serving no purpose at all and the result of mere chance. Each separate
misfortune, as it comes, seems, no doubt, to be something exceptional;
but misfortune in general is the rule.

I know of no greater absurdity than that propounded by most systems of
philosophy in declaring evil to be negative in its character. Evil is
just what is positive; it makes its own existence felt. Leibnitz is
particularly concerned to defend this absurdity; and he seeks to
strengthen his position by using a palpable and paltry sophism.[1]
It is the good which is negative; in other words, happiness and
satisfaction always imply some desire fulfilled, some state of pain
brought to an end.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_, cf. _Thèod_, §153.--Leibnitz argued
that evil is a negative quality--_i.e_., the absence of good; and that
its active and seemingly positive character is an incidental and not
an essential part of its nature. Cold, he said, is only the absence of
the power of heat, and the active power of expansion in freezing water
is an incidental and not an essential part of the nature of cold. The
fact is, that the power of expansion in freezing water is really an
increase of repulsion amongst its molecules; and Schopenhauer is quite
right in calling the whole argument a sophism.]

This explains the fact that we generally find pleasure to be not
nearly so pleasant as we expected, and pain very much more painful.

The pleasure in this world, it has been said, outweighs the pain; or,
at any rate, there is an even balance between the two. If the reader
wishes to see shortly whether this statement is true, let him compare
the respective feelings of two animals, one of which is engaged in
eating the other.

The best consolation in misfortune or affliction of any kind will
be the thought of other people who are in a still worse plight than
yourself; and this is a form of consolation open to every one. But
what an awful fate this means for mankind as a whole!

We are like lambs in a field, disporting themselves under the eye of
the butcher, who chooses out first one and then another for his prey.
So it is that in our good days we are all unconscious of the evil Fate
may have presently in store for us--sickness, poverty, mutilation,
loss of sight or reason.

No little part of the torment of existence lies in this, that Time is
continually pressing upon us, never letting us take breath, but always
coming after us, like a taskmaster with a whip. If at any moment Time
stays his hand, it is only when we are delivered over to the misery of
boredom.

But misfortune has its uses; for, as our bodily frame would burst
asunder if the pressure of the atmosphere was removed, so, if the
lives of men were relieved of all need, hardship and adversity; if
everything they took in hand were successful, they would be so swollen
with arrogance that, though they might not burst, they would present
the spectacle of unbridled folly--nay, they would go mad. And I may
say, further, that a certain amount of care or pain or trouble is
necessary for every man at all times. A ship without ballast is
unstable and will not go straight.

Certain it is that _work, worry, labor_ and _trouble_, form the lot of
almost all men their whole life long. But if all wishes were fulfilled
as soon as they arose, how would men occupy their lives? what would
they do with their time? If the world were a paradise of luxury and
ease, a land flowing with milk and honey, where every Jack obtained
his Jill at once and without any difficulty, men would either die of
boredom or hang themselves; or there would be wars, massacres, and
murders; so that in the end mankind would inflict more suffering on
itself than it has now to accept at the hands of Nature.

In early youth, as we contemplate our coming life, we are like
children in a theatre before the curtain is raised, sitting there
in high spirits and eagerly waiting for the play to begin. It is a
blessing that we do not know what is really going to happen. Could we
foresee it, there are times when children might seem like innocent
prisoners, condemned, not to death, but to life, and as yet all
unconscious of what their sentence means. Nevertheless, every man
desires to reach old age; in other words, a state of life of which it
may be said: "It is bad to-day, and it will be worse to-morrow; and so
on till the worst of all."

If you try to imagine, as nearly as you can, what an amount of misery,
pain and suffering of every kind the sun shines upon in its course,
you will admit that it would be much better if, on the earth as little
as on the moon, the sun were able to call forth the phenomena of life;
and if, here as there, the surface were still in a crystalline state.

Again, you may look upon life as an unprofitable episode, disturbing
the blessed calm of non-existence. And, in any case, even though
things have gone with you tolerably well, the longer you live the more
clearly you will feel that, on the whole, life is _a disappointment,
nay, a cheat_.

If two men who were friends in their youth meet again when they are
old, after being separated for a life-time, the chief feeling
they will have at the sight of each other will be one of complete
disappointment at life as a whole; because their thoughts will be
carried back to that earlier time when life seemed so fair as it
lay spread out before them in the rosy light of dawn, promised so
much--and then performed so little. This feeling will so completely
predominate over every other that they will not even consider it
necessary to give it words; but on either side it will be silently
assumed, and form the ground-work of all they have to talk about.

He who lives to see two or three generations is like a man who sits
some time in the conjurer's booth at a fair, and witnesses the
performance twice or thrice in succession. The tricks were meant to
be seen only once; and when they are no longer a novelty and cease to
deceive, their effect is gone.

While no man is much to be envied for his lot, there are countless
numbers whose fate is to be deplored.

Life is a task to be done. It is a fine thing to say _defunctus est_;
it means that the man has done his task.

If children were brought into the world by an act of pure reason
alone, would the human race continue to exist? Would not a man rather
have so much sympathy with the coming generation as to spare it the
burden of existence? or at any rate not take it upon himself to impose
that burden upon it in cold blood.

I shall be told, I suppose, that my philosophy is comfortless--because
I speak the truth; and people prefer to be assured that everything the
Lord has made is good. Go to the priests, then, and leave philosophers
in peace! At any rate, do not ask us to accommodate our doctrines to
the lessons you have been taught. That is what those rascals of sham
philosophers will do for you. Ask them for any doctrine you please,
and you will get it. Your University professors are bound to preach
optimism; and it is an easy and agreeable task to upset their
theories.

I have reminded the reader that every state of welfare, every feeling
of satisfaction, is negative in its character; that is to say, it
consists in freedom from pain, which is the positive element of
existence. It follows, therefore, that the happiness of any given life
is to be measured, not by its joys and pleasures, but by the extent to
which it has been free from suffering--from positive evil. If this
is the true standpoint, the lower animals appear to enjoy a happier
destiny than man. Let us examine the matter a little more closely.

However varied the forms that human happiness and misery may take,
leading a man to seek the one and shun the other, the material basis
of it all is bodily pleasure or bodily pain. This basis is very
restricted: it is simply health, food, protection from wet and cold,
the satisfaction of the sexual instinct; or else the absence of these
things. Consequently, as far as real physical pleasure is concerned,
the man is not better off than the brute, except in so far as the
higher possibilities of his nervous system make him more sensitive to
every kind of pleasure, but also, it must be remembered, to every kind
of pain. But then compared with the brute, how much stronger are the
passions aroused in him! what an immeasurable difference there is in
the depth and vehemence of his emotions!--and yet, in the one case,
as in the other, all to produce the same result in the end: namely,
health, food, clothing, and so on.

The chief source of all this passion is that thought for what is
absent and future, which, with man, exercises such a powerful
influence upon all he does. It is this that is the real origin of
his cares, his hopes, his fears--emotions which affect him much
more deeply than could ever be the case with those present joys
and sufferings to which the brute is confined. In his powers of
reflection, memory and foresight, man possesses, as it were, a machine
for condensing and storing up his pleasures and his sorrows. But the
brute has nothing of the kind; whenever it is in pain, it is as though
it were suffering for the first time, even though the same thing
should have previously happened to it times out of number. It has
no power of summing up its feelings. Hence its careless and placid
temper: how much it is to be envied! But in man reflection comes in,
with all the emotions to which it gives rise; and taking up the same
elements of pleasure and pain which are common to him and the brute,
it develops his susceptibility to happiness and misery to such a
degree that, at one moment the man is brought in an instant to a state
of delight that may even prove fatal, at another to the depths of
despair and suicide.

If we carry our analysis a step farther, we shall find that, in order
to increase his pleasures, man has intentionally added to the number
and pressure of his needs, which in their original state were not much
more difficult to satisfy than those of the brute. Hence luxury in all
its forms; delicate food, the use of tobacco and opium, spirituous
liquors, fine clothes, and the thousand and one things than he
considers necessary to his existence.

And above and beyond all this, there is a separate and peculiar source
of pleasure, and consequently of pain, which man has established for
himself, also as the result of using his powers of reflection; and
this occupies him out of all proportion to its value, nay, almost more
than all his other interests put together--I mean ambition and the
feeling of honor and shame; in plain words, what he thinks about the
opinion other people have of him. Taking a thousand forms, often very
strange ones, this becomes the goal of almost all the efforts he makes
that are not rooted in physical pleasure or pain. It is true that
besides the sources of pleasure which he has in common with the
brute, man has the pleasures of the mind as well. These admit of many
gradations, from the most innocent trifling or the merest talk up to
the highest intellectual achievements; but there is the accompanying
boredom to be set against them on the side of suffering. Boredom is
a form of suffering unknown to brutes, at any rate in their natural
state; it is only the very cleverest of them who show faint traces
of it when they are domesticated; whereas in the case of man it has
become a downright scourge. The crowd of miserable wretches whose one
aim in life is to fill their purses but never to put anything into
their heads, offers a singular instance of this torment of boredom.
Their wealth becomes a punishment by delivering them up to misery of
having nothing to do; for, to escape it, they will rush about in all
directions, traveling here, there and everywhere. No sooner do they
arrive in a place than they are anxious to know what amusements it
affords; just as though they were beggars asking where they could
receive a dole! Of a truth, need and boredom are the two poles
of human life. Finally, I may mention that as regards the sexual
relation, a man is committed to a peculiar arrangement which drives
him obstinately to choose one person. This feeling grows, now and
then, into a more or less passionate love,[1] which is the source of
little pleasure and much suffering.

[Footnote 1: I have treated this subject at length in a special
chapter of the second volume of my chief work.]

It is, however, a wonderful thing that the mere addition of thought
should serve to raise such a vast and lofty structure of human
happiness and misery; resting, too, on the same narrow basis of joy
and sorrow as man holds in common with the brute, and exposing him
to such violent emotions, to so many storms of passion, so much
convulsion of feeling, that what he has suffered stands written and
may be read in the lines on his face. And yet, when all is told, he
has been struggling ultimately for the very same things as the brute
has attained, and with an incomparably smaller expenditure of passion
and pain.

But all this contributes to increase the measures of suffering in
human life out of all proportion to its pleasures; and the pains of
life are made much worse for man by the fact that death is something
very real to him. The brute flies from death instinctively without
really knowing what it is, and therefore without ever contemplating it
in the way natural to a man, who has this prospect always before his
eyes. So that even if only a few brutes die a natural death, and most
of them live only just long enough to transmit their species, and
then, if not earlier, become the prey of some other animal,--whilst
man, on the other hand, manages to make so-called natural death the
rule, to which, however, there are a good many exceptions,--the
advantage is on the side of the brute, for the reason stated above.
But the fact is that man attains the natural term of years just as
seldom as the brute; because the unnatural way in which he lives, and
the strain of work and emotion, lead to a degeneration of the race;
and so his goal is not often reached.

The brute is much more content with mere existence than man; the plant
is wholly so; and man finds satisfaction in it just in proportion as
he is dull and obtuse. Accordingly, the life of the brute carries less
of sorrow with it, but also less of joy, when compared with the life
of man; and while this may be traced, on the one side, to freedom from
the torment of _care_ and _anxiety_, it is also due to the fact
that _hope_, in any real sense, is unknown to the brute. It is thus
deprived of any share in that which gives us the most and best of our
joys and pleasures, the mental anticipation of a happy future, and the
inspiriting play of phantasy, both of which we owe to our power of
imagination. If the brute is free from care, it is also, in this
sense, without hope; in either case, because its consciousness is
limited to the present moment, to what it can actually see before
it. The brute is an embodiment of present impulses, and hence what
elements of fear and hope exist in its nature--and they do not go very
far--arise only in relation to objects that lie before it and within
reach of those impulses: whereas a man's range of vision embraces the
whole of his life, and extends far into the past and future.

Following upon this, there is one respect in which brutes show real
wisdom when compared with us--I mean, their quiet, placid enjoyment of
the present moment. The tranquillity of mind which this seems to give
them often puts us to shame for the many times we allow our thoughts
and our cares to make us restless and discontented. And, in fact,
those pleasures of hope and anticipation which I have been mentioning
are not to be had for nothing. The delight which a man has in hoping
for and looking forward to some special satisfaction is a part of the
real pleasure attaching to it enjoyed in advance. This is afterwards
deducted; for the more we look forward to anything, the less
satisfaction we find in it when it comes. But the brute's enjoyment
is not anticipated, and therefore, suffers no deduction; so that the
actual pleasure of the moment comes to it whole and unimpaired. In the
same way, too, evil presses upon the brute only with its own intrinsic
weight; whereas with us the fear of its coming often makes its burden
ten times more grievous.

It is just this characteristic way in which the brute gives itself up
entirely to the present moment that contributes so much to the delight
we take in our domestic pets. They are the present moment personified,
and in some respects they make us feel the value of every hour that
is free from trouble and annoyance, which we, with our thoughts and
preoccupations, mostly disregard. But man, that selfish and heartless
creature, misuses this quality of the brute to be more content than we
are with mere existence, and often works it to such an extent that he
allows the brute absolutely nothing more than mere, bare life. The
bird which was made so that it might rove over half of the world, he
shuts up into the space of a cubic foot, there to die a slow death in
longing and crying for freedom; for in a cage it does not sing for
the pleasure of it. And when I see how man misuses the dog, his best
friend; how he ties up this intelligent animal with a chain, I feel
the deepest sympathy with the brute and burning indignation against
its master.

We shall see later that by taking a very high standpoint it is
possible to justify the sufferings of mankind. But this justification
cannot apply to animals, whose sufferings, while in a great measure
brought about by men, are often considerable even apart from their
agency.[1] And so we are forced to ask, Why and for what purpose does
all this torment and agony exist? There is nothing here to give the
will pause; it is not free to deny itself and so obtain redemption.
There is only one consideration that may serve to explain the
sufferings of animals. It is this: that the will to live, which
underlies the whole world of phenomena, must, in their case satisfy
its cravings by feeding upon itself. This it does by forming a
gradation of phenomena, every one of which exists at the expense of
another. I have shown, however, that the capacity for suffering is
less in animals than in man. Any further explanation that may be given
of their fate will be in the nature of hypothesis, if not actually
mythical in its character; and I may leave the reader to speculate
upon the matter for himself.

[Footnote 1: Cf. _Welt als Wille und Vorstellung_, vol. ii. p. 404.]

_Brahma_ is said to have produced the world by a kind of fall or
mistake; and in order to atone for his folly, he is bound to remain
in it himself until he works out his redemption. As an account of the
origin of things, that is admirable! According to the doctrines
of _Buddhism_, the world came into being as the result of some
inexplicable disturbance in the heavenly calm of Nirvana, that blessed
state obtained by expiation, which had endured so long a time--the
change taking place by a kind of fatality. This explanation must be
understood as having at bottom some moral bearing; although it is
illustrated by an exactly parallel theory in the domain of physical
science, which places the origin of the sun in a primitive streak of
mist, formed one knows not how. Subsequently, by a series of moral
errors, the world became gradually worse and worse--true of the
physical orders as well--until it assumed the dismal aspect it wears
to-day. Excellent! The _Greeks_ looked upon the world and the gods as
the work of an inscrutable necessity. A passable explanation: we may
be content with it until we can get a better. Again, _Ormuzd_ and
_Ahriman_ are rival powers, continually at war. That is not bad. But
that a God like Jehovah should have created this world of misery and
woe, out of pure caprice, and because he enjoyed doing it, and should
then have clapped his hands in praise of his own work, and declared
everything to be very good--that will not do at all! In its
explanation of the origin of the world, Judaism is inferior to any
other form of religious doctrine professed by a civilized nation;
and it is quite in keeping with this that it is the only one which
presents no trace whatever of any belief in the immortality of the
soul.[1]

[Footnote 1: See _Parerga_, vol. i. pp. 139 _et seq_.]

Even though Leibnitz' contention, that this is the best of all
possible worlds, were correct, that would not justify God in having
created it. For he is the Creator not of the world only, but of
possibility itself; and, therefore, he ought to have so ordered
possibility as that it would admit of something better.

There are two things which make it impossible to believe that this
world is the successful work of an all-wise, all-good, and, at the
same time, all-powerful Being; firstly, the misery which abounds in
it everywhere; and secondly, the obvious imperfection of its highest
product, man, who is a burlesque of what he should be. These things
cannot be reconciled with any such belief. On the contrary, they are
just the facts which support what I have been saying; they are our
authority for viewing the world as the outcome of our own misdeeds,
and therefore, as something that had better not have been. Whilst,
under the former hypothesis, they amount to a bitter accusation
against the Creator, and supply material for sarcasm; under the latter
they form an indictment against our own nature, our own will, and
teach us a lesson of humility. They lead us to see that, like the
children of a libertine, we come into the world with the burden of sin
upon us; and that it is only through having continually to atone for
this sin that our existence is so miserable, and that its end is
death.

There is nothing more certain than the general truth that it is the
grievous _sin of the world_ which has produced the grievous _suffering
of the world_. I am not referring here to the physical connection
between these two things lying in the realm of experience; my meaning
is metaphysical. Accordingly, the sole thing that reconciles me to the
Old Testament is the story of the Fall. In my eyes, it is the only
metaphysical truth in that book, even though it appears in the form of
an allegory. There seems to me no better explanation of our existence
than that it is the result of some false step, some sin of which
we are paying the penalty. I cannot refrain from recommending the
thoughtful reader a popular, but at the same time, profound treatise
on this subject by Claudius[1] which exhibits the essentially
pessimistic spirit of Christianity. It is entitled: _Cursed is the
ground for thy sake_.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Matthias Claudius (1740-1815), a
popular poet, and friend of Klopstock, Herder and Leasing. He edited
the _Wandsbecker Bote_, in the fourth part of which appeared the
treatise mentioned above. He generally wrote under the pseudonym of
_Asmus_, and Schopenhauer often refers to him by this name.]

Between the ethics of the Greeks and the ethics of the Hindoos, there
is a glaring contrast. In the one case (with the exception, it must be
confessed, of Plato), the object of ethics is to enable a man to lead
a happy life; in the other, it is to free and redeem him from life
altogether--as is directly stated in the very first words of the
_Sankhya Karika_.

Allied with this is the contrast between the Greek and the Christian
idea of death. It is strikingly presented in a visible form on a fine
antique sarcophagus in the gallery of Florence, which exhibits, in
relief, the whole series of ceremonies attending a wedding in ancient
times, from the formal offer to the evening when Hymen's torch lights
the happy couple home. Compare with that the Christian coffin,
draped in mournful black and surmounted with a crucifix! How much
significance there is in these two ways of finding comfort in death.
They are opposed to each other, but each is right. The one points to
the _affirmation_ of the will to live, which remains sure of life for
all time, however rapidly its forms may change. The other, in the
symbol of suffering and death, points to the _denial_ of the will to
live, to redemption from this world, the domain of death and devil.
And in the question between the affirmation and the denial of the will
to live, Christianity is in the last resort right.

The contrast which the New Testament presents when compared with the
Old, according to the ecclesiastical view of the matter, is just that
existing between my ethical system and the moral philosophy of Europe.
The Old Testament represents man as under the dominion of Law, in
which, however, there is no redemption. The New Testament declares
Law to have failed, frees man from its dominion,[1] and in its stead
preaches the kingdom of grace, to be won by faith, love of neighbor
and entire sacrifice of self. This is the path of redemption from the
evil of the world. The spirit of the New Testament is undoubtedly
asceticism, however your protestants and rationalists may twist it to
suit their purpose. Asceticism is the denial of the will to live; and
the transition from the Old Testament to the New, from the dominion
of Law to that of Faith, from justification by works to redemption
through the Mediator, from the domain of sin and death to eternal life
in Christ, means, when taken in its real sense, the transition from
the merely moral virtues to the denial of the will to live. My
philosophy shows the metaphysical foundation of justice and the love
of mankind, and points to the goal to which these virtues necessarily
lead, if they are practised in perfection. At the same time it is
candid in confessing that a man must turn his back upon the world, and
that the denial of the will to live is the way of redemption. It is
therefore really at one with the spirit of the New Testament, whilst
all other systems are couched in the spirit of the Old; that is
to say, theoretically as well as practically, their result is
Judaism--mere despotic theism. In this sense, then, my doctrine might
be called the only true Christian philosophy--however paradoxical a
statement this may seem to people who take superficial views instead
of penetrating to the heart of the matter.

[Footnote 1: Cf. Romans vii; Galatians ii, iii.]

If you want a safe compass to guide you through life, and to banish
all doubt as to the right way of looking at it, you cannot do better
than accustom yourself to regard this world as a penitentiary, a
sort of a penal colony, or [Greek: ergastaerion] as the earliest
philosopher called it.[1] Amongst the Christian Fathers, Origen, with
praiseworthy courage, took this view,[2] which is further justified by
certain objective theories of life. I refer, not to my own philosophy
alone, but to the wisdom of all ages, as expressed in Brahmanism and
Buddhism, and in the sayings of Greek philosophers like Empedocles and
Pythagoras; as also by Cicero, in his remark that the wise men of old
used to teach that we come into this world to pay the penalty of crime
committed in another state of existence--a doctrine which formed
part of the initiation into the mysteries.[3] And Vanini--whom his
contemporaries burned, finding that an easier task than to confute
him--puts the same thing in a very forcible way. _Man_, he says, _is
so full of every kind of misery that, were it not repugnant to the
Christian religion, I should venture to affirm that if evil spirits
exist at all, they have posed into human form and are now atoning for
their crimes_.[4] And true Christianity--using the word in its right
sense--also regards our existence as the consequence of sin and error.

[Footnote 1: Cf. Clem. Alex. Strom. L. iii, c, 3, p. 399.]

[Footnote 2: Augustine _de cìvitate Dei_., L. xi. c. 23.]

[Footnote 3: Cf. _Fragmenta de philosophia_.]

[Footnote: 4: _De admirandis naturae arcanis_; dial L. p. 35.]

If you accustom yourself to this view of life you will regulate your
expectations accordingly, and cease to look upon all its disagreeable
incidents, great and small, its sufferings, its worries, its misery,
as anything unusual or irregular; nay, you will find that everything
is as it should be, in a world where each of us pays the penalty of
existence in his own peculiar way. Amongst the evils of a penal colony
is the society of those who form it; and if the reader is worthy of
better company, he will need no words from me to remind him of what he
has to put up with at present. If he has a soul above the common, or
if he is a man of genius, he will occasionally feel like some noble
prisoner of state, condemned to work in the galleys with common
criminals; and he will follow his example and try to isolate himself.

In general, however, it should be said that this view of life will
enable us to contemplate the so-called imperfections of the great
majority of men, their moral and intellectual deficiencies and the
resulting base type of countenance, without any surprise, to say
nothing of indignation; for we shall never cease to reflect where we
are, and that the men about us are beings conceived and born in
sin, and living to atone for it. That is what Christianity means in
speaking of the sinful nature of man.

_Pardon's the word to all_! [1] Whatever folly men commit, be
their shortcomings or their vices what they may, let us exercise
forbearance; remembering that when these faults appear in others, it
is our follies and vices that we behold. They are the shortcomings of
humanity, to which we belong; whose faults, one and all, we share;
yes, even those very faults at which we now wax so indignant, merely
because they have not yet appeared in ourselves. They are faults that
do not lie on the surface. But they exist down there in the depths of
our nature; and should anything call them forth, they will come and
show themselves, just as we now see them in others. One man, it
is true, may have faults that are absent in his fellow; and it is
undeniable that the sum total of bad qualities is in some cases very
large; for the difference of individuality between man and man passes
all measure.

[Footnote 1: "Cymbeline," Act v. Sc. 5.]

In fact, the conviction that the world and man is something that had
better not have been, is of a kind to fill us with indulgence towards
one another. Nay, from this point of view, we might well consider the
proper form of address to be, not _Monsieur, Sir, mein Herr_, but _my
fellow-sufferer, Socî malorum, compagnon de miseres_! This may perhaps
sound strange, but it is in keeping with the facts; it puts others in
a right light; and it reminds us of that which is after all the most
necessary thing in life--the tolerance, patience, regard, and love
of neighbor, of which everyone stands in need, and which, therefore,
every man owes to his fellow.




THE VANITY OF EXISTENCE.


This vanity finds expression in the whole way in which things exist;
in the infinite nature of Time and Space, as opposed to the finite
nature of the individual in both; in the ever-passing present moment
as the only mode of actual existence; in the interdependence and
relativity of all things; in continual Becoming without ever Being; in
constant wishing and never being satisfied; in the long battle
which forms the history of life, where every effort is checked by
difficulties, and stopped until they are overcome. Time is that in
which all things pass away; it is merely the form under which the will
to live--the thing-in-itself and therefore imperishable--has revealed
to it that its efforts are in vain; it is that agent by which at every
moment all things in our hands become as nothing, and lose any real
value they possess.

That which _has been_ exists no more; it exists as little as that
which has _never_ been. But of everything that exists you must say, in
the next moment, that it has been. Hence something of great importance
now past is inferior to something of little importance now present, in
that the latter is a _reality_, and related to the former as something
to nothing.

A man finds himself, to his great astonishment, suddenly existing,
after thousands and thousands of years of non-existence: he lives for
a little while; and then, again, comes an equally long period when he
must exist no more. The heart rebels against this, and feels that
it cannot be true. The crudest intellect cannot speculate on such a
subject without having a presentiment that Time is something ideal in
its nature. This ideality of Time and Space is the key to every true
system of metaphysics; because it provides for quite another order of
things than is to be met with in the domain of nature. This is why
Kant is so great.

Of every event in our life we can say only for one moment that it
_is_; for ever after, that it _was_. Every evening we are poorer by a
day. It might, perhaps, make us mad to see how rapidly our short span
of time ebbs away; if it were not that in the furthest depths of our
being we are secretly conscious of our share in the exhaustible spring
of eternity, so that we can always hope to find life in it again.

Consideration of the kind, touched on above, might, indeed, lead us to
embrace the belief that the greatest _wisdom_ is to make the enjoyment
of the present the supreme object of life; because that is the only
reality, all else being merely the play of thought. On the other hand,
such a course might just as well be called the greatest _folly_: for
that which in the next moment exists no more, and vanishes utterly,
like a dream, can never be worth a serious effort.

The whole foundation on which our existence rests is the present--the
ever-fleeting present. It lies, then, in the very nature of our
existence to take the form of constant motion, and to offer no
possibility of our ever attaining the rest for which we are always
striving. We are like a man running downhill, who cannot keep on his
legs unless he runs on, and will inevitably fall if he stops; or,
again, like a pole balanced on the tip of one's finger; or like a
planet, which would fall into its sun the moment it ceased to hurry
forward on its way. Unrest is the mark of existence.

In a world where all is unstable, and nought can endure, but is swept
onwards at once in the hurrying whirlpool of change; where a man, if
he is to keep erect at all, must always be advancing and moving, like
an acrobat on a rope--in such a world, happiness in inconceivable.
How can it dwell where, as Plato says, _continual Becoming and never
Being_ is the sole form of existence? In the first place, a man never
is happy, but spends his whole life in striving after something which
he thinks will make him so; he seldom attains his goal, and when he
does, it is only to be disappointed; he is mostly shipwrecked in the
end, and comes into harbor with masts and rigging gone. And then, it
is all one whether he has been happy or miserable; for his life was
never anything more than a present moment always vanishing; and now it
is over.

At the same time it is a wonderful thing that, in the world of human
beings as in that of animals in general, this manifold restless motion
is produced and kept up by the agency of two simple impulses--hunger
and the sexual instinct; aided a little, perhaps, by the influence of
boredom, but by nothing else; and that, in the theatre of life, these
suffice to form the _primum mobile_ of how complicated a machinery,
setting in motion how strange and varied a scene!

On looking a little closer, we find that inorganic matter presents
a constant conflict between chemical forces, which eventually works
dissolution; and on the other hand, that organic life is impossible
without continual change of matter, and cannot exist if it does not
receive perpetual help from without. This is the realm of _finality_;
and its opposite would be _an infinite existence_, exposed to no
attack from without, and needing nothing to support it; [Greek: haei
hosautos dn], the realm of eternal peace; [Greek: oute giguomenon oute
apollumenon], some timeless, changeless state, one and undiversified;
the negative knowledge of which forms the dominant note of the
Platonic philosophy. It is to some such state as this that the denial
of the will to live opens up the way.

The scenes of our life are like pictures done in rough mosaic. Looked
at close, they produce no effect. There is nothing beautiful to
be found in them, unless you stand some distance off. So, to gain
anything we have longed for is only to discover how vain and empty
it is; and even though we are always living in expectation of better
things, at the same time we often repent and long to have the past
back again. We look upon the present as something to be put up with
while it lasts, and serving only as the way towards our goal. Hence
most people, if they glance back when they come to the end of life,
will find that all along they have been living _ad interim_: they will
be surprised to find that the very thing they disregarded and let
slip by unenjoyed, was just the life in the expectation of which they
passed all their time. Of how many a man may it not be said that hope
made a fool of him until he danced into the arms of death!

Then again, how insatiable a creature is man! Every satisfaction he
attains lays the seeds of some new desire, so that there is no end to
the wishes of each individual will. And why is this? The real reason
is simply that, taken in itself, Will is the lord of all worlds:
everything belongs to it, and therefore no one single thing can ever
give it satisfaction, but only the whole, which is endless. For all
that, it must rouse our sympathy to think how very little the Will,
this lord of the world, really gets when it takes the form of an
individual; usually only just enough to keep the body together. This
is why man is so very miserable.

Life presents itself chiefly as a task--the task, I mean, of
subsisting at all, _gagner sa vie_. If this is accomplished, life is a
burden, and then there comes the second task of doing something with
that which has been won--of warding off boredom, which, like a bird
of prey, hovers over us, ready to fall wherever it sees a life secure
from need. The first task is to win something; the second, to banish
the feeling that it has been won; otherwise it is a burden.

Human life must be some kind of mistake. The truth of this will be
sufficiently obvious if we only remember that man is a compound of
needs and necessities hard to satisfy; and that even when they are
satisfied, all he obtains is a state of painlessness, where nothing
remains to him but abandonment to boredom. This is direct proof that
existence has no real value in itself; for what is boredom but the
feeling of the emptiness of life? If life--the craving for which
is the very essence of our being--were possessed of any positive
intrinsic value, there would be no such thing as boredom at all: mere
existence would satisfy us in itself, and we should want for nothing.
But as it is, we take no delight in existence except when we are
struggling for something; and then distance and difficulties to be
overcome make our goal look as though it would satisfy us--an illusion
which vanishes when we reach it; or else when we are occupied with
some purely intellectual interest--when in reality we have stepped
forth from life to look upon it from the outside, much after the
manner of spectators at a play. And even sensual pleasure itself means
nothing but a struggle and aspiration, ceasing the moment its aim is
attained. Whenever we are not occupied in one of these ways, but cast
upon existence itself, its vain and worthless nature is brought home
to us; and this is what we mean by boredom. The hankering after what
is strange and uncommon--an innate and ineradicable tendency of human
nature--shows how glad we are at any interruption of that natural
course of affairs which is so very tedious.

That this most perfect manifestation of the will to live, the human
organism, with the cunning and complex working of its machinery,
must fall to dust and yield up itself and all its strivings to
extinction--this is the naïve way in which Nature, who is always so
true and sincere in what she says, proclaims the whole struggle of
this will as in its very essence barren and unprofitable. Were it of
any value in itself, anything unconditioned and absolute, it could not
thus end in mere nothing.

If we turn from contemplating the world as a whole, and, in
particular, the generations of men as they live their little hour of
mock-existence and then are swept away in rapid succession; if we turn
from this, and look at life in its small details, as presented, say,
in a comedy, how ridiculous it all seems! It is like a drop of water
seen through a microscope, a single drop teeming with _infusoria_; or
a speck of cheese full of mites invisible to the naked eye. How we
laugh as they bustle about so eagerly, and struggle with one another
in so tiny a space! And whether here, or in the little span of human
life, this terrible activity produces a comic effect.

It is only in the microscope that our life looks so big. It is an
indivisible point, drawn out and magnified by the powerful lenses of
Time and Space.




ON SUICIDE.


As far as I know, none but the votaries of monotheistic, that is to
say, Jewish religions, look upon suicide as a crime. This is all the
more striking, inasmuch as neither in the Old nor in the New Testament
is there to be found any prohibition or positive disapproval of it;
so that religious teachers are forced to base their condemnation of
suicide on philosophical grounds of their own invention. These are
so very bad that writers of this kind endeavor to make up for the
weakness of their arguments by the strong terms in which they express
their abhorrence of the practice; in other words, they declaim against
it. They tell us that suicide is the greatest piece of cowardice; that
only a madman could be guilty of it; and other insipidities of the
same kind; or else they make the nonsensical remark that suicide is
_wrong_; when it is quite obvious that there is nothing in the world
to which every man has a more unassailable title than to his own life
and person.

Suicide, as I have said, is actually accounted a crime; and a crime
which, especially under the vulgar bigotry that prevails in England,
is followed by an ignominious burial and the seizure of the man's
property; and for that reason, in a case of suicide, the jury almost
always brings in a verdict of insanity. Now let the reader's own moral
feelings decide as to whether or not suicide is a criminal act. Think
of the impression that would be made upon you by the news that some
one you know had committed the crime, say, of murder or theft, or been
guilty of some act of cruelty or deception; and compare it with your
feelings when you hear that he has met a voluntary death. While in the
one case a lively sense of indignation and extreme resentment will be
aroused, and you will call loudly for punishment or revenge, in the
other you will be moved to grief and sympathy; and mingled with your
thoughts will be admiration for his courage, rather than the moral
disapproval which follows upon a wicked action. Who has not had
acquaintances, friends, relations, who of their own free will have
left this world; and are these to be thought of with horror as
criminals? Most emphatically, No! I am rather of opinion that the
clergy should be challenged to explain what right they have to go into
the pulpit, or take up their pens, and stamp as a crime an action
which many men whom we hold in affection and honor have committed;
and to refuse an honorable burial to those who relinquish this
world voluntarily. They have no Biblical authority to boast of,
as justifying their condemnation of suicide; nay, not even any
philosophical arguments that will hold water; and it must be
understood that it is arguments we want, and that we will not be put
off with mere phrases or words of abuse. If the criminal law forbids
suicide, that is not an argument valid in the Church; and besides, the
prohibition is ridiculous; for what penalty can frighten a man who is
not afraid of death itself? If the law punishes people for trying
to commit suicide, it is punishing the want of skill that makes the
attempt a failure.

The ancients, moreover, were very far from regarding the matter in
that light. Pliny says: _Life is not so desirable a thing as to be
protracted at any cost. Whoever you are, you are sure to die, even
though your life has been full of abomination and crime. The chief
of all remedies for a troubled mind is the feeling that among the
blessings which Nature gives to man, there is none greater than an
opportune death; and the best of it is that every one can avail
himself of it.[1]_ And elsewhere the same writer declares: _Not even
to God are all things possible; for he could not compass his own
death, if he willed to die, and yet in all the miseries of our earthly
life, this is the best of his gifts to man.[2]_ Nay, in Massilia
and on the isle of Ceos, the man who could give valid reasons
for relinquishing his life, was handed the cup of hemlock by the
magistrate; and that, too, in public.[3] And in ancient times, how
many heroes and wise men died a voluntary death. Aristotle,[4] it is
true, declared suicide to be an offence against the State, although
not against the person; but in Stobaeus' exposition of the Peripatetic
philosophy there is the following remark: _The good man should flee
life when his misfortunes become too great; the bad man, also, when
he is too prosperous_. And similarly: _So he will marry and beget
children and take part in the affairs of the State, and, generally,
practice virtue and continue to live; and then, again, if need be,
and at any time necessity compels him, he will depart to his place of
refuge in the tomb.[5]_ And we find that the Stoics actually praised
suicide as a noble and heroic action, as hundreds of passages show;
above all in the works of Seneca, who expresses the strongest approval
of it. As is well known, the Hindoos look upon suicide as a religious
act, especially when it takes the form of self-immolation by widows;
but also when it consists in casting oneself under the wheels of the
chariot of the god at Juggernaut, or being eaten by crocodiles in the
Ganges, or being drowned in the holy tanks in the temples, and so on.
The same thing occurs on the stage--that mirror of life. For example,
in _L'Orphelin de la Chine_[6] a celebrated Chinese play, almost
all the noble characters end by suicide; without the slightest hint
anywhere, or any impression being produced on the spectator, that
they are committing a crime. And in our own theatre it is much the
same--Palmira, for instance, in _Mahomet_, or Mortimer in _Maria
Stuart_, Othello, Countess Terzky.[7] Is Hamlet's monologue the
meditation of a criminal? He merely declares that if we had any
certainty of being annihilated by it, death would be infinitely
preferable to the world as it is. But _there lies the rub_!

[Footnote 1: Hist. Nat. Lib. xxviii., 1.]

[Footnote 2: Loc. cit. Lib. ii. c. 7.]

[Footnote 3: 3 Valerius Maximus; hist. Lib. ii., c. 6, § 7 et 8.
Heraclides Ponticus; fragmenta de rebus publicis, ix. Aeliani variae
historiae, iii., 37. Strabo; Lib. x., c. 5, 6.]

[Footnote 4: _Eth. Nichom_., v. 15.]

[Footnote 5: Stobaeus. _Ecl. Eth_.. ii., c. 7, pp. 286, 312]

[Footnote 6: Traduit par St. Julien, 1834.]

[Footnote 7: _Translator's Note_.--Palmira: a female slave in Goethe's
play of _Mahomet_. Mortimer: a would-be lover and rescuer of Mary in
Schiller's _Maria Stuart_. Countess Terzky: a leading character in
Schiller's _Wallenstein's Tod_.]

The reasons advanced against suicide by the clergy of monotheistic,
that is to say, Jewish religions, and by those philosophers who adapt
themselves thereto, are weak sophisms which can easily be refuted.[1]
The most thorough-going refutation of them is given by Hume in his
_Essay on Suicide_. This did not appear until after his death, when
it was immediately suppressed, owing to the scandalous bigotry and
outrageous ecclesiastical tyranny that prevailed in England; and hence
only a very few copies of it were sold under cover of secrecy and at a
high price. This and another treatise by that great man have come to
us from Basle, and we may be thankful for the reprint.[2] It is a
great disgrace to the English nation that a purely philosophical
treatise, which, proceeding from one of the first thinkers and writers
in England, aimed at refuting the current arguments against suicide
by the light of cold reason, should be forced to sneak about in that
country, as though it were some rascally production, until at last it
found refuge on the Continent. At the same time it shows what a good
conscience the Church has in such matters.

[Footnote 1: See my treatise on the _Foundation of Morals_, § 5.]

[Footnote 2: _Essays on Suicide_ and the _Immortality of the Soul_, by
the late David Hume, Basle, 1799, sold by James Decker.]

In my chief work I have explained the only valid reason existing
against suicide on the score of mortality. It is this: that suicide
thwarts the attainment of the highest moral aim by the fact that, for
a real release from this world of misery, it substitutes one that is
merely apparent. But from a _mistake_ to a _crime_ is a far cry; and
it is as a crime that the clergy of Christendom wish us to regard
suicide.

The inmost kernel of Christianity is the truth that suffering--_the
Cross_--is the real end and object of life. Hence Christianity
condemns suicide as thwarting this end; whilst the ancient world,
taking a lower point of view, held it in approval, nay, in honor.[1]
But if that is to be accounted a valid reason against suicide, it
involves the recognition of asceticism; that is to say, it is valid
only from a much higher ethical standpoint than has ever been adopted
by moral philosophers in Europe. If we abandon that high standpoint,
there is no tenable reason left, on the score of morality, for
condemning suicide. The extraordinary energy and zeal with which the
clergy of monotheistic religions attack suicide is not supported
either by any passages in the Bible or by any considerations of
weight; so that it looks as though they must have some secret reason
for their contention. May it not be this--that the voluntary surrender
of life is a bad compliment for him who said that _all things were
very good_? If this is so, it offers another instance of the crass
optimism of these religions,--denouncing suicide to escape being
denounced by it.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Schopenhauer refers to _Die Welt
als Wille und Vorstellung_, vol. i., § 69, where the reader may find
the same argument stated at somewhat greater length. According to
Schopenhauer, moral freedom--the highest ethical aim--is to be
obtained only by a denial of the will to live. Far from being a
denial, suicide is an emphatic assertion of this will. For it is in
fleeing from the pleasures, not from the sufferings of life, that this
denial consists. When a man destroys his existence as an individual,
he is not by any means destroying his will to live. On the contrary,
he would like to live if he could do so with satisfaction to himself;
if he could assert his will against the power of circumstance; but
circumstance is too strong for him.]

It will generally be found that, as soon as the terrors of life reach
the point at which they outweigh the terrors of death, a man will
put an end to his life. But the terrors of death offer considerable
resistance; they stand like a sentinel at the gate leading out of this
world. Perhaps there is no man alive who would not have already put an
end to his life, if this end had been of a purely negative character,
a sudden stoppage of existence. There is something positive about
it; it is the destruction of the body; and a man shrinks from that,
because his body is the manifestation of the will to live.

However, the struggle with that sentinel is, as a rule, not so hard
as it may seem from a long way off, mainly in consequence of the
antagonism between the ills of the body and the ills of the mind. If
we are in great bodily pain, or the pain lasts a long time, we become
indifferent to other troubles; all we think about is to get well. In
the same way great mental suffering makes us insensible to bodily
pain; we despise it; nay, if it should outweigh the other, it
distracts our thoughts, and we welcome it as a pause in mental
suffering. It is this feeling that makes suicide easy; for the bodily
pain that accompanies it loses all significance in the eyes of one
who is tortured by an excess of mental suffering. This is especially
evident in the case of those who are driven to suicide by some purely
morbid and exaggerated ill-humor. No special effort to overcome their
feelings is necessary, nor do such people require to be worked up in
order to take the step; but as soon as the keeper into whose charge
they are given leaves them for a couple of minutes, they quickly bring
their life to an end.

When, in some dreadful and ghastly dream, we reach the moment of
greatest horror, it awakes us; thereby banishing all the hideous
shapes that were born of the night. And life is a dream: when the
moment of greatest horror compels us to break it off, the same thing
happens.

Suicide may also be regarded as an experiment--a question which man
puts to Nature, trying to force her to an answer. The question is
this: What change will death produce in a man's existence and in his
insight into the nature of things? It is a clumsy experiment to make;
for it involves the destruction of the very consciousness which puts
the question and awaits the answer.




IMMORTALITY:[1] A DIALOGUE.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--The word
immortality--_Unsterblichkeit_--does not occur in the original; nor
would it, in its usual application, find a place in Schopenhauer's
vocabulary. The word he uses is _Unzerstörbarkeit--indestructibility_.
But I have preferred _immortality_, because that word is commonly
associated with the subject touched upon in this little debate. If any
critic doubts the wisdom of this preference, let me ask him to try
his hand at a short, concise, and, at the same time, popularly
intelligible rendering of the German original, which runs thus: _Zur
Lehre von der Unzerstörbarkeit unseres wahren Wesens durch den Tod:
Meine dialogische Schlussbelustigung_.]


THRASYMACHOS--PHILALETHES.

_Thrasymachos_. Tell me now, in one word, what shall I be after my
death? And mind you be clear and precise.

_Philalethes_. All and nothing!

_Thrasymachos_. I thought so! I gave you a problem, and you solve it
by a contradiction. That's a very stale trick.

_Philalethes_. Yes, but you raise transcendental questions, and you
expect me to answer them in language that is only made for immanent
knowledge. It's no wonder that a contradiction ensues.

_Thrasymachos_. What do you mean by transcendental questions and
immanent knowledge? I've heard these expressions before, of course;
they are not new to me. The Professor was fond of using them, but only
as predicates of the Deity, and he never talked of anything else;
which was all quite right and proper. He argued thus: if the Deity was
in the world itself, he was immanent; if he was somewhere outside it,
he was transcendent. Nothing could be clearer and more obvious! You
knew where you were. But this Kantian rigmarole won't do any more:
it's antiquated and no longer applicable to modern ideas. Why, we've
had a whole row of eminent men in the metropolis of German learning--

_Philalethes_. (Aside.) German humbug, he means.

_Thrasymachos_. The mighty Schleiermacher, for instance, and that
gigantic intellect, Hegel; and at this time of day we've abandoned
that nonsense. I should rather say we're so far beyond it that we
can't put up with it any more. What's the use of it then? What does it
all mean?

_Philalethes_. Transcendental knowledge is knowledge which passes
beyond the bounds of possible experience, and strives to determine the
nature of things as they are in themselves. Immanent knowledge, on the
other hand, is knowledge which confines itself entirely with those
bounds; so that it cannot apply to anything but actual phenomena. As
far as you are an individual, death will be the end of you. But your
individuality is not your true and inmost being: it is only the
outward manifestation of it. It is not the _thing-in-itself_, but only
the phenomenon presented in the form of time; and therefore with a
beginning and an end. But your real being knows neither time, nor
beginning, nor end, nor yet the limits of any given individual. It is
everywhere present in every individual; and no individual can
exist apart from it. So when death comes, on the one hand you are
annihilated as an individual; on the other, you are and remain
everything. That is what I meant when I said that after your death
you would be all and nothing. It is difficult to find a more precise
answer to your question and at the same time be brief. The answer is
contradictory, I admit; but it is so simply because your life is in
time, and the immortal part of you in eternity. You may put the matter
thus: Your immortal part is something that does not last in time and
yet is indestructible; but there you have another contradiction! You
see what happens by trying to bring the transcendental within the
limits of immanent knowledge. It is in some sort doing violence to the
latter by misusing it for ends it was never meant to serve.

_Thrasymachos_. Look here, I shan't give twopence for your immortality
unless I'm to remain an individual.

_Philalethes_. Well, perhaps I may be able to satisfy you on this
point. Suppose I guarantee that after death you shall remain an
individual, but only on condition that you first spend three months of
complete unconsciousness.

_Thrasymachos_. I shall have no objection to that.

_Philalethes_. But remember, if people are completely unconscious,
they take no account of time. So, when you are dead, it's all the same
to you whether three months pass in the world of consciousness, or ten
thousand years. In the one case as in the other, it is simply a matter
of believing what is told you when you awake. So far, then, you can
afford to be indifferent whether it is three months or ten thousand
years that pass before you recover your individuality.

_Thrasymachos_. Yes, if it comes to that, I suppose you're right.

_Philalethes_. And if by chance, after those ten thousand years have
gone by, no one ever thinks of awakening you, I fancy it would be
no great misfortune. You would have become quite accustomed to
non-existence after so long a spell of it--following upon such a very
few years of life. At any rate you may be sure you would be perfectly
ignorant of the whole thing. Further, if you knew that the mysterious
power which keeps you in your present state of life had never once
ceased in those ten thousand years to bring forth other phenomena like
yourself, and to endow them with life, it would fully console you.

_Thrasymachos_. Indeed! So you think you're quietly going to do me
out of my individuality with all this fine talk. But I'm up to your
tricks. I tell you I won't exist unless I can have my individuality.
I'm not going to be put off with 'mysterious powers,' and what you
call 'phenomena.' I can't do without my individuality, and I won't
give it up.

_Philalethes_. You mean, I suppose, that your individuality is such a
delightful thing, so splendid, so perfect, and beyond compare--that
you can't imagine anything better. Aren't you ready to exchange your
present state for one which, if we can judge by what is told us, may
possibly be superior and more endurable?

_Thrasymachos_. Don't you see that my individuality, be it what it
may, is my very self? To me it is the most important thing in the
world.

  _For God is God and I am I_.

_I_ want to exist, _I, I_. That's the main thing. I don't care about
an existence which has to be proved to be mine, before I can believe
it.

_Philalethes_. Think what you're doing! When you say _I, I, I_ want
to exist, it is not you alone that says this. Everything says it,
absolutely everything that has the faintest trace of consciousness. It
follows, then, that this desire of yours is just the part of you that
is _not individual_--the part that is common to all things without
distinction. It is the cry, not of the individual, but of existence
itself; it is the intrinsic element in everything that exists, nay, it
is the cause of anything existing at all. This desire craves for, and
so is satisfied with, nothing less than existence in general--not any
definite individual existence. No! that is not its aim. It seems to be
so only because this desire--this _Will_--attains consciousness only
in the individual, and therefore looks as though it were concerned
with nothing but the individual. There lies the illusion--an illusion,
it is true, in which the individual is held fast: but, if he reflects,
he can break the fetters and set himself free. It is only indirectly,
I say, that the individual has this violent craving for existence. It
is _the Will to Live_ which is the real and direct aspirant--alike and
identical in all things. Since, then, existence is the free work, nay,
the mere reflection of the will, where existence is, there, too,
must be will; and for the moment the will finds its satisfaction in
existence itself; so far, I mean, as that which never rests, but
presses forward eternally, can ever find any satisfaction at all.
The will is careless of the individual: the individual is not its
business; although, as I have said, this seems to be the case, because
the individual has no direct consciousness of will except in himself.
The effect of this is to make the individual careful to maintain his
own existence; and if this were not so, there would be no surety
for the preservation of the species. From all this it is clear that
individuality is not a form of perfection, but rather of limitation;
and so to be freed from it is not loss but gain. Trouble yourself no
more about the matter. Once thoroughly recognize what you are, what
your existence really is, namely, the universal will to live, and the
whole question will seem to you childish, and most ridiculous!

_Thrasymachos_. You're childish yourself and most ridiculous, like
all philosophers! and if a man of my age lets himself in for a
quarter-of-an-hour's talk with such fools, it is only because it
amuses me and passes the time. I've more important business to attend
to, so Good-bye.




FURTHER PSYCHOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS.


There is an unconscious propriety in the way in which, in all European
languages, the word _person_ is commonly used to denote a human
being. The real meaning of _persona_ is _a mask_, such as actors were
accustomed to wear on the ancient stage; and it is quite true that no
one shows himself as he is, but wears his mask and plays his part.
Indeed, the whole of our social arrangements may be likened to a
perpetual comedy; and this is why a man who is worth anything finds
society so insipid, while a blockhead is quite at home in it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Reason deserves to be called a prophet; for in showing us the
consequence and effect of our actions in the present, does it not tell
us what the future will be? This is precisely why reason is such an
excellent power of restraint in moments when we are possessed by some
base passion, some fit of anger, some covetous desire, that will lead
us to do things whereof we must presently repent.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hatred_ comes from the heart; _contempt_ from the head; and neither
feeling is quite within our control. For we cannot alter our heart;
its basis is determined by motives; and our head deals with objective
facts, and applies to them rules which are immutable. Any given
individual is the union of a particular heart with a particular head.

Hatred and contempt are diametrically opposed and mutually exclusive.
There are even not a few cases where hatred of a person is rooted in
nothing but forced esteem for his qualities. And besides, if a man
sets out to hate all the miserable creatures he meets, he will not
have much energy left for anything else; whereas he can despise them,
one and all, with the greatest ease. True, genuine contempt is just
the reverse of true, genuine pride; it keeps quite quiet and gives no
sign of its existence. For if a man shows that he despises you, he
signifies at least this much regard for you, that he wants to let
you know how little he appreciates you; and his wish is dictated by
hatred, which cannot exist with real contempt. On the contrary, if it
is genuine, it is simply the conviction that the object of it is a man
of no value at all. Contempt is not incompatible with indulgent and
kindly treatment, and for the sake of one's own peace and safety, this
should not be omitted; it will prevent irritation; and there is no
one who cannot do harm if he is roused to it. But if this pure, cold,
sincere contempt ever shows itself, it will be met with the most
truculent hatred; for the despised person is not in a position to
fight contempt with its own weapons.

       *       *       *       *       *

Melancholy is a very different thing from bad humor, and of the two,
it is not nearly so far removed from a gay and happy temperament.
Melancholy attracts, while bad humor repels.

Hypochondria is a species of torment which not only makes us
unreasonably cross with the things of the present; not only fills us
with groundless anxiety on the score of future misfortunes entirely
of our own manufacture; but also leads to unmerited self-reproach for
what we have done in the past.

Hypochondria shows itself in a perpetual hunting after things that vex
and annoy, and then brooding over them. The cause of it is an inward
morbid discontent, often co-existing with a naturally restless
temperament. In their extreme form, this discontent and this unrest
lead to suicide.

       *       *       *       *       *

Any incident, however trivial, that rouses disagreeable emotion,
leaves an after-effect in our mind, which for the time it lasts,
prevents our taking a clear objective view of the things about us, and
tinges all our thoughts: just as a small object held close to the eye
limits and distorts our field of vision.

       *       *       *       *       *

What makes people _hard-hearted_ is this, that each man has, or
fancies he has, as much as he can bear in his own troubles. Hence, if
a man suddenly finds himself in an unusually happy position, it will
in most cases result in his being sympathetic and kind. But if he has
never been in any other than a happy position, or this becomes his
permanent state, the effect of it is often just the contrary: it so
far removes him from suffering that he is incapable of feeling any
more sympathy with it. So it is that the poor often show themselves
more ready to help than the rich.

       *       *       *       *       *

At times it seems as though we both wanted and did not want the same
thing, and felt at once glad and sorry about it. For instance, if
on some fixed date we are going to be put to a decisive test about
anything in which it would be a great advantage to us to come off
victorious, we shall be anxious for it to take place at once, and at
the same time we shall tremble at the thought of its approach. And if,
in the meantime, we hear that, for once in a way, the date has been
postponed, we shall experience a feeling both of pleasure and of
annoyance; for the news is disappointing, but nevertheless it affords
us momentary relief. It is just the same thing if we are expecting
some important letter carrying a definite decision, and it fails to
arrive.

In such cases there are really two different motives at work in us;
the stronger but more distant of the two being the desire to stand
the test and to have the decision given in our favor; and the weaker,
which touches us more nearly, the wish to be left for the present in
peace and quiet, and accordingly in further enjoyment of the advantage
which at any rate attaches to a state of hopeful uncertainty, compared
with the possibility that the issue may be unfavorable.

       *       *       *       *       *

In my head there is a permanent opposition-party; and whenever I take
any step or come to any decision--though I may have given the matter
mature consideration--it afterwards attacks what I have done, without,
however, being each time necessarily in the right. This is, I suppose,
only a form of rectification on the part of the spirit of scrutiny;
but it often reproaches me when I do not deserve it. The same thing,
no doubt, happens to many others as well; for where is the man who
can help thinking that, after all, it were better not to have done
something that he did with great deliberation:

  _Quid tam dextro pede concipis ut te
  Conatus non poeniteat votique peracti_?

       *       *       *       *       *

Why is it that _common_ is an expression of contempt? and that
_uncommon, extraordinary, distinguished_, denote approbation? Why is
everything that is common contemptible?

_Common_ in its original meaning denotes that which is peculiar to all
men, _i.e_., shared equally by the whole species, and therefore an
inherent part of its nature. Accordingly, if an individual possesses
no qualities beyond those which attach to mankind in general, he is
a _common man. Ordinary_ is a much milder word, and refers rather
to intellectual character; whereas _common_ has more of a moral
application.

What value can a creature have that is not a whit different from
millions of its kind? Millions, do I say? nay, an infiniture of
creatures which, century after century, in never-ending flow, Nature
sends bubbling up from her inexhaustible springs; as generous with
them as the smith with the useless sparks that fly around his anvil.

It is obviously quite right that a creature which has no qualities
except those of the species, should have to confine its claim to an
existence entirely within the limits of the species, and live a life
conditioned by those limits.

In various passages of my works,[1] I have argued that whilst a lower
animal possesses nothing more than the generic character of its
species, man is the only being which can lay claim to possess an
individual character. But in most men this individual character comes
to very little in reality; and they may be almost all ranged under
certain classes: _ce sont des espèces_. Their thoughts and desires,
like their faces, are those of the species, or, at any rate, those
of the class to which they belong; and accordingly, they are of a
trivial, every-day, common character, and exist by the thousand. You
can usually tell beforehand what they are likely to do and say. They
have no special stamp or mark to distinguish them; they are like
manufactured goods, all of a piece.

[Footnote 1: _Grundprobleme der Ethik_, p. 48; _Welt als Wille und
Vorstellung_, vol. i. p. 338.]

If, then, their nature is merged in that of the species, how shall
their existence go beyond it? The curse of vulgarity puts men on a par
with the lower animals, by allowing them none but a generic nature, a
generic form of existence. Anything that is high or great or noble,
must then, as a mater of course, and by its very nature, stand alone
in a world where no better expression can be found to denote what is
base and contemptible than that which I have mentioned as in general
use, namely, _common_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Will, as the _thing-in-itself_, is the foundation of all being; it
is part and parcel of every creature, and the permanent element in
everything. Will, then, is that which we possess in common with all
men, nay, with all animals, and even with lower forms of existence;
and in so far we are akin to everything--so far, that is, as
everything is filled to overflowing with will. On the other hand, that
which places one being over another, and sets differences between man
and man, is intellect and knowledge; therefore in every manifestation
of self we should, as far as possible, give play to the intellect
alone; for, as we have seen, the will is the _common_ part of us.
Every violent exhibition of will is common and vulgar; in other words,
it reduces us to the level of the species, and makes us a mere type
and example of it; in that it is just the character of the
species that we are showing. So every fit of anger is something
_common_--every unrestrained display of joy, or of hate, or fear--in
short, every form of emotion; in other words, every movement of the
will, if it's so strong as decidedly to outweigh the intellectual
element in consciousness, and to make the man appear as a being that
_wills_ rather than _knows_.

In giving way to emotion of this violent kind, the greatest genius
puts himself on a level with the commonest son of earth. Contrarily,
if a man desires to be absolutely uncommon, in other words, great, he
should never allow his consciousness to be taken possession of
and dominated by the movement of his will, however much he may be
solicited thereto. For example, he must be able to observe that other
people are badly disposed towards him, without feeling any hatred
towards them himself; nay, there is no surer sign of a great mind than
that it refuses to notice annoying and insulting expressions, but
straightway ascribes them, as it ascribes countless other mistakes, to
the defective knowledge of the speaker, and so merely observes without
feeling them. This is the meaning of that remark of Gracian, that
nothing is more unworthy of a man than to let it be seen that he is
one--_el mayor desdoro de un hombre es dar muestras de que es hombre_.

And even in the drama, which is the peculiar province of the passions
and emotions, it is easy for them to appear common and vulgar. And
this is specially observable in the works of the French tragic
writers, who set no other aim before themselves but the delineation
of the passions; and by indulging at one moment in a vaporous kind
of pathos which makes them ridiculous, at another in epigrammatic
witticisms, endeavor to conceal the vulgarity of their subject. I
remember seeing the celebrated Mademoiselle Rachel as Maria Stuart:
and when she burst out in fury against Elizabeth--though she did it
very well--I could not help thinking of a washerwoman. She played
the final parting in such a way as to deprive it of all true tragic
feeling, of which, indeed, the French have no notion at all. The same
part was incomparably better played by the Italian Ristori; and, in
fact, the Italian nature, though in many respects very different from
the German, shares its appreciation for what is deep, serious, and
true in Art; herein opposed to the French, which everywhere betrays
that it possesses none of this feeling whatever.

The noble, in other words, the uncommon, element in the drama--nay,
what is sublime in it--is not reached until the intellect is set to
work, as opposed to the will; until it takes a free flight over all
those passionate movements of the will, and makes them subject of its
contemplation. Shakespeare, in particular, shows that this is his
general method, more especially in Hamlet. And only when intellect
rises to the point where the vanity of all effort is manifest, and the
will proceeds to an act of self-annulment, is the drama tragic in the
true sense of the word; it is then that it reaches its highest aim in
becoming really sublime.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every man takes the limits of his own field of vision for the limits
of the world. This is an error of the intellect as inevitable as that
error of the eye which lets us fancy that on the horizon heaven and
earth meet. This explains many things, and among them the fact that
everyone measures us with his own standard--generally about as long as
a tailor's tape, and we have to put up with it: as also that no one
will allow us to be taller than himself--a supposition which is once
for all taken for granted.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is no doubt that many a man owes his good fortune in life solely
to the circumstance that he has a pleasant way of smiling, and so wins
the heart in his favor.

However, the heart would do better to be careful, and to remember what
Hamlet put down in his tablets--_that one may smile, and smile, and be
a villain_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Everything that is really fundamental in a man, and therefore genuine
works, as such, unconsciously; in this respect like the power of
nature. That which has passed through the domain of consciousness is
thereby transformed into an idea or picture; and so if it comes to be
uttered, it is only an idea or picture which passes from one person to
another.

Accordingly, any quality of mind or character that is genuine and
lasting, is originally unconscious; and it is only when unconsciously
brought into play that it makes a profound impression. If any like
quality is consciously exercised, it means that it has been worked up;
it becomes intentional, and therefore matter of affectation, in other
words, of deception.

If a man does a thing unconsciously, it costs him no trouble; but if
he tries to do it by taking trouble, he fails. This applies to the
origin of those fundamental ideas which form the pith and marrow of
all genuine work. Only that which is innate is genuine and will hold
water; and every man who wants to achieve something, whether in
practical life, in literature, or in art, must _follow the rules
without knowing them_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Men of very great capacity, will as a rule, find the company of very
stupid people preferable to that of the common run; for the same
reason that the tyrant and the mob, the grandfather and the
grandchildren, are natural allies.

       *       *       *       *       *

That line of Ovid's,

  _Pronaque cum spectent animalia cetera terram_,

can be applied in its true physical sense to the lower animals alone;
but in a metaphorical and spiritual sense it is, alas! true of nearly
all men as well. All their plans and projects are merged in the desire
of physical enjoyment, physical well-being. They may, indeed, have
personal interests, often embracing a very varied sphere; but still
these latter receive their importance entirely from the relation in
which they stand to the former. This is not only proved by their
manner of life and the things they say, but it even shows itself in
the way they look, the expression of their physiognomy, their gait and
gesticulations. Everything about them cries out; _in terram prona_!

It is not to them, it is only to the nobler and more highly endowed
natures--men who really think and look about them in the world, and
form exceptional specimens of humanity--that the next lines are
applicable;

  _Os homini sublime dedit coelumque tueri
  Jussit et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus_.

       *       *       *       *       *

No one knows what capacities for doing and suffering he has in
himself, until something comes to rouse them to activity: just as in
a pond of still water, lying there like a mirror, there is no sign of
the roar and thunder with which it can leap from the precipice, and
yet remain what it is; or again, rise high in the air as a fountain.
When water is as cold as ice, you can have no idea of the latent
warmth contained in it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Why is it that, in spite of all the mirrors in the world, no one
really knows what he looks like?

A man may call to mind the face of his friend, but not his own. Here,
then, is an initial difficulty in the way of applying the maxim, _Know
thyself_.

This is partly, no doubt, to be explained by the fact that it is
physically impossible for a man to see himself in the glass except
with face turned straight towards it and perfectly motionless; where
the expression of the eye, which counts for so much, and really gives
its whole character to the face, is to a great extent lost. But
co-existing with this physical impossibility, there seems to me to be
an ethical impossibility of an analogous nature, and producing the
same effect. A man cannot look upon his own reflection as though the
person presented there were _a stranger_ to him; and yet this is
necessary if he is to take _an objective view_. In the last resort,
an objective view means a deep-rooted feeling on the part of the
individual, as a moral being, that that which he is contemplating is
_not himself_[1]; and unless he can take this point of view, he will
not see things in a really true light, which is possible only if he is
alive to their actual defects, exactly as they are. Instead of that,
when a man sees himself in the glass, something out of his own
egotistic nature whispers to him to take care to remember that _it is
no stranger, but himself, that he is looking at_; and this operates as
a _noli me tang ere_, and prevents him taking an objective view. It
seems, indeed, as if, without the leaven of a grain of malice, such a
view were impossible.

[Footnote 1: Cf. _Grundprobleme der Ethik_, p. 275.]

       *       *       *       *       *

According as a man's mental energy is exerted or relaxed, will life
appear to him either so short, and petty, and fleeting, that nothing
can possibly happen over which it is worth his while to spend emotion;
that nothing really matters, whether it is pleasure or riches, or even
fame, and that in whatever way a man may have failed, he cannot
have lost much--or, on the other hand, life will seem so long, so
important, so all in all, so momentous and so full of difficulty that
we have to plunge into it with our whole soul if we are to obtain a
share of its goods, make sure of its prizes, and carry out our plans.
This latter is the immanent and common view of life; it is what
Gracian means when he speaks of the serious way of looking
at things--_tomar muy de veras el vivir_. The former is the
transcendental view, which is well expressed in Ovid's _non est
tanti_--it is not worth so much trouble; still better, however, by
Plato's remark that nothing in human affairs is worth any great
anxiety--[Greek: oute ti ton anthropinon axion esti megalaes
spoudaes.] This condition of mind is due to the intellect having got
the upper hand in the domain of consciousness, where, freed from
the mere service of the will, it looks upon the phenomena of life
objectively, and so cannot fail to gain a clear insight into its
vain and futile character. But in the other condition of mind, will
predominates; and the intellect exists only to light it on its way to
the attainment of its desires.

A man is great or small according as he leans to the one or the other
of these views of life.

       *       *       *       *       *

People of very brilliant ability think little of admitting their
errors and weaknesses, or of letting others see them. They look upon
them as something for which they have duly paid; and instead of
fancying that these weaknesses are a disgrace to them, they consider
they are doing them an honor. This is especially the case when
the errors are of the kind that hang together with their
qualities--_conditiones sine quibus non_--or, as George Sand said,
_les défauts de ses vertus_.

Contrarily, there are people of good character and irreproachable
intellectual capacity, who, far from admitting the few little
weaknesses they have, conceal them with care, and show themselves very
sensitive to any suggestion of their existence; and this, just because
their whole merit consists in being free from error and infirmity. If
these people are found to have done anything wrong, their reputation
immediately suffers.

       *       *       *       *       *

With people of only moderate ability, modesty is mere honesty; but
with those who possess great talent, it is hypocrisy. Hence, it is
just as becoming in the latter to make no secret of the respect they
bear themselves and no disguise of the fact that they are conscious of
unusual power, as it is in the former to be modest. Valerius
Maximus gives some very neat examples of this in his chapter on
self-confidence, _de fiducia sui_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not to go to the theatre is like making one's toilet without a mirror.
But it is still worse to take a decision without consulting a friend.
For a man may have the most excellent judgment in all other matters,
and yet go wrong in those which concern himself; because here the will
comes in and deranges the intellect at once. Therefore let a man take
counsel of a friend. A doctor can cure everyone but himself; if he
falls ill, he sends for a colleague.

       *       *       *       *       *

In all that we do, we wish, more or less, to come to the end; we are
impatient to finish and glad to be done. But the last scene of all,
the general end, is something that, as a rule, we wish as far off as
may be.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every parting gives a foretaste of death; every coming together again
a foretaste of the resurrection. This is why even people who were
indifferent to each other, rejoice so much if they come together again
after twenty or thirty years' separation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Intellects differ from one another in a very real and fundamental way:
but no comparison can well be made by merely general observations. It
is necessary to come close, and to go into details; for the difference
that exists cannot be seen from afar; and it is not easy to judge by
outward appearances, as in the several cases of education, leisure and
occupation. But even judging by these alone, it must be admitted that
many a man has _a degree of existence_ at least ten times as high as
another--in other words, exists ten times as much.

I am not speaking here of savages whose life is often only one degree
above that of the apes in their woods. Consider, for instance, a
porter in Naples or Venice (in the north of Europe solicitude for the
winter months makes people more thoughtful and therefore reflective);
look at the life he leads, from its beginning to its end:--driven by
poverty; living on his physical strength; meeting the needs of every
day, nay, of every hour, by hard work, great effort, constant tumult,
want in all its forms, no care for the morrow; his only comfort
rest after exhaustion; continuous quarreling; not a moment free for
reflection; such sensual delights as a mild climate and only just
sufficient food will permit of; and then, finally, as the metaphysical
element, the crass superstition of his church; the whole forming a
manner of life with only a low degree of consciousness, where a man
hustles, or rather is hustled, through his existence. This restless
and confused dream forms the life of how many millions!

Such men _think_ only just so much as is necessary to carry out their
will for the moment. They never reflect upon their life as a connected
whole, let alone, then, upon existence in general; to a certain extent
they may be said to exist without really knowing it. The existence of
the mobsman or the slave who lives on in this unthinking way, stands
very much nearer than ours to that of the brute, which is confined
entirely to the present moment; but, for that very reason, it has also
less of pain in it than ours. Nay, since all pleasure is in its nature
negative, that is to say, consists in freedom from some form of misery
or need, the constant and rapid interchange between setting about
something and getting it done, which is the permanent accompaniment of
the work they do, and then again the augmented form which this
takes when they go from work to rest and the satisfaction of their
needs--all this gives them a constant source of enjoyment; and the
fact that it is much commoner to see happy faces amongst the poor than
amongst the rich, is a sure proof that it is used to good advantage.

Passing from this kind of man, consider, next, the sober, sensible
merchant, who leads a life of speculation, thinks long over his plans
and carries them out with great care, founds a house, and provides for
his wife, his children and descendants; takes his share, too, in the
life of a community. It is obvious that a man like this has a much
higher degree of consciousness than the former, and so his existence
has a higher degree of reality.

Then look at the man of learning, who investigates, it may be, the
history of the past. He will have reached the point at which a man
becomes conscious of existence as a whole, sees beyond the period of
his own life, beyond his own personal interests, thinking over the
whole course of the world's history.

Then, finally, look at the poet or the philosopher, in whom reflection
has reached such a height, that, instead of being drawn on to
investigate any one particular phenomenon of existence, he stands in
amazement _before existence itself_, this great sphinx, and makes it
his problem. In him consciousness has reached the degree of clearness
at which it embraces the world itself: his intellect has completely
abandoned its function as the servant of his will, and now holds the
world before him; and the world calls upon him much more to examine
and consider it, than to play a part in it himself. If, then, the
degree of consciousness is the degree of reality, such a man will be
said to exist most of all, and there will be sense and significance in
so describing him.

Between the two extremes here sketched, and the intervening stages,
everyone will be able to find the place at which he himself stands.

       *       *       *       *       *

We know that man is in general superior to all other animals, and this
is also the case in his capacity for being trained. Mohammedans are
trained to pray with their faces turned towards Mecca, five times a
day; and they never fail to do it. Christians are trained to cross
themselves on certain occasions, to bow, and so on. Indeed, it may
be said that religion is the _chef d'oeuvre_ of the art of training,
because it trains people in the way they shall think: and, as is well
known, you cannot begin the process too early. There is no absurdity
so palpable but that it may be firmly planted in the human head if
you only begin to inculcate it before the age of five, by constantly
repeating it with an air of great solemnity. For as in the case of
animals, so in that of men, training is successful only when you begin
in early youth.

Noblemen and gentlemen are trained to hold nothing sacred but their
word of honor--to maintain a zealous, rigid, and unshaken belief in
the ridiculous code of chivalry; and if they are called upon to do so,
to seal their belief by dying for it, and seriously to regard a king
as a being of a higher order.

Again, our expressions of politeness, the compliments we make, in
particular, the respectful attentions we pay to ladies, are a matter
of training; as also our esteem for good birth, rank, titles, and so
on. Of the same character is the resentment we feel at any insult
directed against us; and the measure of this resentment may be exactly
determined by the nature of the insult. An Englishman, for instance,
thinks it a deadly insult to be told that he is no gentleman, or,
still worse, that he is a liar; a Frenchman has the same feeling if
you call him a coward, and a German if you say he is stupid.

There are many persons who are trained to be strictly honorable in
regard to one particular matter, while they have little honor to boast
of in anything else. Many a man, for instance, will not steal your
money; but he will lay hands on everything of yours that he can enjoy
without having to pay for it. A man of business will often deceive you
without the slightest scruple, but he will absolutely refuse to commit
a theft.

Imagination is strong in a man when that particular function of the
brain which enables him to observe is roused to activity without
any necessary excitement of the senses. Accordingly, we find that
imagination is active just in proportion as our senses are not excited
by external objects. A long period of solitude, whether in prison or
in a sick room; quiet, twilight, darkness--these are the things that
promote its activity; and under their influence it comes into play of
itself. On the other hand, when a great deal of material is presented
to our faculties of observation, as happens on a journey, or in
the hurly-burly of the world, or, again, in broad daylight, the
imagination is idle, and, even though call may be made upon it,
refuses to become active, as though it understood that that was not
its proper time.

However, if the imagination is to yield any real product, it must have
received a great deal of material from the external world. This is
the only way in which its storehouse can be filled. The phantasy is
nourished much in the same way as the body, which is least capable
of any work and enjoys doing nothing just in the very moment when it
receives its food which it has to digest. And yet it is to this very
food that it owes the power which it afterwards puts forth at the
right time.

       *       *       *       *       *

Opinion is like a pendulum and obeys the same law. If it goes past
the centre of gravity on one side, it must go a like distance on the
other; and it is only after a certain time that it finds the true
point at which it can remain at rest.

       *       *       *       *       *

By a process of contradiction, distance in space makes things look
small, and therefore free from defect. This is why a landscape looks
so much better in a contracting mirror or in a _camera obscura_, than
it is in reality. The same effect is produced by distance in time. The
scenes and events of long ago, and the persons who took part in them,
wear a charming aspect to the eye of memory, which sees only the
outlines and takes no note of disagreeable details. The present enjoys
no such advantage, and so it always seems defective.

And again, as regards space, small objects close to us look big, and
if they are very close, we may be able to see nothing else, but when
we go a little way off, they become minute and invisible. It is the
same again as regards time. The little incidents and accidents of
every day fill us with emotion, anxiety, annoyance, passion, as long
as they are close to us, when they appear so big, so important, so
serious; but as soon as they are borne down the restless stream of
time, they lose what significance they had; we think no more of them
and soon forget them altogether. They were big only because they were
near.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Joy_ and _sorrow_ are not ideas of the mind, but affections of the
will, and so they do not lie in the domain of memory. We cannot recall
our joys and sorrows; by which I mean that we cannot renew them. We
can recall only the _ideas_ that accompanied them; and, in particular,
the things we were led to say; and these form a gauge of our feelings
at the time. Hence our memory of joys and sorrows is always imperfect,
and they become a matter of indifference to us as soon as they are
over. This explains the vanity of the attempt, which we sometimes
make, to revive the pleasures and the pains of the past. Pleasure and
pain are essentially an affair of the will; and the will, as such, is
not possessed of memory, which is a function of the intellect; and
this in its turn gives out and takes in nothing but thoughts and
ideas, which are not here in question.

It is a curious fact that in bad days we can very vividly recall the
good time that is now no more; but that in good days, we have only a
very cold and imperfect memory of the bad.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have a much better memory of actual objects or pictures than
for mere ideas. Hence a good imagination makes it easier to learn
languages; for by its aid, the new word is at once united with the
actual object to which it refers; whereas, if there is no imagination,
it is simply put on a parallel with the equivalent word in the mother
tongue.

Mnemonics should not only mean the art of keeping something indirectly
in the memory by the use of some direct pun or witticism; it should,
rather, be applied to a systematic theory of memory, and explain its
several attributes by reference both to its real nature, and to the
relation in which these attributes stand to one another.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are moments in life when our senses obtain a higher and rarer
degree of clearness, apart from any particular occasion for it in the
nature of our surroundings; and explicable, rather, on physiological
grounds alone, as the result of some enhanced state of susceptibility,
working from within outwards. Such moments remain indelibly impressed
upon the memory, and preserve themselves in their individuality
entire. We can assign no reason for it, nor explain why this among so
many thousand moments like it should be specially remembered. It seems
as much a matter of chance as when single specimens of a whole race of
animals now extinct are discovered in the layers of a rock; or when,
on opening a book, we light upon an insect accidentally crushed within
the leaves. Memories of this kind are always sweet and pleasant.

       *       *       *       *       *

It occasionally happens that, for no particular reason, long-forgotten
scenes suddenly start up in the memory. This may in many cases be due
to the action of some hardly perceptible odor, which accompanied those
scenes and now recurs exactly same as before. For it is well known
that the sense of smell is specially effective in awakening memories,
and that in general it does not require much to rouse a train of
ideas. And I may say, in passing, that the sense of sight is connected
with the understanding,[1] the sense of hearing with the reason,[2]
and, as we see in the present case, the sense of smell with the
memory. Touch and Taste are more material and dependent upon contact.
They have no ideal side.

[Footnote 1:_Wierfache Wurzel_ § 21.]

[Footnote 2: _Parerga_ vol. ii, § 311.]

       *       *       *       *       *

It must also be reckoned among the peculiar attributes of memory
that a slight state of intoxication often so greatly enhances the
recollection of past times and scenes, that all the circumstances
connected with them come back much more clearly than would be possible
in a state of sobriety; but that, on the other hand, the recollection
of what one said or did while the intoxication lasted, is more than
usually imperfect; nay, that if one has been absolutely tipsy, it is
gone altogether. We may say, then, that whilst intoxication enhances
the memory for what is past, it allows it to remember little of the
present.

       *       *       *       *       *

Men need some kind of external activity, because they are inactive
within. Contrarily, if they are active within, they do not care to be
dragged out of themselves; it disturbs and impedes their thoughts in a
way that is often most ruinous to them.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am not surprised that some people are bored when they find
themselves alone; for they cannot laugh if they are quite by
themselves. The very idea of it seems folly to them.

Are we, then, to look upon laughter as merely O signal for others--a
mere sign, like a word? What makes it impossible for people to laugh
when they are alone is nothing but want of imagination, dullness of
mind generally--[Greek: anaisthaesia kai bradutaes psuchaes], as
Theophrastus has it.[1] The lower animals never laugh, either alone
or in company. Myson, the misanthropist, was once surprised by one of
these people as he was laughing to himself. _Why do you laugh_? he
asked; _there is no one with you. That is just why I am laughing_,
said Myson.

[Footnote 1: _Characters_, c. 27.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Natural _gesticulation_, such as commonly accompanies any lively talk,
is a language of its own, more widespread, even, than the language of
words--so far, I mean, as it is independent of words and alike in all
nations. It is true that nations make use of it in proportion as they
are vivacious, and that in particular cases, amongst the Italians, for
instance, it is supplemented by certain peculiar gestures which are
merely conventional, and therefore possessed of nothing more than a
local value.

In the universal use made of it, gesticulation has some analogy with
logic and grammar, in that it has to do with the form, rather
than with the matter of conversation; but on the other hand it is
distinguishable from them by the fact that it has more of a moral than
of an intellectual bearing; in other words, it reflects the movements
of the will. As an accompaniment of conversation it is like the bass
of a melody; and if, as in music, it keeps true to the progress of the
treble, it serves to heighten the effect.

In a conversation, the gesture depends upon the form in which the
subject-matter is conveyed; and it is interesting to observe that,
whatever that subject-matter may be, with a recurrence of the form,
the very same gesture is repeated. So if I happen to see--from my
window, say--two persons carrying on a lively conversation, without
my being able to catch a word, I can, nevertheless, understand the
general nature of it perfectly well; I mean, the kind of thing that is
being said and the form it takes. There is no mistake about it. The
speaker is arguing about something, advancing his reasons, then
limiting their application, then driving them home and drawing the
conclusion in triumph; or he is recounting his experiences, proving,
perhaps, beyond the shadow of a doubt, how much he has been injured,
but bringing the clearest and most damning evidence to show that
his opponents were foolish and obstinate people who would not be
convinced; or else he is telling of the splendid plan he laid, and how
he carried it to a successful issue, or perhaps failed because
the luck was against him; or, it may be, he is saying that he was
completely at a loss to know what to do, or that he was quick in
seeing some traps set for him, and that by insisting on his rights or
by applying a little force, he succeeded in frustrating and punishing
his enemies; and so on in hundreds of cases of a similar kind.

Strictly speaking, however, what I get from gesticulation alone is
an abstract notion of the essential drift of what is being said, and
that, too, whether I judge from a moral or an intellectual point of
view. It is the quintessence, the true substance of the conversation,
and this remains identical, no matter what may have given rise to the
conversation, or what it may be about; the relation between the two
being that of a general idea or class-name to the individuals which it
covers.

As I have said, the most interesting and amusing part of the matter is
the complete identity and solidarity of the gestures used to denote
the same set of circumstances, even though by people of very different
temperament; so that the gestures become exactly like words of
a language, alike for every one, and subject only to such small
modifications as depend upon variety of accent and education. And yet
there can be no doubt but that these standing gestures, which every
one uses, are the result of no convention or collusion. They are
original and innate--a true language of nature; consolidated, it may
be, by imitation and the influence of custom.

It is well known that it is part of an actor's duty to make a careful
study of gesture; and the same thing is true, to a somewhat smaller
degree, of a public speaker. This study must consist chiefly in
watching others and imitating their movements, for there are no
abstract rules fairly applicable to the matter, with the exception
of some very general leading principles, such as--to take an
example--that the gesture must not follow the word, but rather
come immediately before it, by way of announcing its approach and
attracting the hearer's attention.

Englishmen entertain a peculiar contempt for gesticulation, and look
upon it as something vulgar and undignified. This seems to me a silly
prejudice on their part, and the outcome of their general prudery. For
here we have a language which nature has given to every one, and which
every one understands; and to do away with and forbid it for no better
reason than that it is opposed to that much-lauded thing, gentlemanly
feeling, is a very questionable proceeding.




ON EDUCATION.


The human intellect is said to be so constituted that _general ideas_
arise by abstraction from _particular observations_, and therefore
come after them in point of time. If this is what actually occurs, as
happens in the case of a man who has to depend solely upon his own
experience for what he learns--who has no teacher and no book,--such
a man knows quite well which of his particular observations belong to
and are represented by each of his general ideas. He has a perfect
acquaintance with both sides of his experience, and accordingly, he
treats everything that comes in his way from a right standpoint. This
might be called the _natural_ method of education.

Contrarily, the _artificial_ method is to hear what other people say,
to learn and to read, and so to get your head crammed full of general
ideas before you have any sort of extended acquaintance with the world
as it is, and as you may see it for yourself. You will be told that
the particular observations which go to make these general ideas will
come to you later on in the course of experience; but until that time
arrives, you apply your general ideas wrongly, you judge men and
things from a wrong standpoint, you see them in a wrong light, and
treat them in a wrong way. So it is that education perverts the mind.

This explains why it so frequently happens that, after a long course
of learning and reading, we enter upon the world in our youth, partly
with an artless ignorance of things, partly with wrong notions about
them; so that our demeanor savors at one moment of a nervous anxiety,
at another of a mistaken confidence. The reason of this is simply that
our head is full of general ideas which we are now trying to turn to
some use, but which we hardly ever apply rightly. This is the result
of acting in direct opposition to the natural development of the mind
by obtaining general ideas first, and particular observations last:
it is putting the cart before the horse. Instead of developing the
child's own faculties of discernment, and teaching it to judge and
think for itself, the teacher uses all his energies to stuff its head
full of the ready-made thoughts of other people. The mistaken views
of life, which spring from a false application of general ideas, have
afterwards to be corrected by long years of experience; and it is
seldom that they are wholly corrected. This is why so few men of
learning are possessed of common-sense, such as is often to be met
with in people who have had no instruction at all.

_To acquire a knowledge of the world_ might be defined as the aim
of all education; and it follows from what I have said that special
stress should be laid upon beginning to acquire this knowledge _at
the right end_. As I have shown, this means, in the main, that the
particular observation of a thing shall precede the general idea of
it; further, that narrow and circumscribed ideas shall come before
ideas of a wide range. It means, therefore, that the whole system of
education shall follow in the steps that must have been taken by the
ideas themselves in the course of their formation. But whenever any of
these steps are skipped or left out, the instruction is defective, and
the ideas obtained are false; and finally, a distorted view of the
world arises, peculiar to the individual himself--a view such as
almost everyone entertains for some time, and most men for as long as
they live. No one can look into his own mind without seeing that it
was only after reaching a very mature age, and in some cases when he
least expected it, that he came to a right understanding or a clear
view of many matters in his life, that, after all, were not very
difficult or complicated. Up till then, they were points in his
knowledge of the world which were still obscure, due to his having
skipped some particular lesson in those early days of his education,
whatever it may have been like--whether artificial and conventional,
or of that natural kind which is based upon individual experience.

It follows that an attempt should be made to find out the strictly
natural course of knowledge, so that education may proceed
methodically by keeping to it; and that children may become acquainted
with the ways of the world, without getting wrong ideas into their
heads, which very often cannot be got out again. If this plan were
adopted, special care would have to be taken to prevent children
from using words without clearly understanding their meaning and
application. The fatal tendency to be satisfied with words instead of
trying to understand things--to learn phrases by heart, so that
they may prove a refuge in time of need, exists, as a rule, even in
children; and the tendency lasts on into manhood, making the knowledge
of many learned persons to consist in mere verbiage.

However, the main endeavor must always be to let particular
observations precede general ideas, and not _vice versa_, as is
usually and unfortunately the case; as though a child should come
feet foremost into the world, or a verse be begun by writing down the
rhyme! The ordinary method is to imprint ideas and opinions, in the
strict sense of the word, _prejudices_, on the mind of the child,
before it has had any but a very few particular observations. It is
thus that he afterwards comes to view the world and gather experience
through the medium of those ready-made ideas, rather than to let his
ideas be formed for him out of his own experience of life, as they
ought to be.

A man sees a great many things when he looks at the world for himself,
and he sees them from many sides; but this method of learning is not
nearly so short or so quick as the method which employs abstract
ideas and makes hasty generalizations about everything. Experience,
therefore, will be a long time in correcting preconceived ideas, or
perhaps never bring its task to an end; for wherever a man finds that
the aspect of things seems to contradict the general ideas he has
formed, he will begin by rejecting the evidence it offers as partial
and one-sided; nay, he will shut his eyes to it altogether and deny
that it stands in any contradiction at all with his preconceived
notions, in order that he may thus preserve them uninjured. So it is
that many a man carries about a burden of wrong notions all his life
long--crotchets, whims, fancies, prejudices, which at last become
fixed ideas. The fact is that he has never tried to form his
fundamental ideas for himself out of his own experience of life, his
own way of looking at the world, because he has taken over his ideas
ready-made from other people; and this it is that makes him--as it
makes how many others!--so shallow and superficial.

Instead of that method of instruction, care should be taken to educate
children on the natural lines. No idea should ever be established in a
child's mind otherwise than by what the child can see for itself, or
at any rate it should be verified by the same means; and the result of
this would be that the child's ideas, if few, would be well-grounded
and accurate. It would learn how to measure things by its own standard
rather than by another's; and so it would escape a thousand strange
fancies and prejudices, and not need to have them eradicated by the
lessons it will subsequently be taught in the school of life. The
child would, in this way, have its mind once for all habituated
to clear views and thorough-going knowledge; it would use its own
judgment and take an unbiased estimate of things.

And, in general, children should not form their notions of what life
is like from the copy before they have learned it from the original,
to whatever aspect of it their attention may be directed. Instead,
therefore, of hastening to place _books_, and books alone, in their
hands, let them be made acquainted, step by step, with _things_--with
the actual circumstances of human life. And above all let care be
taken to bring them to a clear and objective view of the world as it
is, to educate them always to derive their ideas directly from real
life, and to shape them in conformity with it--not to fetch them from
other sources, such as books, fairy tales, or what people say--then
to apply them ready-made to real life. For this will mean that their
heads are full of wrong notions, and that they will either see things
in a false light or try in vain to _remodel the world_ to suit their
views, and so enter upon false paths; and that, too, whether they are
only constructing theories of life or engaged in the actual business
of it. It is incredible how much harm is done when the seeds of wrong
notions are laid in the mind in those early years, later on to bear a
crop of prejudice; for the subsequent lessons, which are learned from
real life in the world have to be devoted mainly to their extirpation.
_To unlearn the evil_ was the answer, according to Diogenes
Laertius,[1] Antisthenes gave, when he was asked what branch of
knowledge was most necessary; and we can see what he meant.

[Footnote 1: vi. 7.]

No child under the age of fifteen should receive instruction in
subjects which may possibly be the vehicle of serious error, such as
philosophy, religion, or any other branch of knowledge where it is
necessary to take large views; because wrong notions imbibed early can
seldom be rooted out, and of all the intellectual faculties, judgment
is the last to arrive at maturity. The child should give its attention
either to subjects where no error is possible at all, such as
mathematics, or to those in which there is no particular danger in
making a mistake, such as languages, natural science, history and so
on. And in general, the branches of knowledge which are to be studied
at any period of life should be such as the mind is equal to at that
period and can perfectly understand. Childhood and youth form the time
for collecting materials, for getting a special and thorough knowledge
of the individual and particular things. In those years it is too
early to form views on a large scale; and ultimate explanations must
be put off to a later date. The faculty of judgment, which cannot come
into play without mature experience, should be left to itself; and
care should be taken not to anticipate its action by inculcating
prejudice, which will paralyze it for ever.

On the other hand, the memory should be specially taxed in youth,
since it is then that it is strongest and most tenacious. But in
choosing the things that should be committed to memory the utmost care
and forethought must be exercised; as lessons well learnt in youth are
never forgotten. This precious soil must therefore be cultivated so as
to bear as much fruit as possible. If you think how deeply rooted in
your memory are those persons whom you knew in the first twelve years
of your life, how indelible the impression made upon you by the events
of those years, how clear your recollection of most of the things that
happened to you then, most of what was told or taught you, it will
seem a natural thing to take the susceptibility and tenacity of the
mind at that period as the ground-work of education. This may be done
by a strict observance of method, and a systematic regulation of the
impressions which the mind is to receive.

But the years of youth allotted to a man are short, and memory is, in
general, bound within narrow limits; still more so, the memory of any
one individual. Since this is the case, it is all-important to fill
the memory with what is essential and material in any branch of
knowledge, to the exclusion of everything else. The decision as to
what is essential and material should rest with the masterminds in
every department of thought; their choice should be made after the
most mature deliberation, and the outcome of it fixed and determined.
Such a choice would have to proceed by sifting the things which it
is necessary and important for a man to know in general, and then,
necessary and important for him to know in any particular business
or calling. Knowledge of the first kind would have to be classified,
after an encyclopaedic fashion, in graduated courses, adapted to the
degree of general culture which a man may be expected to have in the
circumstances in which he is placed; beginning with a course limited
to the necessary requirements of primary education, and extending
upwards to the subjects treated of in all the branches of
philosophical thought. The regulation of the second kind of knowledge
would be left to those who had shown genuine mastery in the several
departments into which it is divided; and the whole system would
provide an elaborate rule or canon for intellectual education, which
would, of course, have to be revised every ten years. Some such
arrangement as this would employ the youthful power of the memory to
best advantage, and supply excellent working material to the faculty
of judgment, when it made its appearance later on.

A man's knowledge may be said to be mature, in other words, it has
reached the most complete state of perfection to which he, as an
individual, is capable of bringing it, when an exact correspondence is
established between the whole of his abstract ideas and the things he
has actually perceived for himself. This will mean that each of
his abstract ideas rests, directly or indirectly, upon a basis of
observation, which alone endows it with any real value; and also
that he is able to place every observation he makes under the right
abstract idea which belongs to it. Maturity is the work of experience
alone; and therefore it requires time. The knowledge we derive from
our own observation is usually distinct from that which we acquire
through the medium of abstract ideas; the one coming to us in the
natural way, the other by what people tell us, and the course of
instruction we receive, whether it is good or bad. The result is, that
in youth there is generally very little agreement or correspondence
between our abstract ideas, which are merely phrases in the mind, and
that real knowledge which we have obtained by our own observation. It
is only later on that a gradual approach takes place between these two
kinds of knowledge, accompanied by a mutual correction of error; and
knowledge is not mature until this coalition is accomplished. This
maturity or perfection of knowledge is something quite independent of
another kind of perfection, which may be of a high or a low order--the
perfection, I mean, to which a man may bring his own individual
faculties; which is measured, not by any correspondence between the
two kinds of knowledge, but by the degree of intensity which each kind
attains.

For the practical man the most needful thing is to acquire an accurate
and profound knowledge of _the ways of the world_. But this, though
the most needful, is also the most wearisome of all studies, as a man
may reach a great age without coming to the end of his task; whereas,
in the domain of the sciences, he masters the more important facts
when he is still young. In acquiring that knowledge of the world, it
is while he is a novice, namely, in boyhood and in youth, that the
first and hardest lessons are put before him; but it often happens
that even in later years there is still a great deal to be learned.

The study is difficult enough in itself; but the difficulty is doubled
by _novels_, which represent a state of things in life and the world,
such as, in fact, does not exist. Youth is credulous, and accepts
these views of life, which then become part and parcel of the mind; so
that, instead of a merely negative condition of ignorance, you have
positive error--a whole tissue of false notions to start with; and at
a later date these actually spoil the schooling of experience, and put
a wrong construction on the lessons it teaches. If, before this,
the youth had no light at all to guide him, he is now misled by a
will-o'-the-wisp; still more often is this the case with a girl.
They have both had a false view of things foisted on them by reading
novels; and expectations have been aroused which can never be
fulfilled. This generally exercises a baneful influence on their whole
life. In this respect those whose youth has allowed them no time or
opportunity for reading novels--those who work with their hands and
the like--are in a position of decided advantage. There are a few
novels to which this reproach cannot be addressed--nay, which have an
effect the contrary of bad. First and foremost, to give an example,
_Gil Blas_, and the other works of Le Sage (or rather their Spanish
originals); further, _The Vicar of Wakefield_, and, to some extent Sir
Walter Scott's novels. _Don Quixote_ may be regarded as a satirical
exhibition of the error to which I am referring.




OF WOMEN.


Schiller's poem in honor of women, _Würde der Frauen_, is the
result of much careful thought, and it appeals to the reader by its
antithetic style and its use of contrast; but as an expression of the
true praise which should be accorded to them, it is, I think, inferior
to these few words of Jouy's: _Without women, the beginning of our
life would be helpless; the middle, devoid of pleasure; and the end,
of consolation_. The same thing is more feelingly expressed by Byron
in _Sardanapalus_:

                                                 _The very first
  Of human life must spring from woman's breast,
  Your first small words are taught you from her lips,
  Your first tears quench'd by her, and your last sighs
  Too often breathed out in a woman's hearing,
  When men have shrunk from the ignoble care
  Of watching the last hour of him who led them_.

  (Act I Scene 2.)

These two passages indicate the right standpoint for the appreciation
of women.

You need only look at the way in which she is formed, to see that
woman is not meant to undergo great labor, whether of the mind or of
the body. She pays the debt of life not by what she does, but by what
she suffers; by the pains of child-bearing and care for the child,
and by submission to her husband, to whom she should be a patient and
cheering companion. The keenest sorrows and joys are not for her, nor
is she called upon to display a great deal of strength. The current
of her life should be more gentle, peaceful and trivial than man's,
without being essentially happier or unhappier.

Women are directly fitted for acting as the nurses and teachers of
our early childhood by the fact that they are themselves childish,
frivolous and short-sighted; in a word, they are big children all
their life long--a kind of intermediate stage between the child and
the full-grown man, who is man in the strict sense of the word. See
how a girl will fondle a child for days together, dance with it and
sing to it; and then think what a man, with the best will in the
world, could do if he were put in her place.

With young girls Nature seems to have had in view what, in the
language of the drama, is called _a striking effect_; as for a few
years she dowers them with a wealth of beauty and is lavish in her
gift of charm, at the expense of all the rest of their life; so that
during those years they may capture the fantasy of some man to such a
degree that he is hurried away into undertaking the honorable care of
them, in some form or other, as long as they live--a step for which
there would not appear to be any sufficient warranty if reason only
directed his thoughts. Accordingly, Nature has equipped woman, as she
does all her creatures, with the weapons and implements requisite
for the safeguarding of her existence, and for just as long as it is
necessary for her to have them. Here, as elsewhere, Nature proceeds
with her usual economy; for just as the female ant, after fecundation,
loses her wings, which are then superfluous, nay, actually a danger
to the business of breeding; so, after giving birth to one or two
children, a woman generally loses her beauty; probably, indeed, for
similar reasons.

And so we find that young girls, in their hearts, look upon domestic
affairs or work of any kind as of secondary importance, if not
actually as a mere jest. The only business that really claims their
earnest attention is love, making conquests, and everything connected
with this--dress, dancing, and so on.

The nobler and more perfect a thing is, the later and slower it is
in arriving at maturity. A man reaches the maturity of his reasoning
powers and mental faculties hardly before the age of twenty-eight; a
woman at eighteen. And then, too, in the case of woman, it is only
reason of a sort--very niggard in its dimensions. That is why women
remain children their whole life long; never seeing anything but
what is quite close to them, cleaving to the present moment, taking
appearance for reality, and preferring trifles to matters of the first
importance. For it is by virtue of his reasoning faculty that man does
not live in the present only, like the brute, but looks about him and
considers the past and the future; and this is the origin of prudence,
as well as of that care and anxiety which so many people exhibit. Both
the advantages and the disadvantages which this involves, are shared
in by the woman to a smaller extent because of her weaker power
of reasoning. She may, in fact, be described as intellectually
short-sighted, because, while she has an intuitive understanding of
what lies quite close to her, her field of vision is narrow and does
not reach to what is remote; so that things which are absent, or past,
or to come, have much less effect upon women than upon men. This is
the reason why women are more often inclined to be extravagant, and
sometimes carry their inclination to a length that borders upon
madness. In their hearts, women think that it is men's business
to earn money and theirs to spend it--- if possible during their
husband's life, but, at any rate, after his death. The very fact
that their husband hands them over his earnings for purposes of
housekeeping, strengthens them in this belief.

However many disadvantages all this may involve, there is at least
this to be said in its favor; that the woman lives more in the present
than the man, and that, if the present is at all tolerable, she enjoys
it more eagerly. This is the source of that cheerfulness which
is peculiar to women, fitting her to amuse man in his hours of
recreation, and, in case of need, to console him when he is borne down
by the weight of his cares.

It is by no means a bad plan to consult women in matters of
difficulty, as the Germans used to do in ancient times; for their way
of looking at things is quite different from ours, chiefly in the
fact that they like to take the shortest way to their goal, and, in
general, manage to fix their eyes upon what lies before them; while
we, as a rule, see far beyond it, just because it is in front of our
noses. In cases like this, we need to be brought back to the right
standpoint, so as to recover the near and simple view.

Then, again, women are decidedly more sober in their judgment than
we are, so that they do not see more in things than is really there;
whilst, if our passions are aroused, we are apt to see things in an
exaggerated way, or imagine what does not exist.

The weakness of their reasoning faculty also explains why it is that
women show more sympathy for the unfortunate than men do, and so treat
them with more kindness and interest; and why it is that, on the
contrary, they are inferior to men in point of justice, and less
honorable and conscientious. For it is just because their reasoning
power is weak that present circumstances have such a hold over them,
and those concrete things, which lie directly before their eyes,
exercise a power which is seldom counteracted to any extent by
abstract principles of thought, by fixed rules of conduct, firm
resolutions, or, in general, by consideration for the past and the
future, or regard for what is absent and remote. Accordingly, they
possess the first and main elements that go to make a virtuous
character, but they are deficient in those secondary qualities which
are often a necessary instrument in the formation of it.[1]

[Footnote 1: In this respect they may be compared to an animal
organism which contains a liver but no gall-bladder. Here let me refer
to what I have said in my treatise on _The Foundation of Morals_, §
17.]

Hence, it will be found that the fundamental fault of the female
character is that it has _no sense of justice_. This is mainly due to
the fact, already mentioned, that women are defective in the powers of
reasoning and deliberation; but it is also traceable to the position
which Nature has assigned to them as the weaker sex. They are
dependent, not upon strength, but upon craft; and hence their
instinctive capacity for cunning, and their ineradicable tendency to
say what is not true. For as lions are provided with claws and teeth,
and elephants and boars with tusks, bulls with horns, and cuttle fish
with its clouds of inky fluid, so Nature has equipped woman, for her
defence and protection, with the arts of dissimulation; and all the
power which Nature has conferred upon man in the shape of physical
strength and reason, has been bestowed upon women in this form. Hence,
dissimulation is innate in woman, and almost as much a quality of the
stupid as of the clever. It is as natural for them to make use of it
on every occasion as it is for those animals to employ their means of
defence when they are attacked; they have a feeling that in doing so
they are only within their rights. Therefore a woman who is perfectly
truthful and not given to dissimulation is perhaps an impossibility,
and for this very reason they are so quick at seeing through
dissimulation in others that it is not a wise thing to attempt it with
them. But this fundamental defect which I have stated, with all
that it entails, gives rise to falsity, faithlessness, treachery,
ingratitude, and so on. Perjury in a court of justice is more
often committed by women than by men. It may, indeed, be generally
questioned whether women ought to be sworn in at all. From time to
time one finds repeated cases everywhere of ladies, who want for
nothing, taking things from shop-counters when no one is looking, and
making off with them.

Nature has appointed that the propagation of the species shall be the
business of men who are young, strong and handsome; so that the race
may not degenerate. This is the firm will and purpose of Nature in
regard to the species, and it finds its expression in the passions of
women. There is no law that is older or more powerful than this. Woe,
then, to the man who sets up claims and interests that will conflict
with it; whatever he may say and do, they will be unmercifully crushed
at the first serious encounter. For the innate rule that governs
women's conduct, though it is secret and unformulated, nay,
unconscious in its working, is this: _We are justified in deceiving
those who think they have acquired rights over the species by paying
little attention to the individual, that is, to us. The constitution
and, therefore, the welfare of the species have been placed in our
hands and committed to our care, through the control we obtain over
the next generation, which proceeds from us; let us discharge our
duties conscientiously_. But women have no abstract knowledge of this
leading principle; they are conscious of it only as a concrete fact;
and they have no other method of giving expression to it than the
way in which they act when the opportunity arrives. And then their
conscience does not trouble them so much as we fancy; for in the
darkest recesses of their heart, they are aware that in committing a
breach of their duty towards the individual, they have all the
better fulfilled their duty towards the species, which is infinitely
greater.[1]

[Footnote 1: A more detailed discussion of the matter in question may
be found in my chief work, _Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung_, vol.
ii, ch. 44.]

And since women exist in the main solely for the propagation of the
species, and are not destined for anything else, they live, as a rule,
more for the species than for the individual, and in their hearts
take the affairs of the species more seriously than those of the
individual. This gives their whole life and being a certain levity;
the general bent of their character is in a direction fundamentally
different from that of man; and it is this to which produces that
discord in married life which is so frequent, and almost the normal
state.

The natural feeling between men is mere indifference, but
between women it is actual enmity. The reason of this is that
trade-jealousy--_odium figulinum_--which, in the case of men does not
go beyond the confines of their own particular pursuit; but, with
women, embraces the whole sex; since they have only one kind of
business. Even when they meet in the street, women look at one another
like Guelphs and Ghibellines. And it is a patent fact that when two
women make first acquaintance with each other, they behave with more
constraint and dissimulation than two men would show in a like case;
and hence it is that an exchange of compliments between two women is a
much more ridiculous proceeding than between two men. Further, whilst
a man will, as a general rule, always preserve a certain amount of
consideration and humanity in speaking to others, even to those who
are in a very inferior position, it is intolerable to see how proudly
and disdainfully a fine lady will generally behave towards one who is
in a lower social rank (I do not mean a woman who is in her service),
whenever she speaks to her. The reason of this may be that, with
women, differences of rank are much more precarious than with us;
because, while a hundred considerations carry weight in our case,
in theirs there is only one, namely, with which man they have found
favor; as also that they stand in much nearer relations with one
another than men do, in consequence of the one-sided nature of their
calling. This makes them endeavor to lay stress upon differences of
rank.

It is only the man whose intellect is clouded by his sexual impulses
that could give the name of _the fair sex_ to that under-sized,
narrow-shouldered, broad-hipped, and short-legged race; for the whole
beauty of the sex is bound up with this impulse. Instead of calling
them beautiful, there would be more warrant for describing women as
the un-aesthetic sex. Neither for music, nor for poetry, nor for fine
art, have they really and truly any sense or susceptibility; it is a
mere mockery if they make a pretence of it in order to assist their
endeavor to please. Hence, as a result of this, they are incapable of
taking a _purely objective interest_ in anything; and the reason of it
seems to me to be as follows. A man tries to acquire _direct_ mastery
over things, either by understanding them, or by forcing them to do
his will. But a woman is always and everywhere reduced to obtaining
this mastery _indirectly_, namely, through a man; and whatever direct
mastery she may have is entirely confined to him. And so it lies in
woman's nature to look upon everything only as a means for conquering
man; and if she takes an interest in anything else, it is simulated--a
mere roundabout way of gaining her ends by coquetry, and feigning what
she does not feel. Hence, even Rousseau declared: _Women have, in
general, no love for any art; they have no proper knowledge of any;
and they have no genius_.[1]

[Footnote 1: Lettre à d'Alembert, Note xx.]

No one who sees at all below the surface can have failed to remark the
same thing. You need only observe the kind of attention women bestow
upon a concert, an opera, or a play--the childish simplicity, for
example, with which they keep on chattering during the finest passages
in the greatest masterpieces. If it is true that the Greeks excluded
women from their theatres they were quite right in what they did;
at any rate you would have been able to hear what was said upon the
stage. In our day, besides, or in lieu of saying, _Let a woman keep
silence in the church_, it would be much to the point to say _Let a
woman keep silence in the theatre_. This might, perhaps, be put up in
big letters on the curtain.

And you cannot expect anything else of women if you consider that the
most distinguished intellects among the whole sex have never managed
to produce a single achievement in the fine arts that is really great,
genuine, and original; or given to the world any work of permanent
value in any sphere. This is most strikingly shown in regard to
painting, where mastery of technique is at least as much within their
power as within ours--and hence they are diligent in cultivating it;
but still, they have not a single great painting to boast of, just
because they are deficient in that objectivity of mind which is so
directly indispensable in painting. They never get beyond a subjective
point of view. It is quite in keeping with this that ordinary women
have no real susceptibility for art at all; for Nature proceeds in
strict sequence--_non facit saltum_. And Huarte[1] in his _Examen de
ingenios para las scienzias_--a book which has been famous for
three hundred years--denies women the possession of all the higher
faculties. The case is not altered by particular and partial
exceptions; taken as a whole, women are, and remain, thorough-going
Philistines, and quite incurable. Hence, with that absurd arrangement
which allows them to share the rank and title of their husbands they
are a constant stimulus to his ignoble ambitions. And, further, it is
just because they are Philistines that modern society, where they
take the lead and set the tone, is in such a bad way. Napoleon's
saying--that _women have no rank_--should be adopted as the right
standpoint in determining their position in society; and as regards
their other qualities Chamfort[2] makes the very true remark: _They
are made to trade with our own weaknesses and our follies, but not
with our reason. The sympathies that exist between them and men are
skin-deep only, and do not touch the mind or the feelings or the
character_. They form the _sexus sequior_--the second sex, inferior in
every respect to the first; their infirmities should be treated
with consideration; but to show them great reverence is extremely
ridiculous, and lowers us in their eyes. When Nature made two
divisions of the human race, she did not draw the line exactly through
the middle. These divisions are polar and opposed to each other, it is
true; but the difference between them is not qualitative merely, it is
also quantitative.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--- Juan Huarte (1520?-1590)
practised as a physician at Madrid. The work cited by Schopenhauer is
known, and has been translated into many languages.]

[Footnote 2: _Translator's Note_.--See _Counsels and Maxims_, p. 12,
Note.]

This is just the view which the ancients took of woman, and the view
which people in the East take now; and their judgment as to her proper
position is much more correct than ours, with our old French notions
of gallantry and our preposterous system of reverence--that highest
product of Teutonico-Christian stupidity. These notions have served
only to make women more arrogant and overbearing; so that one is
occasionally reminded of the holy apes in Benares, who in the
consciousness of their sanctity and inviolable position, think they
can do exactly as they please.

But in the West, the woman, and especially the _lady_, finds herself
in a false position; for woman, rightly called by the ancients,
_sexus sequior_, is by no means fit to be the object of our honor and
veneration, or to hold her head higher than man and be on equal terms
with him. The consequences of this false position are sufficiently
obvious. Accordingly, it would be a very desirable thing if this
Number-Two of the human race were in Europe also relegated to her
natural place, and an end put to that lady nuisance, which not only
moves all Asia to laughter, but would have been ridiculed by Greece
and Rome as well. It is impossible to calculate the good effects which
such a change would bring about in our social, civil and political
arrangements. There would be no necessity for the Salic law: it would
be a superfluous truism. In Europe the _lady_, strictly so-called, is
a being who should not exist at all; she should be either a housewife
or a girl who hopes to become one; and she should be brought up, not
to be arrogant, but to be thrifty and submissive. It is just because
there are such people as _ladies_ in Europe that the women of the
lower classes, that is to say, the great majority of the sex, are much
more unhappy than they are in the East. And even Lord Byron says:
_Thought of the state of women under the ancient Greeks--convenient
enough. Present state, a remnant of the barbarism of the chivalric
and the feudal ages--artificial and unnatural. They ought to mind
home--and be well fed and clothed--but not mixed in society. Well
educated, too, in religion--but to read neither poetry nor politics--
nothing but books of piety and cookery. Music--drawing--dancing--also
a little gardening and ploughing now and then. I have seen them
mending the roads in Epirus with good success. Why not, as well as
hay-making and milking_?

The laws of marriage prevailing in Europe consider the woman as the
equivalent of the man--start, that is to say, from a wrong position.
In our part of the world where monogamy is the rule, to marry means to
halve one's rights and double one's duties. Now, when the laws gave
women equal rights with man, they ought to have also endowed her with
a masculine intellect. But the fact is, that just in proportion as
the honors and privileges which the laws accord to women, exceed the
amount which nature gives, is there a diminution in the number
of women who really participate in these privileges; and all the
remainder are deprived of their natural rights by just so much as is
given to the others over and above their share. For the institution of
monogamy, and the laws of marriage which it entails, bestow upon
the woman an unnatural position of privilege, by considering her
throughout as the full equivalent of the man, which is by no means
the case; and seeing this, men who are shrewd and prudent very often
scruple to make so great a sacrifice and to acquiesce in so unfair an
arrangement.

Consequently, whilst among polygamous nations every woman is provided
for, where monogamy prevails the number of married women is limited;
and there remains over a large number of women without stay or
support, who, in the upper classes, vegetate as useless old maids, and
in the lower succumb to hard work for which they are not suited; or
else become _filles de joie_, whose life is as destitute of joy as it
is of honor. But under the circumstances they become a necessity; and
their position is openly recognized as serving the special end of
warding off temptation from those women favored by fate, who have
found, or may hope to find, husbands. In London alone there are 80,000
prostitutes. What are they but the women, who, under the institution
of monogamy have come off worse? Theirs is a dreadful fate: they are
human sacrifices offered up on the altar of monogamy. The women whose
wretched position is here described are the inevitable set-off to the
European lady with her arrogance and pretension. Polygamy is therefore
a real benefit to the female sex if it is taken as a whole. And, from
another point of view, there is no true reason why a man whose wife
suffers from chronic illness, or remains barren, or has gradually
become too old for him, should not take a second. The motives which
induce so many people to become converts to Mormonism[1] appear to
be just those which militate against the unnatural institution of
monogamy.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--The Mormons have recently given up
polygamy, and received the American franchise in its stead.]

Moreover, the bestowal of unnatural rights upon women has imposed upon
them unnatural duties, and, nevertheless, a breach of these duties
makes them unhappy. Let me explain. A man may often think that his
social or financial position will suffer if he marries, unless he
makes some brilliant alliance. His desire will then be to win a woman
of his own choice under conditions other than those of marriage, such
as will secure her position and that of the children. However fair,
reasonable, fit and proper these conditions may be, and the woman
consents by foregoing that undue amount of privilege which marriage
alone can bestow, she to some extent loses her honor, because marriage
is the basis of civic society; and she will lead an unhappy life,
since human nature is so constituted that we pay an attention to the
opinion of other people which is out of all proportion to its value.
On the other hand, if she does not consent, she runs the risk either
of having to be given in marriage to a man whom she does not like, or
of being landed high and dry as an old maid; for the period during
which she has a chance of being settled for life is very short. And
in view of this aspect of the institution of monogamy, Thomasius'
profoundly learned treatise, _de Concubinatu_, is well worth reading;
for it shows that, amongst all nations and in all ages, down to the
Lutheran Reformation, concubinage was permitted; nay, that it was an
institution which was to a certain extent actually recognized by law,
and attended with no dishonor. It was only the Lutheran Reformation
that degraded it from this position. It was seen to be a further
justification for the marriage of the clergy; and then, after that,
the Catholic Church did not dare to remain behind-hand in the matter.

There is no use arguing about polygamy; it must be taken as _de facto_
existing everywhere, and the only question is as to how it shall be
regulated. Where are there, then, any real monogamists? We all live,
at any rate, for a time, and most of us, always, in polygamy. And so,
since every man needs many women, there is nothing fairer than to
allow him, nay, to make it incumbent upon him, to provide for many
women. This will reduce woman to her true and natural position as
a subordinate being; and the _lady_--that monster of European
civilization and Teutonico-Christian stupidity--will disappear from
the world, leaving only _women_, but no more _unhappy women_, of whom
Europe is now full.

In India, no woman is ever independent, but in accordance with the law
of Mamu,[1] she stands under the control of her father, her husband,
her brother or her son. It is, to be sure, a revolting thing that a
widow should immolate herself upon her husband's funeral pyre; but it
is also revolting that she should spend her husband's money with her
paramours--the money for which he toiled his whole life long, in the
consoling belief that he was providing for his children. Happy are
those who have kept the middle course--_medium tenuere beati_.

[Footnote 1: Ch. V., v. 148.]

The first love of a mother for her child is, with the lower animals as
with men, of a purely _instinctive_ character, and so it ceases when
the child is no longer in a physically helpless condition. After that,
the first love should give way to one that is based on habit and
reason; but this often fails to make its appearance, especially where
the mother did not love the father. The love of a father for his child
is of a different order, and more likely to last; because it has its
foundation in the fact that in the child he recognizes his own inner
self; that is to say, his love for it is metaphysical in its origin.

In almost all nations, whether of the ancient or the modern world,
even amongst the Hottentots,[1] property is inherited by the male
descendants alone; it is only in Europe that a departure has taken
place; but not amongst the nobility, however. That the property which
has cost men long years of toil and effort, and been won with so much
difficulty, should afterwards come into the hands of women, who then,
in their lack of reason, squander it in a short time, or otherwise
fool it away, is a grievance and a wrong as serious as it is common,
which should be prevented by limiting the right of women to inherit.
In my opinion, the best arrangement would be that by which women,
whether widows or daughters, should never receive anything beyond the
interest for life on property secured by mortgage, and in no case the
property itself, or the capital, except where all male descendants
fail. The people who make money are men, not women; and it follows
from this that women are neither justified in having unconditional
possession of it, nor fit persons to be entrusted with its
administration. When wealth, in any true sense of the word, that is to
say, funds, houses or land, is to go to them as an inheritance they
should never be allowed the free disposition of it. In their case a
guardian should always be appointed; and hence they should never be
given the free control of their own children, wherever it can be
avoided. The vanity of women, even though it should not prove to be
greater than that of men, has this much danger in it, that it takes an
entirely material direction. They are vain, I mean, of their personal
beauty, and then of finery, show and magnificence. That is just why
they are so much in their element in society. It is this, too, which
makes them so inclined to be extravagant, all the more as their
reasoning power is low. Accordingly we find an ancient writer
describing woman as in general of an extravagant nature--[Greek: Gynae
to synolon esti dapanaeron Physei][2] But with men vanity often takes
the direction of non-material advantages, such as intellect, learning,
courage.

[Footnote 1: Leroy, _Lettres philosophiques sur l'intelligence et la
perfectibilité des animaux, avec quelques lettres sur l'homme_, p.
298, Paris, 1802.]

[Footnote 2: Brunck's _Gnomici poetae graeci_, v. 115.]

In the _Politics_[1] Aristotle explains the great disadvantage which
accrued to the Spartans from the fact that they conceded too much to
their women, by giving them the right of inheritance and dower, and a
great amount of independence; and he shows how much this contributed
to Sparta's fall. May it not be the case in France that the influence
of women, which went on increasing steadily from the time of Louis
XIII., was to blame for that gradual corruption of the Court and the
Government, which brought about the Revolution of 1789, of which all
subsequent disturbances have been the fruit? However that may be, the
false position which women occupy, demonstrated as it is, in the most
glaring way, by the institution of the _lady_, is a fundamental defect
in our social scheme, and this defect, proceeding from the very heart
of it, must spread its baneful influence in all directions.

[Footnote 1: Bk. I, ch. 9.]

       *       *       *       *       *

That woman is by nature meant to obey may be seen by the fact that
every woman who is placed in the unnatural position of complete
independence, immediately attaches herself to some man, by whom she
allows herself to be guided and ruled. It is because she needs a lord
and master. If she is young, it will be a lover; if she is old, a
priest.




ON NOISE.


Kant wrote a treatise on _The Vital Powers_. I should prefer to write
a dirge for them. The superabundant display of vitality, which takes
the form of knocking, hammering, and tumbling things about, has proved
a daily torment to me all my life long. There are people, it is
true--nay, a great many people--who smile at such things, because they
are not sensitive to noise; but they are just the very people who are
also not sensitive to argument, or thought, or poetry, or art, in a
word, to any kind of intellectual influence. The reason of it is that
the tissue of their brains is of a very rough and coarse quality. On
the other hand, noise is a torture to intellectual people. In the
biographies of almost all great writers, or wherever else their
personal utterances are recorded, I find complaints about it; in the
case of Kant, for instance, Goethe, Lichtenberg, Jean Paul; and if it
should happen that any writer has omitted to express himself on the
matter, it is only for want of an opportunity.

This aversion to noise I should explain as follows: If you cut up a
large diamond into little bits, it will entirely lose the value it
had as a whole; and an army divided up into small bodies of soldiers,
loses all its strength. So a great intellect sinks to the level of
an ordinary one, as soon as it is interrupted and disturbed, its
attention distracted and drawn off from the matter in hand; for its
superiority depends upon its power of concentration--of bringing all
its strength to bear upon one theme, in the same way as a concave
mirror collects into one point all the rays of light that strike upon
it. Noisy interruption is a hindrance to this concentration. That is
why distinguished minds have always shown such an extreme dislike
to disturbance in any form, as something that breaks in upon and
distracts their thoughts. Above all have they been averse to that
violent interruption that comes from noise. Ordinary people are
not much put out by anything of the sort. The most sensible and
intelligent of all nations in Europe lays down the rule, _Never
Interrupt_! as the eleventh commandment. Noise is the most impertinent
of all forms of interruption. It is not only an interruption, but
also a disruption of thought. Of course, where there is nothing to
interrupt, noise will not be so particularly painful. Occasionally it
happens that some slight but constant noise continues to bother and
distract me for a time before I become distinctly conscious of it. All
I feel is a steady increase in the labor of thinking--just as though I
were trying to walk with a weight on my foot. At last I find out what
it is. Let me now, however, pass from genus to species. The most
inexcusable and disgraceful of all noises is the cracking of whips--a
truly infernal thing when it is done in the narrow resounding streets
of a town. I denounce it as making a peaceful life impossible; it puts
an end to all quiet thought. That this cracking of whips should be
allowed at all seems to me to show in the clearest way how senseless
and thoughtless is the nature of mankind. No one with anything like an
idea in his head can avoid a feeling of actual pain at this sudden,
sharp crack, which paralyzes the brain, rends the thread of
reflection, and murders thought. Every time this noise is made, it
must disturb a hundred people who are applying their minds to business
of some sort, no matter how trivial it may be; while on the thinker
its effect is woeful and disastrous, cutting his thoughts asunder,
much as the executioner's axe severs the head from the body. No sound,
be it ever so shrill, cuts so sharply into the brain as this cursed
cracking of whips; you feel the sting of the lash right inside your
head; and it affects the brain in the same way as touch affects a
sensitive plant, and for the same length of time.

With all due respect for the most holy doctrine of utility, I really
cannot see why a fellow who is taking away a wagon-load of gravel or
dung should thereby obtain the right to kill in the bud the thoughts
which may happen to be springing up in ten thousand heads--the number
he will disturb one after another in half an hour's drive through the
town. Hammering, the barking of dogs, and the crying of children are
horrible to hear; but your only genuine assassin of thought is the
crack of a whip; it exists for the purpose of destroying every
pleasant moment of quiet thought that any one may now and then enjoy.
If the driver had no other way of urging on his horse than by making
this most abominable of all noises, it would be excusable; but quite
the contrary is the case. This cursed cracking of whips is not only
unnecessary, but even useless. Its aim is to produce an effect upon
the intelligence of the horse; but through the constant abuse of it,
the animal becomes habituated to the sound, which falls upon blunted
feelings and produces no effect at all. The horse does not go any
faster for it. You have a remarkable example of this in the ceaseless
cracking of his whip on the part of a cab-driver, while he is
proceeding at a slow pace on the lookout for a fare. If he were to
give his horse the slightest touch with the whip, it would have much
more effect. Supposing, however, that it were absolutely necessary to
crack the whip in order to keep the horse constantly in mind of its
presence, it would be enough to make the hundredth part of the noise.
For it is a well-known fact that, in regard to sight and hearing,
animals are sensitive to even the faintest indications; they are alive
to things that we can scarcely perceive. The most surprising instances
of this are furnished by trained dogs and canary birds.

It is obvious, therefore, that here we have to do with an act of pure
wantonness; nay, with an impudent defiance offered to those members of
the community who work with their heads by those who work with their
hands. That such infamy should be tolerated in a town is a piece of
barbarity and iniquity, all the more as it could easily be remedied by
a police-notice to the effect that every lash shall have a knot at the
end of it. There can be no harm in drawing the attention of the mob to
the fact that the classes above them work with their heads, for any
kind of headwork is mortal anguish to the man in the street. A fellow
who rides through the narrow alleys of a populous town with unemployed
post-horses or cart-horses, and keeps on cracking a whip several yards
long with all his might, deserves there and then to stand down and
receive five really good blows with a stick.

All the philanthropists in the world, and all the legislators, meeting
to advocate and decree the total abolition of corporal punishment,
will never persuade me to the contrary! There is something even more
disgraceful than what I have just mentioned. Often enough you may see
a carter walking along the street, quite alone, without any horses,
and still cracking away incessantly; so accustomed has the wretch
become to it in consequence of the unwarrantable toleration of this
practice. A man's body and the needs of his body are now everywhere
treated with a tender indulgence. Is the thinking mind then, to be
the only thing that is never to obtain the slightest measure of
consideration or protection, to say nothing of respect? Carters,
porters, messengers--these are the beasts of burden amongst mankind;
by all means let them be treated justly, fairly, indulgently, and with
forethought; but they must not be permitted to stand in the way of
the higher endeavors of humanity by wantonly making a noise. How many
great and splendid thoughts, I should like to know, have been lost to
the world by the crack of a whip? If I had the upper hand, I should
soon produce in the heads of these people an indissoluble association
of ideas between cracking a whip and getting a whipping.

Let us hope that the more intelligent and refined among the nations
will make a beginning in this matter, and then that the Germans may
take example by it and follow suit.[1] Meanwhile, I may quote what
Thomas Hood says of them[2]: _For a musical nation, they are the most
noisy I ever met with_. That they are so is due to the fact, not that
they are more fond of making a noise than other people--they would
deny it if you asked them--but that their senses are obtuse;
consequently, when they hear a noise, it does not affect them much. It
does not disturb them in reading or thinking, simply because they do
not think; they only smoke, which is their substitute for thought. The
general toleration of unnecessary noise--the slamming of doors, for
instance, a very unmannerly and ill-bred thing--is direct evidence
that the prevailing habit of mind is dullness and lack of thought. In
Germany it seems as though care were taken that no one should ever
think for mere noise--to mention one form of it, the way in which
drumming goes on for no purpose at all.

[Footnote 1: According to a notice issued by the Society for the
Protection of Animals in Munich, the superfluous whipping and the
cracking of whips were, in December, 1858, positively forbidden in
Nuremberg.]

[Footnote 2: In _Up the Rhine_.]

Finally, as regards the literature of the subject treated of in this
chapter, I have only one work to recommend, but it is a good one. I
refer to a poetical epistle in _terzo rimo_ by the famous painter
Bronzino, entitled _De' Romori: a Messer Luca Martini_. It gives a
detailed description of the torture to which people are put by the
various noises of a small Italian town. Written in a tragicomic style,
it is very amusing. The epistle may be found in _Opere burlesche del
Berni, Aretino ed altri_, Vol. II., p. 258; apparently published in
Utrecht in 1771.




A FEW PARABLES.


In a field of ripening corn I came to a place which had been trampled
down by some ruthless foot; and as I glanced amongst the countless
stalks, every one of them alike, standing there so erect and bearing
the full weight of the ear, I saw a multitude of different flowers,
red and blue and violet. How pretty they looked as they grew there so
naturally with their little foliage! But, thought I, they are quite
useless; they bear no fruit; they are mere weeds, suffered to remain
only because there is no getting rid of them. And yet, but for these
flowers, there would be nothing to charm the eye in that wilderness
of stalks. They are emblematic of poetry and art, which, in civic
life--so severe, but still useful and not without its fruit--play the
same part as flowers in the corn.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are some really beautifully landscapes in the world, but the
human figures in them are poor, and you had not better look at them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fly should be used as the symbol of impertinence and audacity; for
whilst all other animals shun man more than anything else, and run
away even before he comes near them, the fly lights upon his very
nose.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two Chinamen traveling in Europe went to the theatre for the first
time. One of them did nothing but study the machinery, and he
succeeded in finding out how it was worked. The other tried to get at
the meaning of the piece in spite of his ignorance of the language.
Here you have the Astronomer and the Philosopher.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wisdom which is only theoretical and never put into practice, is like
a double rose; its color and perfume are delightful, but it withers
away and leaves no seed.

No rose without a thorn. Yes, but many a thorn without a rose.

       *       *       *       *       *

A wide-spreading apple-tree stood in full bloom, and behind it a
straight fir raised its dark and tapering head. _Look at the thousands
of gay blossoms which cover me everywhere_, said the apple-tree; _what
have you to show in comparison? Dark-green needles! That is true_,
replied the fir, _but when winter comes, you will be bared of your
glory; and I shall be as I am now_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once, as I was botanizing under an oak, I found amongst a number
of other plants of similar height one that was dark in color, with
tightly closed leaves and a stalk that was very straight and stiff.
When I touched it, it said to me in firm tones: _Let me alone; I am
not for your collection, like these plants to which Nature has given
only a single year of life. I am a little oak_.

So it is with a man whose influence is to last for hundreds of years.
As a child, as a youth, often even as a full-grown man, nay, his whole
life long, he goes about among his fellows, looking like them and
seemingly as unimportant. But let him alone; he will not die. Time
will come and bring those who know how to value him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The man who goes up in a balloon does not feel as though he were
ascending; he only sees the earth sinking deeper under him.

There is a mystery which only those will understand who feel the truth
of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Your estimation of a man's size will be affected by the distance at
which you stand from him, but in two entirely opposite ways according
as it is his physical or his mental stature that you are considering.
The one will seem smaller, the farther off you move; the other,
greater.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nature covers all her works with a varnish of beauty, like the tender
bloom that is breathed, as it were, on the surface of a peach or a
plum. Painters and poets lay themselves out to take off this varnish,
to store it up, and give it us to be enjoyed at our leisure. We drink
deep of this beauty long before we enter upon life itself; and when
afterwards we come to see the works of Nature for ourselves, the
varnish is gone: the artists have used it up and we have enjoyed it in
advance. Thus it is that the world so often appears harsh and devoid
of charm, nay, actually repulsive. It were better to leave us to
discover the varnish for ourselves. This would mean that we should
not enjoy it all at once and in large quantities; we should have no
finished pictures, no perfect poems; but we should look at all things
in that genial and pleasing light in which even now a child of Nature
sometimes sees them--some one who has not anticipated his aesthetic
pleasures by the help of art, or taken the charms of life too early.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Cathedral in Mayence is so shut in by the houses that are built
round about it, that there is no one spot from which you can see it
as a whole. This is symbolic of everything great or beautiful in the
world. It ought to exist for its own sake alone, but before very long
it is misused to serve alien ends. People come from all directions
wanting to find in it support and maintenance for themselves; they
stand in the way and spoil its effect. To be sure, there is nothing
surprising in this, for in a world of need and imperfection everything
is seized upon which can be used to satisfy want. Nothing is exempt
from this service, no, not even those very things which arise only
when need and want are for a moment lost sight of--the beautiful and
the true, sought for their own sakes.

This is especially illustrated and corroborated in the case of
institutions--whether great or small, wealthy or poor, founded, no
matter in what century or in what land, to maintain and advance human
knowledge, and generally to afford help to those intellectual efforts
which ennoble the race. Wherever these institutions may be, it is not
long before people sneak up to them under the pretence of wishing to
further those special ends, while they are really led on by the desire
to secure the emoluments which have been left for their furtherance,
and thus to satisfy certain coarse and brutal instincts of their own.
Thus it is that we come to have so many charlatans in every branch
of knowledge. The charlatan takes very different shapes according
to circumstances; but at bottom he is a man who cares nothing about
knowledge for its own sake, and only strives to gain the semblance
of it that he may use it for his own personal ends, which are always
selfish and material.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every hero is a Samson. The strong man succumbs to the intrigues of
the weak and the many; and if in the end he loses all patience he
crushes both them and himself. Or he is like Gulliver at Lilliput,
overwhelmed by an enormous number of little men.

       *       *       *       *       *

A mother gave her children Aesop's fables to read, in the hope of
educating and improving their minds; but they very soon brought the
book back, and the eldest, wise beyond his years, delivered himself as
follows: _This is no book for us; it's much too childish and stupid.
You can't make us believe that foxes and wolves and ravens are able to
talk; we've got beyond stories of that kind_!

In these young hopefuls you have the enlightened Rationalists of the
future.

       *       *       *       *       *

A number of porcupines huddled together for warmth on a cold day in
winter; but, as they began to prick one another with their quills,
they were obliged to disperse. However the cold drove them together
again, when just the same thing happened. At last, after many turns of
huddling and dispersing, they discovered that they would be best off
by remaining at a little distance from one another. In the same way
the need of society drives the human porcupines together, only to be
mutually repelled by the many prickly and disagreeable qualities of
their nature. The moderate distance which they at last discover to be
the only tolerable condition of intercourse, is the code of politeness
and fine manners; and those who transgress it are roughly told--in
the English phrase--_to keep their distance_. By this arrangement the
mutual need of warmth is only very moderately satisfied; but then
people do not get pricked. A man who has some heat in himself prefers
to remain outside, where he will neither prick other people nor get
pricked himself.


================================================================================
[Counsels and Maxims (교훈과 격률)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Essays of Arthur Schopenhauer; The Art of Literature
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Essays of Arthur Schopenhauer; The Art of Literature

Author: Arthur Schopenhauer

Translator: T. Bailey Saunders


        
Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #10714]
                Most recently updated: October 28, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10714

Credits: Etext produced by Juliet Sutherland, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team.
        
        HTML file produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ESSAYS OF ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER; THE ART OF LITERATURE ***

THE ESSAYS

OF

ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER

TRANSLATED BY

T. BAILEY SAUNDERS, M.A.




THE ART OF LITERATURE.




CONTENTS.

  PREFACE
  ON AUTHORSHIP
  ON STYLE
  ON THE STUDY OF LATIN
  ON MEN OF LEARNING
  ON THINKING FOR ONESELF
  ON SOME FORMS OF LITERATURE
  ON CRITICISM
  ON REPUTATION
  ON GENIUS




TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.


The contents of this, as of the other volumes in the series, have been
drawn from Schopenhauer's _Parerga_, and amongst the various subjects
dealt with in that famous collection of essays, Literature holds an
important place. Nor can Schopenhauer's opinions fail to be of special
value when he treats of literary form and method. For, quite apart
from his philosophical pretensions, he claims recognition as a great
writer; he is, indeed, one of the best of the few really excellent
prose-writers of whom Germany can boast. While he is thus particularly
qualified to speak of Literature as an Art, he has also something to
say upon those influences which, outside of his own merits, contribute
so much to an author's success, and are so often undervalued when he
obtains immediate popularity. Schopenhauer's own sore experiences in
the matter of reputation lend an interest to his remarks upon that
subject, although it is too much to ask of human nature that he should
approach it in any dispassionate spirit.

In the following pages we have observations upon style by one who
was a stylist in the best sense of the word, not affected, nor yet a
phrasemonger; on thinking for oneself by a philosopher who never did
anything else; on criticism by a writer who suffered much from the
inability of others to understand him; on reputation by a candidate
who, during the greater part of his life, deserved without obtaining
it; and on genius by one who was incontestably of the privileged
order himself. And whatever may be thought of some of his opinions
on matters of detail--on anonymity, for instance, or on the question
whether good work is never done for money--there can be no doubt that
his general view of literature, and the conditions under which it
flourishes, is perfectly sound.

It might be thought, perhaps, that remarks which were meant to apply
to the German language would have but little bearing upon one so
different from it as English. This would be a just objection if
Schopenhauer treated literature in a petty spirit, and confined
himself to pedantic inquiries into matters of grammar and etymology,
or mere niceties of phrase. But this is not so. He deals with his
subject broadly, and takes large and general views; nor can anyone
who knows anything of the philosopher suppose this to mean that he is
vague and feeble. It is true that now and again in the course of these
essays he makes remarks which are obviously meant to apply to the
failings of certain writers of his own age and country; but in such a
case I have generally given his sentences a turn, which, while keeping
them faithful to the spirit of the original, secures for them a less
restricted range, and makes Schopenhauer a critic of similar faults in
whatever age or country they may appear. This has been done in spite
of a sharp word on page seventeen of this volume, addressed to
translators who dare to revise their author; but the change is one
with which not even Schopenhauer could quarrel.

It is thus a significant fact--a testimony to the depth of his
insight and, in the main, the justice of his opinions--that views of
literature which appealed to his own immediate contemporaries, should
be found to hold good elsewhere and at a distance of fifty years.
It means that what he had to say was worth saying; and since it is
adapted thus equally to diverse times and audiences, it is probably of
permanent interest.

The intelligent reader will observe that much of the charm of
Schopenhauer's writing comes from its strongly personal character, and
that here he has to do, not with a mere maker of books, but with a
man who thinks for himself and has no false scruples in putting his
meaning plainly upon the page, or in unmasking sham wherever he finds
it. This is nowhere so true as when he deals with literature; and just
as in his treatment of life, he is no flatterer to men in general, so
here he is free and outspoken on the peculiar failings of authors. At
the same time he gives them good advice. He is particularly happy in
recommending restraint in regard to reading the works of others, and
the cultivation of independent thought; and herein he recalls a saying
attributed to Hobbes, who was not less distinguished as a writer than
as a philosopher, to the effect that "_if he had read as much as other
men, he should have been as ignorant as they_."

Schopenhauer also utters a warning, which we shall do well to take to
heart in these days, against mingling the pursuit of literature with
vulgar aims. If we follow him here, we shall carefully distinguish
between literature as an object of life and literature as a means of
living, between the real love of truth and beauty, and that detestable
false love which looks to the price it will fetch in the market. I am
not referring to those who, while they follow a useful and honorable
calling in bringing literature before the public, are content to be
known as men of business. If, by the help of some second witch
of Endor, we could raise the ghost of Schopenhauer, it would be
interesting to hear his opinion of a certain kind of literary
enterprise which has come into vogue since his day, and now receives
an amount of attention very much beyond its due. We may hazard a guess
at the direction his opinion would take. He would doubtless show us
how this enterprise, which is carried on by self-styled _literary
men_, ends by making literature into a form of merchandise, and
treating it as though it were so much goods to be bought and sold at a
profit, and most likely to produce quick returns if the maker's name
is well known. Nor would it be the ghost of the real Schopenhauer
unless we heard a vigorous denunciation of men who claim a connection
with literature by a servile flattery of successful living
authors--the dead cannot be made to pay--in the hope of appearing to
advantage in their reflected light and turning that advantage into
money.

In order to present the contents of this book in a convenient form, I
have not scrupled to make an arrangement with the chapters somewhat
different from that which exists in the original; so that two or more
subjects which are there dealt with successively in one and the same
chapter, here stand by themselves. In consequence of this, some of
the titles of the sections are not to be found in the original. I may
state, however, that the essays on _Authorship_ and _Style_ and the
latter part of that on _Criticism_ are taken direct from the chapter
headed _Ueber Schriftstellerei und Stil_; and that the remainder of
the essay on _Criticism_, with that of _Reputation_, is supplied by
the remarks _Ueber Urtheil, Kritik, Beifall und Ruhm_. The essays on
_The Study of Latin_, on _Men of Learning_, and on _Some Forms
of Literature_, are taken chiefly from the four sections _Ueber
Gelehrsamkeit und Gelehrte, Ueber Sprache und Worte, Ueber Lesen
und Bücher: Anhang_, and _Zur Metaphysik des Schönen_. The essay on
_Thinking for Oneself_ is a rendering of certain remarks under the
heading _Selbstdenken. Genius_ was a favorite subject of speculation
with Schopenhauer, and he often touches upon it in the course of his
works; always, however, to put forth the same theory in regard to it
as may be found in the concluding section of this volume. Though the
essay has little or nothing to do with literary method, the subject of
which it treats is the most needful element of success in literature;
and I have introduced it on that ground. It forms part of a chapter in
the _Parerga_ entitled _Den Intellekt überhaupt und in jeder Beziehung
betreffende Gedanken: Anhang verwandter Stellen._

It has also been part of my duty to invent a title for this volume;
and I am well aware that objection may be made to the one I have
chosen, on the ground that in common language it is unusual to speak
of literature as an art, and that to do so is unduly to narrow its
meaning and to leave out of sight its main function as the record of
thought. But there is no reason why the word _Literature_ should
not be employed in that double sense which is allowed to attach to
_Painting, Music, Sculpture_, as signifying either the objective
outcome of a certain mental activity, seeking to express itself in
outward form; or else the particular kind of mental activity in
question, and the methods it follows. And we do, in fact, use it in
this latter sense, when we say of a writer that he pursues literature
as a calling. If, then, literature can be taken to mean a process as
well as a result of mental activity, there can be no error in speaking
of it as Art. I use that term in its broad sense, as meaning skill in
the display of thought; or, more fully, a right use of the rules
of applying to the practical exhibition of thought, with whatever
material it may deal. In connection with literature, this is a
sense and an application of the term which have been sufficiently
established by the example of the great writers of antiquity.

It may be asked, of course, whether the true thinker, who will always
form the soul of the true author, will not be so much occupied with
what he has to say, that it will appear to him a trivial thing to
spend great effort on embellishing the form in which he delivers it.
Literature, to be worthy of the name, must, it is true, deal with
noble matter--the riddle of our existence, the great facts of life,
the changing passions of the human heart, the discernment of some deep
moral truth. It is easy to lay too much stress upon the mere garment
of thought; to be too precise; to give to the arrangement of words an
attention that should rather be paid to the promotion of fresh ideas.
A writer who makes this mistake is like a fop who spends his little
mind in adorning his person. In short, it may be charged against the
view of literature which is taken in calling it an Art, that, instead
of making truth and insight the author's aim, it favors sciolism and a
fantastic and affected style. There is, no doubt, some justice in the
objection; nor have we in our own day, and especially amongst younger
men, any lack of writers who endeavor to win confidence, not by adding
to the stock of ideas in the world, but by despising the use of plain
language. Their faults are not new in the history of literature; and
it is a pleasing sign of Schopenhauer's insight that a merciless
exposure of them, as they existed half a century ago, is still quite
applicable to their modern form.

And since these writers, who may, in the slang of the hour, be called
"impressionists" in literature, follow their own bad taste in the
manufacture of dainty phrases, devoid of all nerve, and generally
with some quite commonplace meaning, it is all the more necessary to
discriminate carefully between artifice and art.

But although they may learn something from Schopenhauer's advice, it
is not chiefly to them that it is offered. It is to that great mass of
writers, whose business is to fill the columns of the newspapers and
the pages of the review, and to produce the ton of novels that appear
every year. Now that almost everyone who can hold a pen aspires to be
called an author, it is well to emphasize the fact that literature is
an art in some respects more important than any other. The problem of
this art is the discovery of those qualities of style and treatment
which entitled any work to be called good literature.

It will be safe to warn the reader at the very outset that, if he
wishes to avoid being led astray, he should in his search for these
qualities turn to books that have stood the test of time.

For such an amount of hasty writing is done in these days that it is
really difficult for anyone who reads much of it to avoid contracting
its faults, and thus gradually coming to terms of dangerous
familiarity with bad methods. This advice will be especially needful
if things that have little or no claim to be called literature at
all--the newspapers, the monthly magazine, and the last new tale of
intrigue or adventure--fill a large measure, if not the whole, of the
time given to reading. Nor are those who are sincerely anxious to have
the best thought in the best language quite free from danger if they
give too much attention to the contemporary authors, even though these
seem to think and write excellently. For one generation alone is
incompetent to decide upon the merits of any author whatever; and as
literature, like all art, is a thing of human invention, so it can be
pronounced good only if it obtains lasting admiration, by establishing
a permanent appeal to mankind's deepest feeling for truth and beauty.

It is in this sense that Schopenhauer is perfectly right in holding
that neglect of the ancient classics, which are the best of all models
in the art of writing, will infallibly lead to a degeneration of
literature.

And the method of discovering the best qualities of style, and of
forming a theory of writing, is not to follow some trick or mannerism
that happens to please for the moment, but to study the way in which
great authors have done their best work.

It will be said that Schopenhauer tells us nothing we did not know
before. Perhaps so; as he himself says, the best things are seldom
new. But he puts the old truths in a fresh and forcible way; and no
one who knows anything of good literature will deny that these truths
are just now of very fit application.

It was probably to meet a real want that, a year or two ago, an
ingenious person succeeded in drawing a great number of English and
American writers into a confession of their literary creed and the art
they adopted in authorship; and the interesting volume in which he
gave these confessions to the world contained some very good advice,
although most of it had been said before in different forms. More
recently a new departure, of very doubtful use, has taken place; and
two books have been issued, which aim, the one at being an author's
manual, the other at giving hints on essays and how to write them.

A glance at these books will probably show that their authors have
still something to learn.

Both of these ventures seem, unhappily, to be popular; and, although
they may claim a position next-door to that of the present volume I
beg to say that it has no connection with them whatever. Schopenhauer
does not attempt to teach the art of making bricks without straw.

I wish to take this opportunity of tendering my thanks to a large
number of reviewers for the very gratifying reception given to
the earlier volumes of this series. And I have great pleasure in
expressing my obligations to my friend Mr. W.G. Collingwood, who has
looked over most of my proofs and often given me excellent advice in
my effort to turn Schopenhauer into readable English.

T.B.S.




ON AUTHORSHIP.


There are, first of all, two kinds of authors: those who write for the
subject's sake, and those who write for writing's sake. While the
one have had thoughts or experiences which seem to them worth
communicating, the others want money; and so they write, for money.
Their thinking is part of the business of writing. They may be
recognized by the way in which they spin out their thoughts to the
greatest possible length; then, too, by the very nature of their
thoughts, which are only half-true, perverse, forced, vacillating;
again, by the aversion they generally show to saying anything straight
out, so that they may seem other than they are. Hence their writing
is deficient in clearness and definiteness, and it is not long before
they betray that their only object in writing at all is to cover
paper. This sometimes happens with the best authors; now and then, for
example, with Lessing in his _Dramaturgie_, and even in many of Jean
Paul's romances. As soon as the reader perceives this, let him throw
the book away; for time is precious. The truth is that when an author
begins to write for the sake of covering paper, he is cheating the
reader; because he writes under the pretext that he has something to
say.

Writing for money and reservation of copyright are, at bottom, the
ruin of literature. No one writes anything that is worth writing,
unless he writes entirely for the sake of his subject. What an
inestimable boon it would be, if in every branch of literature there
were only a few books, but those excellent! This can never happen, as
long as money is to be made by writing. It seems as though the money
lay under a curse; for every author degenerates as soon as he begins
to put pen to paper in any way for the sake of gain. The best works
of the greatest men all come from the time when they had to write for
nothing or for very little. And here, too, that Spanish proverb holds
good, which declares that honor and money are not to be found in the
same purse--_honora y provecho no caben en un saco_. The reason why
Literature is in such a bad plight nowadays is simply and solely that
people write books to make money. A man who is in want sits down
and writes a book, and the public is stupid enough to buy it. The
secondary effect of this is the ruin of language.

A great many bad writers make their whole living by that foolish
mania of the public for reading nothing but what has just been
printed,--journalists, I mean. Truly, a most appropriate name. In
plain language it is _journeymen, day-laborers_!

Again, it may be said that there are three kinds of authors. First
come those who write without thinking. They write from a full memory,
from reminiscences; it may be, even straight out of other people's
books. This class is the most numerous. Then come those who do their
thinking whilst they are writing. They think in order to write; and
there is no lack of them. Last of all come those authors who think
before they begin to write. They are rare.

Authors of the second class, who put off their thinking until they
come to write, are like a sportsman who goes forth at random and is
not likely to bring very much home. On the other hand, when an author
of the third or rare class writes, it is like a _battue_. Here the
game has been previously captured and shut up within a very small
space; from which it is afterwards let out, so many at a time, into
another space, also confined. The game cannot possibly escape the
sportsman; he has nothing to do but aim and fire--in other words,
write down his thoughts. This is a kind of sport from which a man has
something to show.

But even though the number of those who really think seriously before
they begin to write is small, extremely few of them think about _the
subject itself_: the remainder think only about the books that have
been written on the subject, and what has been said by others. In
order to think at all, such writers need the more direct and powerful
stimulus of having other people's thoughts before them. These become
their immediate theme; and the result is that they are always under
their influence, and so never, in any real sense of the word, are
original. But the former are roused to thought by the subject itself,
to which their thinking is thus immediately directed. This is the only
class that produces writers of abiding fame.

It must, of course, be understood that I am speaking here of writers
who treat of great subjects; not of writers on the art of making
brandy.

Unless an author takes the material on which he writes out of his
own head, that is to say, from his own observation, he is not
worth reading. Book-manufacturers, compilers, the common run of
history-writers, and many others of the same class, take their
material immediately out of books; and the material goes straight
to their finger-tips without even paying freight or undergoing
examination as it passes through their heads, to say nothing of
elaboration or revision. How very learned many a man would be if he
knew everything that was in his own books! The consequence of this is
that these writers talk in such a loose and vague manner, that the
reader puzzles his brain in vain to understand what it is of which
they are really thinking. They are thinking of nothing. It may now and
then be the case that the book from which they copy has been composed
exactly in the same way: so that writing of this sort is like a
plaster cast of a cast; and in the end, the bare outline of the face,
and that, too, hardly recognizable, is all that is left to your
Antinous. Let compilations be read as seldom as possible. It is
difficult to avoid them altogether; since compilations also include
those text-books which contain in a small space the accumulated
knowledge of centuries.

There is no greater mistake than to suppose that the last work is
always the more correct; that what is written later on is in every
case an improvement on what was written before; and that change always
means progress. Real thinkers, men of right judgment, people who are
in earnest with their subject,--these are all exceptions only. Vermin
is the rule everywhere in the world: it is always on the alert, taking
the mature opinions of the thinkers, and industriously seeking to
improve upon them (save the mark!) in its own peculiar way.

If the reader wishes to study any subject, let him beware of rushing
to the newest books upon it, and confining his attention to them
alone, under the notion that science is always advancing, and that the
old books have been drawn upon in the writing of the new. They have
been drawn upon, it is true; but how? The writer of the new book often
does not understand the old books thoroughly, and yet he is unwilling
to take their exact words; so he bungles them, and says in his own bad
way that which has been said very much better and more clearly by the
old writers, who wrote from their own lively knowledge of the subject.
The new writer frequently omits the best things they say, their most
striking illustrations, their happiest remarks; because he does not
see their value or feel how pregnant they are. The only thing that
appeals to him is what is shallow and insipid.

It often happens that an old and excellent book is ousted by new
and bad ones, which, written for money, appear with an air of great
pretension and much puffing on the part of friends. In science a man
tries to make his mark by bringing out something fresh. This often
means nothing more than that he attacks some received theory which
is quite correct, in order to make room for his own false notions.
Sometimes the effort is successful for a time; and then a return is
made to the old and true theory. These innovators are serious about
nothing but their own precious self: it is this that they want to put
forward, and the quick way of doing so, as they think, is to start a
paradox. Their sterile heads take naturally to the path of negation;
so they begin to deny truths that have long been admitted--the vital
power, for example, the sympathetic nervous system, _generatio
equivoca_, Bichat's distinction between the working of the passions
and the working of intelligence; or else they want us to return to
crass atomism, and the like. Hence it frequently happens that _the
course of science is retrogressive._

To this class of writers belong those translators who not only
translate their author but also correct and revise him; a proceeding
which always seems to me impertinent. To such writers I say: Write
books yourself which are worth translating, and leave other people's
works as they are!

The reader should study, if he can, the real authors, the men who
have founded and discovered things; or, at any rate, those who are
recognized as the great masters in every branch of knowledge. Let him
buy second-hand books rather than read their contents in new ones. To
be sure, it is easy to add to any new discovery--_inventis aliquid
addere facile est_; and, therefore, the student, after well mastering
the rudiments of his subject, will have to make himself acquainted
with the more recent additions to the knowledge of it. And, in
general, the following rule may be laid down here as elsewhere: if a
thing is new, it is seldom good; because if it is good, it is only for
a short time new.

What the address is to a letter, the title should be to a book; in
other words, its main object should be to bring the book to those
amongst the public who will take an interest in its contents. It
should, therefore, be expressive; and since by its very nature it must
be short, it should be concise, laconic, pregnant, and if possible
give the contents in one word. A prolix title is bad; and so is one
that says nothing, or is obscure and ambiguous, or even, it may be,
false and misleading; this last may possibly involve the book in the
same fate as overtakes a wrongly addressed letter. The worst titles
of all are those which have been stolen, those, I mean, which have
already been borne by other books; for they are in the first place a
plagiarism, and secondly the most convincing proof of a total lack of
originality in the author. A man who has not enough originality to
invent a new title for his book, will be still less able to give it
new contents. Akin to these stolen titles are those which have been
imitated, that is to say, stolen to the extent of one half; for
instance, long after I had produced my treatise _On Will in Nature_,
Oersted wrote a book entitled _On Mind in Nature_.

A book can never be anything more than the impress of its author's
thoughts; and the value of these will lie either in _the matter about
which he has thought_, or in the _form_ which his thoughts take, in
other words, _what it is that he has thought about it._

The matter of books is most various; and various also are the several
excellences attaching to books on the score of their matter. By matter
I mean everything that comes within the domain of actual experience;
that is to say, the facts of history and the facts of nature, taken in
and by themselves and in their widest sense. Here it is the _thing_
treated of, which gives its peculiar character to the book; so that a
book can be important, whoever it was that wrote it.

But in regard to the form, the peculiar character of a book depends
upon the _person_ who wrote it. It may treat of matters which are
accessible to everyone and well known; but it is the way in which they
are treated, what it is that is thought about them, that gives the
book its value; and this comes from its author. If, then, from this
point of view a book is excellent and beyond comparison, so is its
author. It follows that if a writer is worth reading, his merit rises
just in proportion as he owes little to his matter; therefore, the
better known and the more hackneyed this is, the greater he will be.
The three great tragedians of Greece, for example, all worked at the
same subject-matter.

So when a book is celebrated, care should be taken to note whether it
is so on account of its matter or its form; and a distinction should
be made accordingly.

Books of great importance on account of their matter may proceed from
very ordinary and shallow people, by the fact that they alone have had
access to this matter; books, for instance, which describe journeys in
distant lands, rare natural phenomena, or experiments; or historical
occurrences of which the writers were witnesses, or in connection
with which they have spent much time and trouble in the research and
special study of original documents.

On the other hand, where the matter is accessible to everyone or very
well known, everything will depend upon the form; and what it is
that is thought about the matter will give the book all the value
it possesses. Here only a really distinguished man will be able to
produce anything worth reading; for the others will think nothing but
what anyone else can think. They will just produce an impress of
their own minds; but this is a print of which everyone possesses the
original.

However, the public is very much more concerned to have matter than
form; and for this very reason it is deficient in any high degree of
culture. The public shows its preference in this respect in the most
laughable way when it comes to deal with poetry; for there it devotes
much trouble to the task of tracking out the actual events or personal
circumstances in the life of the poet which served as the occasion of
his various works; nay, these events and circumstances come in the end
to be of greater importance than the works themselves; and rather than
read Goethe himself, people prefer to read what has been written about
him, and to study the legend of Faust more industriously than the
drama of that name. And when Bürger declared that "people would write
learned disquisitions on the question, Who Leonora really was," we
find this literally fulfilled in Goethe's case; for we now possess a
great many learned disquisitions on Faust and the legend attaching to
him. Study of this kind is, and remains, devoted to the material of
the drama alone. To give such preference to the matter over the form,
is as though a man were to take a fine Etruscan vase, not to admire
its shape or coloring, but to make a chemical analysis of the clay and
paint of which it is composed.

The attempt to produce an effect by means of the material employed--an
attempt which panders to this evil tendency of the public--is most to
be condemned in branches of literature where any merit there may be
lies expressly in the form; I mean, in poetical work. For all that, it
is not rare to find bad dramatists trying to fill the house by means
of the matter about which they write. For example, authors of this
kind do not shrink from putting on the stage any man who is in any way
celebrated, no matter whether his life may have been entirely devoid
of dramatic incident; and sometimes, even, they do not wait until the
persons immediately connected with him are dead.

The distinction between matter and form to which I am here alluding
also holds good of conversation. The chief qualities which enable a
man to converse well are intelligence, discernment, wit and vivacity:
these supply the form of conversation. But it is not long before
attention has to be paid to the matter of which he speaks; in other
words, the subjects about which it is possible to converse with
him--his knowledge. If this is very small, his conversation will
not be worth anything, unless he possesses the above-named formal
qualities in a very exceptional degree; for he will have nothing to
talk about but those facts of life and nature which everybody knows.
It will be just the opposite, however, if a man is deficient in these
formal qualities, but has an amount of knowledge which lends value to
what he says. This value will then depend entirely upon the matter of
his conversation; for, as the Spanish proverb has it, _mas sabe el
necio en su casa, que el sabio en la agena_--a fool knows more of his
own business than a wise man does of others.




ON STYLE.


Style is the physiognomy of the mind, and a safer index to character
than the face. To imitate another man's style is like wearing a mask,
which, be it never so fine, is not long in arousing disgust and
abhorrence, because it is lifeless; so that even the ugliest living
face is better. Hence those who write in Latin and copy the manner of
ancient authors, may be said to speak through a mask; the reader, it
is true, hears what they say, but he cannot observe their physiognomy
too; he cannot see their _style_. With the Latin works of writers
who think for themselves, the case is different, and their style is
visible; writers, I mean, who have not condescended to any sort
of imitation, such as Scotus Erigena, Petrarch, Bacon, Descartes,
Spinoza, and many others. An affectation in style is like making
grimaces. Further, the language in which a man writes is the
physiognomy of the nation to which he belongs; and here there are many
hard and fast differences, beginning from the language of the Greeks,
down to that of the Caribbean islanders.

To form a provincial estimate of the value of a writer's productions,
it is not directly necessary to know the subject on which he has
thought, or what it is that he has said about it; that would imply
a perusal of all his works. It will be enough, in the main, to know
_how_ he has thought. This, which means the essential temper or
general quality of his mind, may be precisely determined by his style.
A man's style shows the _formal_ nature of all his thoughts--the
formal nature which can never change, be the subject or the character
of his thoughts what it may: it is, as it were, the dough out of which
all the contents of his mind are kneaded. When Eulenspiegel was asked
how long it would take to walk to the next village, he gave the
seemingly incongruous answer: _Walk_. He wanted to find out by the
man's pace the distance he would cover in a given time. In the same
way, when I have read a few pages of an author, I know fairly well how
far he can bring me.

Every mediocre writer tries to mask his own natural style, because in
his heart he knows the truth of what I am saying. He is thus forced,
at the outset, to give up any attempt at being frank or naïve--a
privilege which is thereby reserved for superior minds, conscious of
their own worth, and therefore sure of themselves. What I mean is that
these everyday writers are absolutely unable to resolve upon writing
just as they think; because they have a notion that, were they to do
so, their work might possibly look very childish and simple. For
all that, it would not be without its value. If they would only go
honestly to work, and say, quite simply, the things they have really
thought, and just as they have thought them, these writers would be
readable and, within their own proper sphere, even instructive.

But instead of that, they try to make the reader believe that their
thoughts have gone much further and deeper than is really the case.
They say what they have to say in long sentences that wind about in a
forced and unnatural way; they coin new words and write prolix periods
which go round and round the thought and wrap it up in a sort of
disguise. They tremble between the two separate aims of communicating
what they want to say and of concealing it. Their object is to dress
it up so that it may look learned or deep, in order to give people
the impression that there is very much more in it than for the moment
meets the eye. They either jot down their thoughts bit by bit, in
short, ambiguous, and paradoxical sentences, which apparently mean
much more than they say,--of this kind of writing Schelling's
treatises on natural philosophy are a splendid instance; or else
they hold forth with a deluge of words and the most intolerable
diffusiveness, as though no end of fuss were necessary to make the
reader understand the deep meaning of their sentences, whereas it is
some quite simple if not actually trivial idea,--examples of which
may be found in plenty in the popular works of Fichte, and the
philosophical manuals of a hundred other miserable dunces not worth
mentioning; or, again, they try to write in some particular style
which they have been pleased to take up and think very grand, a style,
for example, _par excellence_ profound and scientific, where the
reader is tormented to death by the narcotic effect of longspun
periods without a single idea in them,--such as are furnished in
a special measure by those most impudent of all mortals, the
Hegelians[1]; or it may be that it is an intellectual style they have
striven after, where it seems as though their object were to go crazy
altogether; and so on in many other cases. All these endeavors to put
off the _nascetur ridiculus mus_--to avoid showing the funny little
creature that is born after such mighty throes--often make it
difficult to know what it is that they really mean. And then, too,
they write down words, nay, even whole sentences, without attaching
any meaning to them themselves, but in the hope that someone else will
get sense out of them.

[Footnote 1: In their Hegel-gazette, commonly known as _Jahrbücher der
wissenschaftlichen Literatur_.]

And what is at the bottom of all this? Nothing but the untiring effort
to sell words for thoughts; a mode of merchandise that is always
trying to make fresh openings for itself, and by means of odd
expressions, turns of phrase, and combinations of every sort, whether
new or used in a new sense, to produce the appearence of intellect in
order to make up for the very painfully felt lack of it.

It is amusing to see how writers with this object in view will attempt
first one mannerism and then another, as though they were putting
on the mask of intellect! This mask may possibly deceive the
inexperienced for a while, until it is seen to be a dead thing, with
no life in it at all; it is then laughed at and exchanged for another.
Such an author will at one moment write in a dithyrambic vein, as
though he were tipsy; at another, nay, on the very next page, he will
be pompous, severe, profoundly learned and prolix, stumbling on in the
most cumbrous way and chopping up everything very small; like the late
Christian Wolf, only in a modern dress. Longest of all lasts the mask
of unintelligibility; but this is only in Germany, whither it was
introduced by Fichte, perfected by Schelling, and carried to its
highest pitch in Hegel--always with the best results.

And yet nothing is easier than to write so that no one can understand;
just as contrarily, nothing is more difficult than to express deep
things in such a way that every one must necessarily grasp them. All
the arts and tricks I have been mentioning are rendered superfluous if
the author really has any brains; for that allows him to show himself
as he is, and confirms to all time Horace's maxim that good sense is
the source and origin of good style:

  _Scribendi recte sapere est et principium et fons_.

But those authors I have named are like certain workers in metal, who
try a hundred different compounds to take the place of gold--the only
metal which can never have any substitute. Rather than do that, there
is nothing against which a writer should be more upon his guard than
the manifest endeavor to exhibit more intellect than he really has;
because this makes the reader suspect that he possesses very little;
since it is always the case that if a man affects anything, whatever
it may be, it is just there that he is deficient.

That is why it is praise to an author to say that he is _naïve_; it
means that he need not shrink from showing himself as he is. Generally
speaking, to be _naïve_ is to be attractive; while lack of naturalness
is everywhere repulsive. As a matter of fact we find that every
really great writer tries to express his thoughts as purely, clearly,
definitely and shortly as possible. Simplicity has always been held to
be a mark of truth; it is also a mark of genius. Style receives its
beauty from the thought it expresses; but with sham-thinkers the
thoughts are supposed to be fine because of the style. Style is
nothing but the mere silhouette of thought; and an obscure or bad
style means a dull or confused brain.

The first rule, then, for a good style is that _the author should
have something to say_; nay, this is in itself almost all that is
necessary. Ah, how much it means! The neglect of this rule is a
fundamental trait in the philosophical writing, and, in fact, in
all the reflective literature, of my country, more especially since
Fichte. These writers all let it be seen that they want to appear as
though they had something to say; whereas they have nothing to say.
Writing of this kind was brought in by the pseudo-philosophers at the
Universities, and now it is current everywhere, even among the first
literary notabilities of the age. It is the mother of that strained
and vague style, where there seem to be two or even more meanings in
the sentence; also of that prolix and cumbrous manner of expression,
called _le stile empesé_; again, of that mere waste of words which
consists in pouring them out like a flood; finally, of that trick
of concealing the direst poverty of thought under a farrago of
never-ending chatter, which clacks away like a windmill and quite
stupefies one--stuff which a man may read for hours together without
getting hold of a single clearly expressed and definite idea.[1]
However, people are easy-going, and they have formed the habit of
reading page upon page of all sorts of such verbiage, without having
any particular idea of what the author really means. They fancy it is
all as it should be, and fail to discover that he is writing simply
for writing's sake.

[Footnote 1: Select examples of the art of writing in this style are
to be found almost _passim_ in the _Jahrbücher_ published at Halle,
afterwards called the _Deutschen Jahrbücher_.]

On the other hand, a good author, fertile in ideas, soon wins his
reader's confidence that, when he writes, he has really and truly
_something to say_; and this gives the intelligent reader patience to
follow him with attention. Such an author, just because he really has
something to say, will never fail to express himself in the simplest
and most straightforward manner; because his object is to awake the
very same thought in the reader that he has in himself, and no other.
So he will be able to affirm with Boileau that his thoughts are
everywhere open to the light of the day, and that his verse always
says something, whether it says it well or ill:

  _Ma pensée au grand jour partout s'offre et s'expose,
  Et mon vers, bien ou mal, dit toujours quelque chose_:

while of the writers previously described it may be asserted, in the
words of the same poet, that they talk much and never say anything at
all--_quiparlant beaucoup ne disent jamais rien_.

Another characteristic of such writers is that they always avoid a
positive assertion wherever they can possibly do so, in order to leave
a loophole for escape in case of need. Hence they never fail to choose
the more _abstract_ way of expressing themselves; whereas intelligent
people use the more _concrete_; because the latter brings things more
within the range of actual demonstration, which is the source of all
evidence.

There are many examples proving this preference for abstract
expression; and a particularly ridiculous one is afforded by the use
of the verb _to condition_ in the sense of _to cause_ or _to produce_.
People say _to condition something_ instead of _to cause it_, because
being abstract and indefinite it says less; it affirms that _A_ cannot
happen without _B_, instead of that _A_ is caused by _B_. A back door
is always left open; and this suits people whose secret knowledge of
their own incapacity inspires them with a perpetual terror of all
positive assertion; while with other people it is merely the effect of
that tendency by which everything that is stupid in literature or bad
in life is immediately imitated--a fact proved in either case by the
rapid way in which it spreads. The Englishman uses his own judgment in
what he writes as well as in what he does; but there is no nation of
which this eulogy is less true than of the Germans. The consequence
of this state of things is that the word _cause_ has of late almost
disappeared from the language of literature, and people talk only
of _condition_. The fact is worth mentioning because it is so
characteristically ridiculous.

The very fact that these commonplace authors are never more than
half-conscious when they write, would be enough to account for their
dullness of mind and the tedious things they produce. I say they are
only half-conscious, because they really do not themselves understand
the meaning of the words they use: they take words ready-made and
commit them to memory. Hence when they write, it is not so much words
as whole phrases that they put together--_phrases banales_. This is
the explanation of that palpable lack of clearly-expressed thought in
what they say. The fact is that they do not possess the die to give
this stamp to their writing; clear thought of their own is just
what they have not got. And what do we find in its place?--a vague,
enigmatical intermixture of words, current phrases, hackneyed terms,
and fashionable expressions. The result is that the foggy stuff they
write is like a page printed with very old type.

On the other hand, an intelligent author really speaks to us when he
writes, and that is why he is able to rouse our interest and commune
with us. It is the intelligent author alone who puts individual words
together with a full consciousness of their meaning, and chooses them
with deliberate design. Consequently, his discourse stands to that of
the writer described above, much as a picture that has been really
painted, to one that has been produced by the use of a stencil. In the
one case, every word, every touch of the brush, has a special purpose;
in the other, all is done mechanically. The same distinction may be
observed in music. For just as Lichtenberg says that Garrick's soul
seemed to be in every muscle in his body, so it is the omnipresence of
intellect that always and everywhere characterizes the work of genius.

I have alluded to the tediousness which marks the works of these
writers; and in this connection it is to be observed, generally, that
tediousness is of two kinds; objective and subjective. A work is
objectively tedious when it contains the defect in question; that is
to say, when its author has no perfectly clear thought or knowledge to
communicate. For if a man has any clear thought or knowledge in him,
his aim will be to communicate it, and he will direct his energies
to this end; so that the ideas he furnishes are everywhere clearly
expressed. The result is that he is neither diffuse, nor unmeaning,
nor confused, and consequently not tedious. In such a case, even
though the author is at bottom in error, the error is at any rate
clearly worked out and well thought over, so that it is at least
formally correct; and thus some value always attaches to the work. But
for the same reason a work that is objectively tedious is at all times
devoid of any value whatever.

The other kind of tediousness is only relative: a reader may find a
work dull because he has no interest in the question treated of in it,
and this means that his intellect is restricted. The best work may,
therefore, be tedious subjectively, tedious, I mean, to this or
that particular person; just as, contrarity, the worst work may be
subjectively engrossing to this or that particular person who has an
interest in the question treated of, or in the writer of the book.

It would generally serve writers in good stead if they would see that,
whilst a man should, if possible, think like a great genius, he should
talk the same language as everyone else. Authors should use common
words to say uncommon things. But they do just the opposite. We find
them trying to wrap up trivial ideas in grand words, and to clothe
their very ordinary thoughts in the most extraordinary phrases, the
most far-fetched, unnatural, and out-of-the-way expressions. Their
sentences perpetually stalk about on stilts. They take so much
pleasure in bombast, and write in such a high-flown, bloated,
affected, hyperbolical and acrobatic style that their prototype is
Ancient Pistol, whom his friend Falstaff once impatiently told to say
what he had to say _like a man of this world._[1]

[Footnote 1: _King Henry IV_., Part II. Act v. Sc. 3.]

There is no expression in any other language exactly answering to the
French _stile empesé_; but the thing itself exists all the more often.
When associated with affectation, it is in literature what assumption
of dignity, grand airs and primeness are in society; and equally
intolerable. Dullness of mind is fond of donning this dress; just as
an ordinary life it is stupid people who like being demure and formal.

An author who writes in the prim style resembles a man who dresses
himself up in order to avoid being confounded or put on the same level
with a mob--a risk never run by the _gentleman_, even in his worst
clothes. The plebeian may be known by a certain showiness of attire
and a wish to have everything spick and span; and in the same way, the
commonplace person is betrayed by his style.

Nevertheless, an author follows a false aim if he tries to write
exactly as he speaks. There is no style of writing but should have a
certain trace of kinship with the _epigraphic_ or _monumental_ style,
which is, indeed, the ancestor of all styles. For an author to write
as he speaks is just as reprehensible as the opposite fault, to speak
as he writes; for this gives a pedantic effect to what he says, and at
the same time makes him hardly intelligible.

An obscure and vague manner of expression is always and everywhere a
very bad sign. In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred it comes from
vagueness of thought; and this again almost always means that there is
something radically wrong and incongruous about the thought itself--in
a word, that it is incorrect. When a right thought springs up in the
mind, it strives after expression and is not long in reaching it; for
clear thought easily finds words to fit it. If a man is capable of
thinking anything at all, he is also always able to express it
in clear, intelligible, and unambiguous terms. Those writers who
construct difficult, obscure, involved, and equivocal sentences, most
certainly do not know aright what it is that they want to say: they
have only a dull consciousness of it, which is still in the stage of
struggle to shape itself as thought. Often, indeed, their desire is to
conceal from themselves and others that they really have nothing at
all to say. They wish to appear to know what they do not know, to
think what they do not think, to say what they do not say. If a
man has some real communication to make, which will he choose--an
indistinct or a clear way of expressing himself? Even Quintilian
remarks that things which are said by a highly educated man are often
easier to understand and much clearer; and that the less educated
a man is, the more obscurely he will write--_plerumque accidit ut
faciliora sint ad intelligendum et lucidiora multo que a doctissimo
quoque dicuntur_.... _Erit ergo etiam obscurior quo quisque deterior_.

An author should avoid enigmatical phrases; he should know whether he
wants to say a thing or does not want to say it. It is this indecision
of style that makes so many writers insipid. The only case that offers
an exception to this rule arises when it is necessary to make a remark
that is in some way improper.

As exaggeration generally produces an effect the opposite of
that aimed at; so words, it is true, serve to make thought
intelligible--but only up to a certain point. If words are heaped up
beyond it, the thought becomes more and more obscure again. To find
where the point lies is the problem of style, and the business of the
critical faculty; for a word too much always defeats its purpose. This
is what Voltaire means when he says that _the adjective is the enemy
of the substantive_. But, as we have seen, many people try to conceal
their poverty of thought under a flood of verbiage.

Accordingly let all redundancy be avoided, all stringing together of
remarks which have no meaning and are not worth perusal. A writer must
make a sparing use of the reader's time, patience and attention; so as
to lead him to believe that his author writes what is worth careful
study, and will reward the time spent upon it. It is always better to
omit something good than to add that which is not worth saying at all.
This is the right application of Hesiod's maxim, [Greek: pleon aemisu
pantos][1]--the half is more than the whole. _Le secret pour
être ennuyeux, c'est de tout dire_. Therefore, if possible, the
quintessence only! mere leading thoughts! nothing that the reader
would think for himself. To use many words to communicate few thoughts
is everywhere the unmistakable sign of mediocrity. To gather much
thought into few words stamps the man of genius.

[Footnote 1: _Works and Days_, 40.]

Truth is most beautiful undraped; and the impression it makes is deep
in proportion as its expression has been simple. This is so, partly
because it then takes unobstructed possession of the hearer's whole
soul, and leaves him no by-thought to distract him; partly, also,
because he feels that here he is not being corrupted or cheated by the
arts of rhetoric, but that all the effect of what is said comes from
the thing itself. For instance, what declamation on the vanity of
human existence could ever be more telling than the words of Job? _Man
that is born of a woman hath but a short time to live and is full of
misery. He cometh up, and is cut down, like a flower; he fleeth as it
were a shadow, and never continueth in one stay_.

For the same reason Goethe's naïve poetry is incomparably greater than
Schiller's rhetoric. It is this, again, that makes many popular songs
so affecting. As in architecture an excess of decoration is to be
avoided, so in the art of literature a writer must guard against all
rhetorical finery, all useless amplification, and all superfluity of
expression in general; in a word, he must strive after _chastity_ of
style. Every word that can be spared is hurtful if it remains. The law
of simplicity and naïveté holds good of all fine art; for it is quite
possible to be at once simple and sublime.

True brevity of expression consists in everywhere saying only what
is worth saying, and in avoiding tedious detail about things which
everyone can supply for himself. This involves correct discrimination
between what it necessary and what is superfluous. A writer should
never be brief at the expense of being clear, to say nothing of being
grammatical. It shows lamentable want of judgment to weaken the
expression of a thought, or to stunt the meaning of a period for the
sake of using a few words less. But this is the precise endeavor
of that false brevity nowadays so much in vogue, which proceeds by
leaving out useful words and even by sacrificing grammar and logic. It
is not only that such writers spare a word by making a single verb or
adjective do duty for several different periods, so that the reader,
as it were, has to grope his way through them in the dark; they also
practice, in many other respects, an unseemingly economy of speech,
in the effort to effect what they foolishly take to be brevity of
expression and conciseness of style. By omitting something that might
have thrown a light over the whole sentence, they turn it into a
conundrum, which the reader tries to solve by going over it again and
again.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note._--In the original, Schopenhauer here
enters upon a lengthy examination of certain common errors in the
writing and speaking of German. His remarks are addressed to his own
countrymen, and would lose all point, even if they were intelligible,
in an English translation. But for those who practice their German by
conversing or corresponding with Germans, let me recommend what he
there says as a useful corrective to a slipshod style, such as can
easily be contracted if it is assumed that the natives of a country
always know their own language perfectly.]

It is wealth and weight of thought, and nothing else, that gives
brevity to style, and makes it concise and pregnant. If a writer's
ideas are important, luminous, and generally worth communicating, they
will necessarily furnish matter and substance enough to fill out the
periods which give them expression, and make these in all their parts
both grammatically and verbally complete; and so much will this be
the case that no one will ever find them hollow, empty or feeble. The
diction will everywhere be brief and pregnant, and allow the thought
to find intelligible and easy expression, and even unfold and move
about with grace.

Therefore instead of contracting his words and forms of speech, let a
writer enlarge his thoughts. If a man has been thinned by illness and
finds his clothes too big, it is not by cutting them down, but by
recovering his usual bodily condition, that he ought to make them fit
him again.

Let me here mention an error of style, very prevalent nowadays,
and, in the degraded state of literature and the neglect of ancient
languages, always on the increase; I mean _subjectivity_. A writer
commits this error when he thinks it enough if he himself knows what
he means and wants to say, and takes no thought for the reader, who is
left to get at the bottom of it as best he can. This is as though the
author were holding a monologue; whereas, it ought to be a dialogue;
and a dialogue, too, in which he must express himself all the more
clearly inasmuch as he cannot hear the questions of his interlocutor.

Style should for this very reason never be subjective, but
_objective_; and it will not be objective unless the words are so set
down that they directly force the reader to think precisely the same
thing as the author thought when he wrote them. Nor will this result
be obtained unless the author has always been careful to remember that
thought so far follows the law of gravity that it travels from head to
paper much more easily than from paper to head; so that he must assist
the latter passage by every means in his power. If he does this, a
writer's words will have a purely objective effect, like that of a
finished picture in oils; whilst the subjective style is not much more
certain in its working than spots on the wall, which look like figures
only to one whose phantasy has been accidentally aroused by them;
other people see nothing but spots and blurs. The difference in
question applies to literary method as a whole; but it is often
established also in particular instances. For example, in a recently
published work I found the following sentence: _I have not written in
order to increase the number of existing books._ This means just the
opposite of what the writer wanted to say, and is nonsense as well.

He who writes carelessly confesses thereby at the very outset that he
does not attach much importance to his own thoughts. For it is only
where a man is convinced of the truth and importance of his thoughts,
that he feels the enthusiasm necessary for an untiring and assiduous
effort to find the clearest, finest, and strongest expression for
them,--just as for sacred relics or priceless works of art there are
provided silvern or golden receptacles. It was this feeling that led
ancient authors, whose thoughts, expressed in their own words, have
lived thousands of years, and therefore bear the honored title of
_classics_, always to write with care. Plato, indeed, is said to
have written the introduction to his _Republic_ seven times over in
different ways.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note._--It is a fact worth mentioning that
the first twelve words of the _Republic_ are placed in the exact order
which would be natural in English.]

As neglect of dress betrays want of respect for the company a man
meets, so a hasty, careless, bad style shows an outrageous lack of
regard for the reader, who then rightly punishes it by refusing to
read the book. It is especially amusing to see reviewers criticising
the works of others in their own most careless style--the style of
a hireling. It is as though a judge were to come into court in
dressing-gown and slippers! If I see a man badly and dirtily dressed,
I feel some hesitation, at first, in entering into conversation
with him: and when, on taking up a book, I am struck at once by the
negligence of its style, I put it away.

Good writing should be governed by the rule that a man can think only
one thing clearly at a time; and, therefore, that he should not be
expected to think two or even more things in one and the same moment.
But this is what is done when a writer breaks up his principal
sentence into little pieces, for the purpose of pushing into the gaps
thus made two or three other thoughts by way of parenthesis; thereby
unnecessarily and wantonly confusing the reader. And here it is again
my own countrymen who are chiefly in fault. That German lends itself
to this way of writing, makes the thing possible, but does not justify
it. No prose reads more easily or pleasantly than French, because, as
a rule, it is free from the error in question. The Frenchman strings
his thoughts together, as far as he can, in the most logical and
natural order, and so lays them before his reader one after the other
for convenient deliberation, so that every one of them may receive
undivided attention. The German, on the other hand, weaves them
together into a sentence which he twists and crosses, and crosses and
twists again; because he wants to say six things all at once, instead
of advancing them one by one. His aim should be to attract and hold
the reader's attention; but, above and beyond neglect of this aim, he
demands from the reader that he shall set the above mentioned rule at
defiance, and think three or four different thoughts at one and the
same time; or since that is impossible, that his thoughts shall
succeed each other as quickly as the vibrations of a cord. In this way
an author lays the foundation of his _stile empesé_, which is then
carried to perfection by the use of high-flown, pompous expressions to
communicate the simplest things, and other artifices of the same kind.

In those long sentences rich in involved parenthesis, like a box of
boxes one within another, and padded out like roast geese stuffed with
apples, it is really the _memory_ that is chiefly taxed; while it is
the understanding and the judgment which should be called into play,
instead of having their activity thereby actually hindered and
weakened.[1] This kind of sentence furnishes the reader with mere
half-phrases, which he is then called upon to collect carefully and
store up in his memory, as though they were the pieces of a torn
letter, afterwards to be completed and made sense of by the other
halves to which they respectively belong. He is expected to go on
reading for a little without exercising any thought, nay, exerting
only his memory, in the hope that, when he comes to the end of the
sentence, he may see its meaning and so receive something to think
about; and he is thus given a great deal to learn by heart before
obtaining anything to understand. This is manifestly wrong and an
abuse of the reader's patience.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note._--This sentence in the original is
obviously meant to illustrate the fault of which it speaks. It does
so by the use of a construction very common in German, but happily
unknown in English; where, however, the fault itself exists none the
less, though in different form.]

The ordinary writer has an unmistakable preference for this
style, because it causes the reader to spend time and trouble in
understanding that which he would have understood in a moment without
it; and this makes it look as though the writer had more depth and
intelligence than the reader. This is, indeed, one of those artifices
referred to above, by means of which mediocre authors unconsciously,
and as it were by instinct, strive to conceal their poverty of thought
and give an appearance of the opposite. Their ingenuity in this
respect is really astounding.

It is manifestly against all sound reason to put one thought obliquely
on top of another, as though both together formed a wooden cross. But
this is what is done where a writer interrupts what he has begun
to say, for the purpose of inserting some quite alien matter; thus
depositing with the reader a meaningless half-sentence, and bidding
him keep it until the completion comes. It is much as though a man
were to treat his guests by handing them an empty plate, in the hope
of something appearing upon it. And commas used for a similar purpose
belong to the same family as notes at the foot of the page and
parenthesis in the middle of the text; nay, all three differ only in
degree. If Demosthenes and Cicero occasionally inserted words by ways
of parenthesis, they would have done better to have refrained.

But this style of writing becomes the height of absurdity when the
parenthesis are not even fitted into the frame of the sentence, but
wedged in so as directly to shatter it. If, for instance, it is an
impertinent thing to interrupt another person when he is speaking, it
is no less impertinent to interrupt oneself. But all bad, careless,
and hasty authors, who scribble with the bread actually before their
eyes, use this style of writing six times on a page, and rejoice in
it. It consists in--it is advisable to give rule and example together,
wherever it is possible--breaking up one phrase in order to glue in
another. Nor is it merely out of laziness that they write thus. They
do it out of stupidity; they think there is a charming _légèreté_
about it; that it gives life to what they say. No doubt there are a
few rare cases where such a form of sentence may be pardonable.

Few write in the way in which an architect builds; who, before he
sets to work, sketches out his plan, and thinks it over down to its
smallest details. Nay, most people write only as though they were
playing dominoes; and, as in this game, the pieces are arranged half
by design, half by chance, so it is with the sequence and connection
of their sentences. They only have an idea of what the general shape
of their work will be, and of the aim they set before themselves.
Many are ignorant even of this, and write as the coral-insects build;
period joins to period, and the Lord only knows what the author means.

Life now-a-days goes at a gallop; and the way in which this affects
literature is to make it extremely superficial and slovenly.




ON THE STUDY OF LATIN.


The abolition of Latin as the universal language of learned men,
together with the rise of that provincialism which attaches to
national literatures, has been a real misfortune for the cause of
knowledge in Europe. For it was chiefly through the medium of the
Latin language that a learned public existed in Europe at all--a
public to which every book as it came out directly appealed. The
number of minds in the whole of Europe that are capable of thinking
and judging is small, as it is; but when the audience is broken up and
severed by differences of language, the good these minds can do is
very much weakened. This is a great disadvantage; but a second and
worse one will follow, namely, that the ancient languages will cease
to be taught at all. The neglect of them is rapidly gaining ground
both in France and Germany.

If it should really come to this, then farewell, humanity! farewell,
noble taste and high thinking! The age of barbarism will return, in
spite of railways, telegraphs and balloons. We shall thus in the end
lose one more advantage possessed by all our ancestors. For Latin is
not only a key to the knowledge of Roman antiquity; its also directly
opens up to us the Middle Age in every country in Europe, and modern
times as well, down to about the year 1750. Erigena, for example, in
the ninth century, John of Salisbury in the twelfth, Raimond Lully in
the thirteenth, with a hundred others, speak straight to us in the
very language that they naturally adopted in thinking of learned
matters.

They thus come quite close to us even at this distance of time: we are
in direct contact with them, and really come to know them. How would
it have been if every one of them spoke in the language that was
peculiar to his time and country? We should not understand even the
half of what they said. A real intellectual contact with them would be
impossible. We should see them like shadows on the farthest horizon,
or, may be, through the translator's telescope.

It was with an eye to the advantage of writing in Latin that Bacon, as
he himself expressly states, proceeded to translate his _Essays_ into
that language, under the title _Sermones fideles_; at which work
Hobbes assisted him.[1]

[Footnote 1: Cf. Thomae Hobbes vita: _Carolopoli apud Eleutherium
Anglicum_, 1681, p. 22.]

Here let me observe, by way of parenthesis, that when patriotism tries
to urge its claims in the domain of knowledge, it commits an offence
which should not be tolerated. For in those purely human questions
which interest all men alike, where truth, insight, beauty, should be
of sole account, what can be more impertinent than to let preference
for the nation to which a man's precious self happens to belong,
affect the balance of judgment, and thus supply a reason for doing
violence to truth and being unjust to the great minds of a foreign
country in order to make much of the smaller minds of one's own!
Still, there are writers in every nation in Europe, who afford
examples of this vulgar feeling. It is this which led Yriarte to
caricature them in the thirty-third of his charming _Literary
Fables_.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note._--Tomas de Yriarte (1750-91), a
Spanish poet, and keeper of archives in the War Office at Madrid. His
two best known works are a didactic poem, entitled _La Musica_, and
the _Fables_ here quoted, which satirize the peculiar foibles of
literary men. They have been translated into many languages; into
English by Rockliffe (3rd edition, 1866). The fable in question
describes how, at a picnic of the animals, a discussion arose as to
which of them carried off the palm for superiority of talent. The
praises of the ant, the dog, the bee, and the parrot were sung in
turn; but at last the ostrich stood up and declared for the dromedary.
Whereupon the dromedary stood up and declared for the ostrich. No one
could discover the reason for this mutual compliment. Was it because
both were such uncouth beasts, or had such long necks, or were neither
of them particularly clever or beautiful? or was it because each had a
hump? _No_! said the fox, _you are all wrong. Don't you see they are
both foreigners_? Cannot the same be said of many men of learning?]

In learning a language, the chief difficulty consists in making
acquaintance with every idea which it expresses, even though it should
use words for which there is no exact equivalent in the mother tongue;
and this often happens. In learning a new language a man has, as it
were, to mark out in his mind the boundaries of quite new spheres of
ideas, with the result that spheres of ideas arise where none were
before. Thus he not only learns words, he gains ideas too.

This is nowhere so much the case as in learning ancient languages, for
the differences they present in their mode of expression as compared
with modern languages is greater than can be found amongst modern
languages as compared with one another. This is shown by the fact that
in translating into Latin, recourse must be had to quite other turns
of phrase than are used in the original. The thought that is to be
translated has to be melted down and recast; in other words, it must
be analyzed and then recomposed. It is just this process which makes
the study of the ancient languages contribute so much to the education
of the mind.

It follows from this that a man's thought varies according to the
language in which he speaks. His ideas undergo a fresh modification,
a different shading, as it were, in the study of every new language.
Hence an acquaintance with many languages is not only of much indirect
advantage, but it is also a direct means of mental culture, in that it
corrects and matures ideas by giving prominence to their many-sided
nature and their different varieties of meaning, as also that it
increases dexterity of thought; for in the process of learning many
languages, ideas become more and more independent of words. The
ancient languages effect this to a greater degree than the modern, in
virtue of the difference to which I have alluded.

From what I have said, it is obvious that to imitate the style of the
ancients in their own language, which is so very much superior to ours
in point of grammatical perfection, is the best way of preparing for a
skillful and finished expression of thought in the mother-tongue. Nay,
if a man wants to be a great writer, he must not omit to do this: just
as, in the case of sculpture or painting, the student must educate
himself by copying the great masterpieces of the past, before
proceeding to original work. It is only by learning to write Latin
that a man comes to treat diction as an art. The material in this art
is language, which must therefore be handled with the greatest care
and delicacy.

The result of such study is that a writer will pay keen attention to
the meaning and value of words, their order and connection, their
grammatical forms. He will learn how to weigh them with precision, and
so become an expert in the use of that precious instrument which is
meant not only to express valuable thought, but to preserve it as
well. Further, he will learn to feel respect for the language in
which he writes and thus be saved from any attempt to remodel it by
arbitrary and capricious treatment. Without this schooling, a man's
writing may easily degenerate into mere chatter.

To be entirely ignorant of the Latin language is like being in a fine
country on a misty day. The horizon is extremely limited. Nothing can
be seen clearly except that which is quite close; a few steps beyond,
everything is buried in obscurity. But the Latinist has a wide view,
embracing modern times, the Middle Age and Antiquity; and his mental
horizon is still further enlarged if he studies Greek or even
Sanscrit.

If a man knows no Latin, he belongs to the vulgar, even though he be
a great virtuoso on the electrical machine and have the base of
hydrofluoric acid in his crucible.

There is no better recreation for the mind than the study of the
ancient classics. Take any one of them into your hand, be it only
for half an hour, and you will feel yourself refreshed, relieved,
purified, ennobled, strengthened; just as though you had quenched your
thirst at some pure spring. Is this the effect of the old language
and its perfect expression, or is it the greatness of the minds whose
works remain unharmed and unweakened by the lapse of a thousand years?
Perhaps both together. But this I know. If the threatened calamity
should ever come, and the ancient languages cease to be taught, a new
literature will arise, of such barbarous, shallow and worthless stuff
as never was seen before.




ON MEN OF LEARNING.


When one sees the number and variety of institutions which exist
for the purposes of education, and the vast throng of scholars and
masters, one might fancy the human race to be very much concerned
about truth and wisdom. But here, too, appearances are deceptive. The
masters teach in order to gain money, and strive, not after wisdom,
but the outward show and reputation of it; and the scholars learn, not
for the sake of knowledge and insight, but to be able to chatter and
give themselves airs. Every thirty years a new race comes into the
world--a youngster that knows nothing about anything, and after
summarily devouring in all haste the results of human knowledge as
they have been accumulated for thousands of years, aspires to be
thought cleverer than the whole of the past. For this purpose he goes
to the University, and takes to reading books--new books, as being of
his own age and standing. Everything he reads must be briefly put,
must be new! he is new himself. Then he falls to and criticises. And
here I am not taking the slightest account of studies pursued for the
sole object of making a living.

Students, and learned persons of all sorts and every age, aim as
a rule at acquiring _information_ rather than insight. They pique
themselves upon knowing about everything--stones, plants, battles,
experiments, and all the books in existence. It never occurs to them
that information is only a means of insight, and in itself of little
or no value; that it is his way of _thinking_ that makes a man a
philosopher. When I hear of these portents of learning and their
imposing erudition, I sometimes say to myself: Ah, how little they
must have had to think about, to have been able to read so much!
And when I actually find it reported of the elder Pliny that he was
continually reading or being read to, at table, on a journey, or in
his bath, the question forces itself upon my mind, whether the man
was so very lacking in thought of his own that he had to have
alien thought incessantly instilled into him; as though he were a
consumptive patient taking jellies to keep himself alive. And neither
his undiscerning credulity nor his inexpressibly repulsive and barely
intelligible style--which seems like of a man taking notes, and very
economical of paper--is of a kind to give me a high opinion of his
power of independent thought.

We have seen that much reading and learning is prejudicial to thinking
for oneself; and, in the same way, through much writing and teaching,
a man loses the habit of being quite clear, and therefore thorough, in
regard to the things he knows and understands; simply because he has
left himself no time to acquire clearness or thoroughness. And so,
when clear knowledge fails him in his utterances, he is forced to fill
out the gaps with words and phrases. It is this, and not the dryness
of the subject-matter, that makes most books such tedious reading.
There is a saying that a good cook can make a palatable dish even
out of an old shoe; and a good writer can make the dryest things
interesting.

With by far the largest number of learned men, knowledge is a means,
not an end. That is why they will never achieve any great work;
because, to do that, he who pursues knowledge must pursue it as an
end, and treat everything else, even existence itself, as only a
means. For everything which a man fails to pursue for its own sake is
but half-pursued; and true excellence, no matter in what sphere, can
be attained only where the work has been produced for its own sake
alone, and not as a means to further ends.

And so, too, no one will ever succeed in doing anything really great
and original in the way of thought, who does not seek to acquire
knowledge for himself, and, making this the immediate object of his
studies, decline to trouble himself about the knowledge of others. But
the average man of learning studies for the purpose of being able to
teach and write. His head is like a stomach and intestines which let
the food pass through them undigested. That is just why his teaching
and writing is of so little use. For it is not upon undigested refuse
that people can be nourished, but solely upon the milk which secretes
from the very blood itself.

The wig is the appropriate symbol of the man of learning, pure and
simple. It adorns the head with a copious quantity of false hair, in
lack of one's own: just as erudition means endowing it with a great
mass of alien thought. This, to be sure, does not clothe the head so
well and naturally, nor is it so generally useful, nor so suited for
all purposes, nor so firmly rooted; nor when alien thought is used up,
can it be immediately replaced by more from the same source, as is
the case with that which springs from soil of one's own. So we find
Sterne, in his _Tristram Shandy_, boldly asserting that _an ounce of a
man's own wit is worth a ton of other people's_.

And in fact the most profound erudition is no more akin to genius than
a collection of dried plants in like Nature, with its constant flow
of new life, ever fresh, ever young, ever changing. There are no two
things more opposed than the childish naïveté of an ancient author and
the learning of his commentator.

_Dilettanti, dilettanti!_ This is the slighting way in which those who
pursue any branch of art or learning for the love and enjoyment of the
thing,--_per il loro diletto_, are spoken of by those who have taken
it up for the sake of gain, attracted solely by the prospect of money.
This contempt of theirs comes from the base belief that no man will
seriously devote himself to a subject, unless he is spurred on to it
by want, hunger, or else some form of greed. The public is of the same
way of thinking; and hence its general respect for professionals and
its distrust of _dilettanti_. But the truth is that the _dilettante_
treats his subject as an end, whereas the professional, pure and
simple, treats it merely as a means. He alone will be really in
earnest about a matter, who has a direct interest therein, takes to it
because he likes it, and pursues it _con amore_. It is these, and not
hirelings, that have always done the greatest work.

In the republic of letters it is as in other republics; favor is shown
to the plain man--he who goes his way in silence and does not set up
to be cleverer than others. But the abnormal man is looked upon as
threatening danger; people band together against him, and have, oh!
such a majority on their side.

The condition of this republic is much like that of a small State in
America, where every man is intent only upon his own advantage, and
seeks reputation and power for himself, quite heedless of the general
weal, which then goes to ruin. So it is in the republic of letters;
it is himself, and himself alone, that a man puts forward, because he
wants to gain fame. The only thing in which all agree is in trying to
keep down a really eminent man, if he should chance to show himself,
as one who would be a common peril. From this it is easy to see how it
fares with knowledge as a whole.

Between professors and independent men of learning there has always
been from of old a certain antagonism, which may perhaps be likened
to that existing been dogs and wolves. In virtue of their position,
professors enjoy great facilities for becoming known to their
contemporaries. Contrarily, independent men of learning enjoy, by
their position, great facilities for becoming known to posterity; to
which it is necessary that, amongst other and much rarer gifts, a man
should have a certain leisure and freedom. As mankind takes a long
time in finding out on whom to bestow its attention, they may both
work together side by side.

He who holds a professorship may be said to receive his food in the
stall; and this is the best way with ruminant animals. But he who
finds his food for himself at the hands of Nature is better off in the
open field.

Of human knowledge as a whole and in every branch of it, by far the
largest part exists nowhere but on paper,--I mean, in books, that
paper memory of mankind. Only a small part of it is at any given
period really active in the minds of particular persons. This is due,
in the main, to the brevity and uncertainty of life; but it also comes
from the fact that men are lazy and bent on pleasure. Every generation
attains, on its hasty passage through existence, just so much of human
knowledge as it needs, and then soon disappears. Most men of learning
are very superficial. Then follows a new generation, full of hope, but
ignorant, and with everything to learn from the beginning. It seizes,
in its turn, just so much as it can grasp or find useful on its brief
journey and then too goes its way. How badly it would fare with human
knowledge if it were not for the art of writing and printing! This it
is that makes libraries the only sure and lasting memory of the human
race, for its individual members have all of them but a very limited
and imperfect one. Hence most men of learning as are loth to have
their knowledge examined as merchants to lay bare their books.

Human knowledge extends on all sides farther than the eye can reach;
and of that which would be generally worth knowing, no one man can
possess even the thousandth part.

All branches of learning have thus been so much enlarged that he
who would "do something" has to pursue no more than one subject and
disregard all others. In his own subject he will then, it is true, be
superior to the vulgar; but in all else he will belong to it. If we
add to this that neglect of the ancient languages, which is now-a-days
on the increase and is doing away with all general education in the
humanities--for a mere smattering of Latin and Greek is of no use--we
shall come to have men of learning who outside their own subject
display an ignorance truly bovine.

An exclusive specialist of this kind stands on a par with a workman in
a factory, whose whole life is spent in making one particular kind of
screw, or catch, or handle, for some particular instrument or machine,
in which, indeed, he attains incredible dexterity. The specialist may
also be likened to a man who lives in his own house and never leaves
it. There he is perfectly familiar with everything, every little step,
corner, or board; much as Quasimodo in Victor Hugo's _Nôtre Dame_
knows the cathedral; but outside it, all is strange and unknown.

For true culture in the humanities it is absolutely necessary that
a man should be many-sided and take large views; and for a man of
learning in the higher sense of the word, an extensive acquaintance
with history is needful. He, however, who wishes to be a complete
philosopher, must gather into his head the remotest ends of human
knowledge: for where else could they ever come together?

It is precisely minds of the first order that will never be
specialists. For their very nature is to make the whole of existence
their problem; and this is a subject upon which they will every one of
them in some form provide mankind with a new revelation. For he alone
can deserve the name of genius who takes the All, the Essential, the
Universal, for the theme of his achievements; not he who spends his
life in explaining some special relation of things one to another.




ON THINKING FOR ONESELF.


A library may be very large; but if it is in disorder, it is not so
useful as one that is small but well arranged. In the same way, a man
may have a great mass of knowledge, but if he has not worked it up
by thinking it over for himself, it has much less value than a far
smaller amount which he has thoroughly pondered. For it is only when a
man looks at his knowledge from all sides, and combines the things he
knows by comparing truth with truth, that he obtains a complete hold
over it and gets it into his power. A man cannot turn over anything in
his mind unless he knows it; he should, therefore, learn something;
but it is only when he has turned it over that he can be said to know
it.

Reading and learning are things that anyone can do of his own free
will; but not so _thinking_. Thinking must be kindled, like a fire
by a draught; it must be sustained by some interest in the matter
in hand. This interest may be of purely objective kind, or merely
subjective. The latter comes into play only in things that concern
us personally. Objective interest is confined to heads that think by
nature; to whom thinking is as natural as breathing; and they are very
rare. This is why most men of learning show so little of it.

It is incredible what a different effect is produced upon the mind
by thinking for oneself, as compared with reading. It carries on and
intensifies that original difference in the nature of two minds which
leads the one to think and the other to read. What I mean is that
reading forces alien thoughts upon the mind--thoughts which are as
foreign to the drift and temper in which it may be for the moment, as
the seal is to the wax on which it stamps its imprint. The mind is
thus entirely under compulsion from without; it is driven to think
this or that, though for the moment it may not have the slightest
impulse or inclination to do so.

But when a man thinks for himself, he follows the impulse of his
own mind, which is determined for him at the time, either by his
environment or some particular recollection. The visible world of
a man's surroundings does not, as reading does, impress a _single_
definite thought upon his mind, but merely gives the matter and
occasion which lead him to think what is appropriate to his nature and
present temper. So it is, that much reading deprives the mind of all
elasticity; it is like keeping a spring continually under pressure.
The safest way of having no thoughts of one's own is to take up a book
every moment one has nothing else to do. It is this practice which
explains why erudition makes most men more stupid and silly than they
are by nature, and prevents their writings obtaining any measure of
success. They remain, in Pope's words:

  _For ever reading, never to be read!_[1]

[Footnote 1: _Dunciad_, iii, 194.]

Men of learning are those who have done their reading in the pages of
a book. Thinkers and men of genius are those who have gone straight
to the book of Nature; it is they who have enlightened the world and
carried humanity further on its way. If a man's thoughts are to have
truth and life in them, they must, after all, be his own fundamental
thoughts; for these are the only ones that he can fully and wholly
understand. To read another's thoughts is like taking the leavings of
a meal to which we have not been invited, or putting on the clothes
which some unknown visitor has laid aside. The thought we read
is related to the thought which springs up in ourselves, as the
fossil-impress of some prehistoric plant to a plant as it buds forth
in spring-time.

Reading is nothing more than a substitute for thought of one's own. It
means putting the mind into leading-strings. The multitude of books
serves only to show how many false paths there are, and how widely
astray a man may wander if he follows any of them. But he who
is guided by his genius, he who thinks for himself, who thinks
spontaneously and exactly, possesses the only compass by which he can
steer aright. A man should read only when his own thoughts stagnate
at their source, which will happen often enough even with the best of
minds. On the other hand, to take up a book for the purpose of scaring
away one's own original thoughts is sin against the Holy Spirit. It is
like running away from Nature to look at a museum of dried plants or
gaze at a landscape in copperplate.

A man may have discovered some portion of truth or wisdom, after
spending a great deal of time and trouble in thinking it over for
himself and adding thought to thought; and it may sometimes happen
that he could have found it all ready to hand in a book and spared
himself the trouble. But even so, it is a hundred times more valuable
if he has acquired it by thinking it out for himself. For it is only
when we gain our knowledge in this way that it enters as an integral
part, a living member, into the whole system of our thought; that it
stands in complete and firm relation with what we know; that it is
understood with all that underlies it and follows from it; that it
wears the color, the precise shade, the distinguishing mark, of our
own way of thinking; that it comes exactly at the right time, just
as we felt the necessity for it; that it stands fast and cannot be
forgotten. This is the perfect application, nay, the interpretation,
of Goethe's advice to earn our inheritance for ourselves so that we
may really possess it:

  _Was due ererbt von deinen Välern hast,
  Erwirb es, um es zu besitzen._[1]

[Footnote 1: _Faust_, I. 329.]

The man who thinks for himself, forms his own opinions and learns the
authorities for them only later on, when they serve but to strengthen
his belief in them and in himself. But the book-philosopher starts
from the authorities. He reads other people's books, collects their
opinions, and so forms a whole for himself, which resembles an
automaton made up of anything but flesh and blood. Contrarily, he who
thinks for himself creates a work like a living man as made by Nature.
For the work comes into being as a man does; the thinking mind is
impregnated from without, and it then forms and bears its child.

Truth that has been merely learned is like an artificial limb, a false
tooth, a waxen nose; at best, like a nose made out of another's flesh;
it adheres to us only because it is put on. But truth acquired by
thinking of our own is like a natural limb; it alone really belongs
to us. This is the fundamental difference between the thinker and the
mere man of learning. The intellectual attainments of a man who thinks
for himself resemble a fine painting, where the light and shade are
correct, the tone sustained, the color perfectly harmonized; it is
true to life. On the other hand, the intellectual attainments of the
mere man of learning are like a large palette, full of all sorts of
colors, which at most are systematically arranged, but devoid of
harmony, connection and meaning.

Reading is thinking with some one else's head instead of one's own. To
think with one's own head is always to aim at developing a coherent
whole--a system, even though it be not a strictly complete one; and
nothing hinders this so much as too strong a current of others'
thoughts, such as comes of continual reading. These thoughts,
springing every one of them from different minds, belonging to
different systems, and tinged with different colors, never of
themselves flow together into an intellectual whole; they never form a
unity of knowledge, or insight, or conviction; but, rather, fill
the head with a Babylonian confusion of tongues. The mind that is
over-loaded with alien thought is thus deprived of all clear insight,
and is well-nigh disorganized. This is a state of things observable
in many men of learning; and it makes them inferior in sound sense,
correct judgment and practical tact, to many illiterate persons,
who, after obtaining a little knowledge from without, by means of
experience, intercourse with others, and a small amount of reading,
have always subordinated it to, and embodied it with, their own
thought.

The really scientific _thinker_ does the same thing as these
illiterate persons, but on a larger scale. Although he has need
of much knowledge, and so must read a great deal, his mind is
nevertheless strong enough to master it all, to assimilate and
incorporate it with the system of his thoughts, and so to make it
fit in with the organic unity of his insight, which, though vast, is
always growing. And in the process, his own thought, like the bass in
an organ, always dominates everything and is never drowned by other
tones, as happens with minds which are full of mere antiquarian lore;
where shreds of music, as it were, in every key, mingle confusedly,
and no fundamental note is heard at all.

Those who have spent their lives in reading, and taken their wisdom
from books, are like people who have obtained precise information
about a country from the descriptions of many travellers. Such
people can tell a great deal about it; but, after all, they have no
connected, clear, and profound knowledge of its real condition. But
those who have spent their lives in thinking, resemble the travellers
themselves; they alone really know what they are talking about; they
are acquainted with the actual state of affairs, and are quite at home
in the subject.

The thinker stands in the same relation to the ordinary
book-philosopher as an eye-witness does to the historian; he speaks
from direct knowledge of his own. That is why all those who think
for themselves come, at bottom, to much the same conclusion. The
differences they present are due to their different points of view;
and when these do not affect the matter, they all speak alike. They
merely express the result of their own objective perception of things.
There are many passages in my works which I have given to the public
only after some hesitation, because of their paradoxical nature; and
afterwards I have experienced a pleasant surprise in finding the same
opinion recorded in the works of great men who lived long ago.

The book-philosopher merely reports what one person has said and
another meant, or the objections raised by a third, and so on. He
compares different opinions, ponders, criticises, and tries to get at
the truth of the matter; herein on a par with the critical historian.
For instance, he will set out to inquire whether Leibnitz was not for
some time a follower of Spinoza, and questions of a like nature. The
curious student of such matters may find conspicuous examples of what
I mean in Herbart's _Analytical Elucidation of Morality and Natural
Right_, and in the same author's _Letters on Freedom_. Surprise may
be felt that a man of the kind should put himself to so much trouble;
for, on the face of it, if he would only examine the matter for
himself, he would speedily attain his object by the exercise of a
little thought. But there is a small difficulty in the way. It does
not depend upon his own will. A man can always sit down and read, but
not--think. It is with thoughts as with men; they cannot always be
summoned at pleasure; we must wait for them to come. Thought about a
subject must appear of itself, by a happy and harmonious combination
of external stimulus with mental temper and attention; and it is just
that which never seems to come to these people.

This truth may be illustrated by what happens in the case of matters
affecting our own personal interest. When it is necessary to come to
some resolution in a matter of that kind, we cannot well sit down at
any given moment and think over the merits of the case and make up our
mind; for, if we try to do so, we often find ourselves unable, at that
particular moment, to keep our mind fixed upon the subject; it wanders
off to other things. Aversion to the matter in question is sometimes
to blame for this. In such a case we should not use force, but wait
for the proper frame of mind to come of itself. It often comes
unexpectedly and returns again and again; and the variety of temper in
which we approach it at different moments puts the matter always in a
fresh light. It is this long process which is understood by the term
_a ripe resolution._ For the work of coming to a resolution must be
distributed; and in the process much that is overlooked at one moment
occurs to us at another; and the repugnance vanishes when we find, as
we usually do, on a closer inspection, that things are not so bad as
they seemed.

This rule applies to the life of the intellect as well as to matters
of practice. A man must wait for the right moment. Not even the
greatest mind is capable of thinking for itself at all times. Hence a
great mind does well to spend its leisure in reading, which, as I have
said, is a substitute for thought; it brings stuff to the mind by
letting another person do the thinking; although that is always done
in a manner not our own. Therefore, a man should not read too much, in
order that his mind may not become accustomed to the substitute and
thereby forget the reality; that it may not form the habit of walking
in well-worn paths; nor by following an alien course of thought grow a
stranger to its own. Least of all should a man quite withdraw his gaze
from the real world for the mere sake of reading; as the impulse and
the temper which prompt to thought of one's own come far oftener from
the world of reality than from the world of books. The real life that
a man sees before him is the natural subject of thought; and in its
strength as the primary element of existence, it can more easily than
anything else rouse and influence the thinking mind.

After these considerations, it will not be matter for surprise that
a man who thinks for himself can easily be distinguished from the
book-philosopher by the very way in which he talks, by his marked
earnestness, and the originality, directness, and personal conviction
that stamp all his thoughts and expressions. The book-philosopher, on
the other hand, lets it be seen that everything he has is second-hand;
that his ideas are like the number and trash of an old furniture-shop,
collected together from all quarters. Mentally, he is dull and
pointless--a copy of a copy. His literary style is made up of
conventional, nay, vulgar phrases, and terms that happen to be
current; in this respect much like a small State where all the money
that circulates is foreign, because it has no coinage of its own.

Mere experience can as little as reading supply the place of thought.
It stands to thinking in the same relation in which eating stands
to digestion and assimilation. When experience boasts that to its
discoveries alone is due the advancement of the human race, it is as
though the mouth were to claim the whole credit of maintaining the
body in health.

The works of all truly capable minds are distinguished by a character
of _decision_ and _definiteness_, which means they are clear and free
from obscurity. A truly capable mind always knows definitely and
clearly what it is that it wants to express, whether its medium is
prose, verse, or music. Other minds are not decisive and not definite;
and by this they may be known for what they are.

The characteristic sign of a mind of the highest order is that it
always judges at first hand. Everything it advances is the result of
thinking for itself; and this is everywhere evident by the way in
which it gives its thoughts utterance. Such a mind is like a Prince.
In the realm of intellect its authority is imperial, whereas the
authority of minds of a lower order is delegated only; as may be seen
in their style, which has no independent stamp of its own.

Every one who really thinks for himself is so far like a monarch.
His position is undelegated and supreme. His judgments, like royal
decrees, spring from his own sovereign power and proceed directly from
himself. He acknowledges authority as little as a monarch admits a
command; he subscribes to nothing but what he has himself authorized.
The multitude of common minds, laboring under all sorts of current
opinions, authorities, prejudices, is like the people, which silently
obeys the law and accepts orders from above.

Those who are so zealous and eager to settle debated questions by
citing authorities, are really glad when they are able to put the
understanding and the insight of others into the field in place of
their own, which are wanting. Their number is legion. For, as
Seneca says, there is no man but prefers belief to the exercise
of judgment--_unusquisque mavult credere quam judicare_. In their
controversies such people make a promiscuous use of the weapon of
authority, and strike out at one another with it. If any one chances
to become involved in such a contest, he will do well not to try
reason and argument as a mode of defence; for against a weapon of that
kind these people are like Siegfrieds, with a skin of horn, and dipped
in the flood of incapacity for thinking and judging. They will meet
his attack by bringing up their authorities as a way of abashing
him--_argumentum ad verecundiam_, and then cry out that they have won
the battle.

In the real world, be it never so fair, favorable and pleasant,
we always live subject to the law of gravity which we have to
be constantly overcoming. But in the world of intellect we are
disembodied spirits, held in bondage to no such law, and free from
penury and distress. Thus it is that there exists no happiness on
earth like that which, at the auspicious moment, a fine and fruitful
mind finds in itself.

The presence of a thought is like the presence of a woman we love. We
fancy we shall never forget the thought nor become indifferent to the
dear one. But out of sight, out of mind! The finest thought runs the
risk of being irrevocably forgotten if we do not write it down, and
the darling of being deserted if we do not marry her.

There are plenty of thoughts which are valuable to the man who thinks
them; but only few of them which have enough strength to produce
repercussive or reflect action--I mean, to win the reader's sympathy
after they have been put on paper.

But still it must not be forgotten that a true value attaches only
to what a man has thought in the first instance _for his own case_.
Thinkers may be classed according as they think chiefly for their own
case or for that of others. The former are the genuine independent
thinkers; they really think and are really independent; they are the
true _philosophers_; they alone are in earnest. The pleasure and the
happiness of their existence consists in thinking. The others are the
_sophists_; they want to seem that which they are not, and seek their
happiness in what they hope to get from the world. They are in earnest
about nothing else. To which of these two classes a man belongs may be
seen by his whole style and manner. Lichtenberg is an example for the
former class; Herder, there can be no doubt, belongs to the second.

When one considers how vast and how close to us is _the problem of
existence_--this equivocal, tortured, fleeting, dream-like existence
of ours--so vast and so close that a man no sooner discovers it than
it overshadows and obscures all other problems and aims; and when
one sees how all men, with few and rare exceptions, have no clear
consciousness of the problem, nay, seem to be quite unaware of its
presence, but busy themselves with everything rather than with this,
and live on, taking no thought but for the passing day and the hardly
longer span of their own personal future, either expressly discarding
the problem or else over-ready to come to terms with it by adopting
some system of popular metaphysics and letting it satisfy them; when,
I say, one takes all this to heart, one may come to the opinion that
man may be said to be _a thinking being_ only in a very remote
sense, and henceforth feel no special surprise at any trait of human
thoughtlessness or folly; but know, rather, that the normal man's
intellectual range of vision does indeed extend beyond that of the
brute, whose whole existence is, as it were, a continual present,
with no consciousness of the past or the future, but not such an
immeasurable distance as is generally supposed.

This is, in fact, corroborated by the way in which most men converse;
where their thoughts are found to be chopped up fine, like chaff, so
that for them to spin out a discourse of any length is impossible.

If this world were peopled by really thinking beings, it could not be
that noise of every kind would be allowed such generous limits, as is
the case with the most horrible and at the same time aimless form of
it.[1] If Nature had meant man to think, she would not have given him
ears; or, at any rate, she would have furnished them with airtight
flaps, such as are the enviable possession of the bat. But, in truth,
man is a poor animal like the rest, and his powers are meant only to
maintain him in the struggle for existence; so he must need keep his
ears always open, to announce of themselves, by night as by day, the
approach of the pursuer.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Schopenhauer refers to the cracking
of whips. See the Essay _On Noise_ in _Studies in Pessimism_.]

In the drama, which is the most perfect reflection of human existence,
there are three stages in the presentation of the subject, with a
corresponding variety in the design and scope of the piece.

At the first, which is also the most common, stage, the drama is
never anything more than merely _interesting_. The persons gain our
attention by following their own aims, which resemble ours; the action
advances by means of intrigue and the play of character and incident;
while wit and raillery season the whole.

At the second stage, the drama becomes _sentimental_. Sympathy is
roused with the hero and, indirectly, with ourselves. The action takes
a pathetic turn; but the end is peaceful and satisfactory.

The climax is reached with the third stage, which is the most
difficult. There the drama aims at being _tragic_. We are brought face
to face with great suffering and the storm and stress of existence;
and the outcome of it is to show the vanity of all human effort.
Deeply moved, we are either directly prompted to disengage our will
from the struggle of life, or else a chord is struck in us which
echoes a similar feeling.

The beginning, it is said, is always difficult. In the drama it is
just the contrary; for these the difficulty always lies in the end.
This is proved by countless plays which promise very well for
the first act or two, and then become muddled, stick or
falter--notoriously so in the fourth act--and finally conclude in a
way that is either forced or unsatisfactory or else long foreseen by
every one. Sometimes, too, the end is positively revolting, as in
Lessing's _Emilia Galotti_, which sends the spectators home in a
temper.

This difficulty in regard to the end of a play arises partly because
it is everywhere easier to get things into a tangle than to get them
out again; partly also because at the beginning we give the author
_carte blanche_ to do as he likes, but, at the end, make certain
definite demands upon him. Thus we ask for a conclusion that shall be
either quite happy or else quite tragic; whereas human affairs do not
easily take so decided a turn; and then we expect that it shall be
natural, fit and proper, unlabored, and at the same time foreseen by
no one.

These remarks are also applicable to an epic and to a novel; but the
more compact nature of the drama makes the difficulty plainer by
increasing it.

_E nihilo nihil fit_. That nothing can come from nothing is a maxim
true in fine art as elsewhere. In composing an historical picture, a
good artist will use living men as a model, and take the groundwork
of the faces from life; and then proceed to idealize them in point of
beauty or expression. A similar method, I fancy, is adopted by good
novelists. In drawing a character they take a general outline of it
from some real person of their acquaintance, and then idealize and
complete it to suit their purpose.

A novel will be of a high and noble order, the more it represents
of inner, and the less it represents of outer, life; and the ratio
between the two will supply a means of judging any novel, of whatever
kind, from _Tristram Shandy_ down to the crudest and most sensational
tale of knight or robber. _Tristram Shandy_ has, indeed, as good as
no action at all; and there is not much in _La Nouvelle Heloïse_ and
_Wilhelm Meister_. Even _Don Quixote_ has relatively little; and what
there is, very unimportant, and introduced merely for the sake of fun.
And these four are the best of all existing novels.

Consider, further, the wonderful romances of Jean Paul, and how much
inner life is shown on the narrowest basis of actual event. Even in
Walter Scott's novels there is a great preponderance of inner over
outer life, and incident is never brought in except for the purpose of
giving play to thought and emotion; whereas, in bad novels, incident
is there on its own account. Skill consists in setting the inner life
in motion with the smallest possible array of circumstance; for it is
this inner life that really excites our interest.

The business of the novelist is not to relate great events, but to
make small ones interesting.

History, which I like to think of as the contrary of poetry [Greek:
istoroumenon--pepoiaemenon], is for time what geography is for space;
and it is no more to be called a science, in any strict sense of the
word, than is geography, because it does not deal with universal
truths, but only with particular details. History has always been the
favorite study of those who wish to learn something, without having to
face the effort demanded by any branch of real knowledge, which taxes
the intelligence. In our time history is a favorite pursuit; as
witness the numerous books upon the subject which appear every year.

If the reader cannot help thinking, with me, that history is merely
the constant recurrence of similar things, just as in a kaleidoscope
the same bits of glass are represented, but in different combinations,
he will not be able to share all this lively interest; nor, however,
will he censure it. But there is a ridiculous and absurd claim, made
by many people, to regard history as a part of philosophy, nay, as
philosophy itself; they imagine that history can take its place.

The preference shown for history by the greater public in all ages may
be illustrated by the kind of conversation which is so much in vogue
everywhere in society. It generally consists in one person relating
something and then another person relating something else; so that in
this way everyone is sure of receiving attention. Both here and in the
case of history it is plain that the mind is occupied with particular
details. But as in science, so also in every worthy conversation, the
mind rises to the consideration of some general truth.

This objection does not, however, deprive history of its value. Human
life is short and fleeting, and many millions of individuals share in
it, who are swallowed by that monster of oblivion which is waiting for
them with ever-open jaws. It is thus a very thankworthy task to try to
rescue something--the memory of interesting and important events, or
the leading features and personages of some epoch--from the general
shipwreck of the world.

From another point of view, we might look upon history as the sequel
to zoology; for while with all other animals it is enough to observe
the species, with man individuals, and therefore individual events
have to be studied; because every man possesses a character as an
individual. And since individuals and events are without number or
end, an essential imperfection attaches to history. In the study of
it, all that a man learns never contributes to lessen that which he
has still to learn. With any real science, a perfection of knowledge
is, at any rate, conceivable.

When we gain access to the histories of China and of India, the
endlessness of the subject-matter will reveal to us the defects in the
study, and force our historians to see that the object of science is
to recognize the many in the one, to perceive the rules in any given
example, and to apply to the life of nations a knowledge of mankind;
not to go on counting up facts _ad infinitum_.

There are two kinds of history; the history of politics and the
history of literature and art. The one is the history of the will;
the other, that of the intellect. The first is a tale of woe, even of
terror: it is a record of agony, struggle, fraud, and horrible murder
_en masse_. The second is everywhere pleasing and serene, like the
intellect when left to itself, even though its path be one of error.
Its chief branch is the history of philosophy. This is, in fact, its
fundamental bass, and the notes of it are heard even in the other
kind of history. These deep tones guide the formation of opinion, and
opinion rules the world. Hence philosophy, rightly understood, is a
material force of the most powerful kind, though very slow in its
working. The philosophy of a period is thus the fundamental bass of
its history.

The NEWSPAPER, is the second-hand in the clock of history; and it is
not only made of baser metal than those which point to the minute and
the hour, but it seldom goes right.

The so-called leading article is the chorus to the drama of passing
events.

Exaggeration of every kind is as essential to journalism as it is to
the dramatic art; for the object of journalism is to make events go
as far as possible. Thus it is that all journalists are, in the very
nature of their calling, alarmists; and this is their way of giving
interest to what they write. Herein they are like little dogs; if
anything stirs, they immediately set up a shrill bark.

Therefore, let us carefully regulate the attention to be paid to this
trumpet of danger, so that it may not disturb our digestion. Let us
recognize that a newspaper is at best but a magnifying-glass, and very
often merely a shadow on the wall.

The _pen_ is to thought what the stick is to walking; but you walk
most easily when you have no stick, and you think with the greatest
perfection when you have no pen in your hand. It is only when a man
begins to be old that he likes to use a stick and is glad to take up
his pen.

When an _hypothesis_ has once come to birth in the mind, or gained a
footing there, it leads a life so far comparable with the life of an
organism, as that it assimilates matter from the outer world only when
it is like in kind with it and beneficial; and when, contrarily, such
matter is not like in kind but hurtful, the hypothesis, equally with
the organism, throws it off, or, if forced to take it, gets rid of it
again entire.

To gain _immortality_ an author must possess so many excellences that
while it will not be easy to find anyone to understand and appreciate
them all, there will be men in every age who are able to recognize
and value some of them. In this way the credit of his book will be
maintained throughout the long course of centuries, in spite of the
fact that human interests are always changing.

An author like this, who has a claim to the continuance of his life
even with posterity, can only be a man who, over the wide earth, will
seek his like in vain, and offer a palpable contrast with everyone
else in virtue of his unmistakable distinction. Nay, more: were he,
like the wandering Jew, to live through several generations, he would
still remain in the same superior position. If this were not so, it
would be difficult to see why his thoughts should not perish like
those of other men.

_Metaphors_ and _similes_ are of great value, in so far as they
explain an unknown relation by a known one. Even the more detailed
simile which grows into a parable or an allegory, is nothing more than
the exhibition of some relation in its simplest, most visible and
palpable form. The growth of ideas rests, at bottom, upon similes;
because ideas arise by a process of combining the similarities and
neglecting the differences between things. Further, intelligence, in
the strict sense of the word, ultimately consists in a seizing of
relations; and a clear and pure grasp of relations is all the more
often attained when the comparison is made between cases that lie wide
apart from one another, and between things of quite different nature.
As long as a relation is known to me as existing only in a single
case, I have but an _individual_ idea of it--in other words, only an
intuitive knowledge of it; but as soon as I see the same relation in
two different cases, I have a _general_ idea of its whole nature, and
this is a deeper and more perfect knowledge.

Since, then, similes and metaphors are such a powerful engine of
knowledge, it is a sign of great intelligence in a writer if his
similes are unusual and, at the same time, to the point. Aristotle
also observes that by far the most important thing to a writer is
to have this power of metaphor; for it is a gift which cannot be
acquired, and it is a mark of genius.

As regards _reading_, to require that a man shall retain everything he
has ever read, is like asking him to carry about with him all he has
ever eaten. The one kind of food has given him bodily, and the other
mental, nourishment; and it is through these two means that he has
grown to be what he is. The body assimilates only that which is like
it; and so a man retains in his mind only that which interests him, in
other words, that which suits his system of thought or his purposes in
life.

If a man wants to read good books, he must make a point of avoiding
bad ones; for life is short, and time and energy limited.

_Repetitio est mater studiorum_. Any book that is at all important
ought to be at once read through twice; partly because, on a second
reading, the connection of the different portions of the book will be
better understood, and the beginning comprehended only when the end
is known; and partly because we are not in the same temper and
disposition on both readings. On the second perusal we get a new view
of every passage and a different impression of the whole book, which
then appears in another light.

A man's works are the quintessence of his mind, and even though he may
possess very great capacity, they will always be incomparably more
valuable than his conversation. Nay, in all essential matters his
works will not only make up for the lack of personal intercourse with
him, but they will far surpass it in solid advantages. The writings
even of a man of moderate genius may be edifying, worth reading and
instructive, because they are his quintessence--the result and fruit
of all his thought and study; whilst conversation with him may be
unsatisfactory.

So it is that we can read books by men in whose company we find
nothing to please, and that a high degree of culture leads us to seek
entertainment almost wholly from books and not from men.




ON CRITICISM.


The following brief remarks on the critical faculty are chiefly
intended to show that, for the most part, there is no such thing.
It is a _rara avis_; almost as rare, indeed, as the phoenix, which
appears only once in five hundred years.

When we speak of _taste_--an expression not chosen with any regard for
it--we mean the discovery, or, it may be only the recognition, of what
is _right aesthetically_, apart from the guidance of any rule; and
this, either because no rule has as yet been extended to the matter in
question, or else because, if existing, it is unknown to the artist,
or the critic, as the case may be. Instead of _taste_, we might use
the expression _aesthetic sense_, if this were not tautological.

The perceptive critical taste is, so to speak, the female analogue
to the male quality of productive talent or genius. Not capable
of _begetting_ great work itself, it consists in a capacity of
_reception_, that is to say, of recognizing as such what is right,
fit, beautiful, or the reverse; in other words, of discriminating
the good from the bad, of discovering and appreciating the one and
condemning the other.

In appreciating a genius, criticism should not deal with the errors in
his productions or with the poorer of his works, and then proceed to
rate him low; it should attend only to the qualities in which he most
excels. For in the sphere of intellect, as in other spheres, weakness
and perversity cleave so firmly to human nature that even the most
brilliant mind is not wholly and at all times free from them. Hence
the great errors to be found even in the works of the greatest men; or
as Horace puts it, _quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus_.

That which distinguishes genius, and should be the standard for
judging it, is the height to which it is able to soar when it is in
the proper mood and finds a fitting occasion--a height always out
of the reach of ordinary talent. And, in like manner, it is a very
dangerous thing to compare two great men of the same class; for
instance, two great poets, or musicians, or philosophers, or artists;
because injustice to the one or the other, at least for the moment,
can hardly be avoided. For in making a comparison of the kind the
critic looks to some particular merit of the one and at once discovers
that it is absent in the other, who is thereby disparaged. And then
if the process is reversed, and the critic begins with the latter and
discovers his peculiar merit, which is quite of a different order from
that presented by the former, with whom it may be looked for in vain,
the result is that both of them suffer undue depreciation.

There are critics who severally think that it rests with each one of
them what shall be accounted good, and what bad. They all mistake
their own toy-trumpets for the trombones of fame.

A drug does not effect its purpose if the dose is too large; and it
is the same with censure and adverse criticism when it exceeds the
measure of justice.

The disastrous thing for intellectual merit is that it must wait for
those to praise the good who have themselves produced nothing but what
is bad; nay, it is a primary misfortune that it has to receive its
crown at the hands of the critical power of mankind--a quality of
which most men possess only the weak and impotent semblance, so that
the reality may be numbered amongst the rarest gifts of nature. Hence
La Bruyère's remark is, unhappily, as true as it is neat. _Après
l'esprit de discernement_, he says, _ce qu'il y a au monde de plus
rare, ce sont les diamans et les perles_. The spirit of discernment!
the critical faculty! it is these that are lacking. Men do not know
how to distinguish the genuine from the false, the corn from the
chaff, gold from copper; or to perceive the wide gulf that separates
a genius from an ordinary man. Thus we have that bad state of things
described in an old-fashioned verse, which gives it as the lot of the
great ones here on earth to be recognized only when they are gone:

  _Es ist nun das Geschick der Grossen fiier auf Erden,
  Erst wann sie nicht mehr sind; von uns erkannt zu werden._

When any genuine and excellent work makes its appearance, the chief
difficulty in its way is the amount of bad work it finds already in
possession of the field, and accepted as though it were good. And
then if, after a long time, the new comer really succeeds, by a hard
struggle, in vindicating his place for himself and winning reputation,
he will soon encounter fresh difficulty from some affected, dull,
awkward imitator, whom people drag in, with the object of calmly
setting him up on the altar beside the genius; not seeing the
difference and really thinking that here they have to do with another
great man. This is what Yriarte means by the first lines of his
twenty-eighth Fable, where he declares that the ignorant rabble always
sets equal value on the good and the bad:

  _Siempre acostumbra hacer el vulgo necio
  De lo bueno y lo malo igual aprecio_.

So even Shakespeare's dramas had, immediately after his death, to give
place to those of Ben Jonson, Massinger, Beaumont and Fletcher, and to
yield the supremacy for a hundred years. So Kant's serious philosophy
was crowded out by the nonsense of Fichte, Schelling, Jacobi, Hegel.
And even in a sphere accessible to all, we have seen unworthy
imitators quickly diverting public attention from the incomparable
Walter Scott. For, say what you will, the public has no sense for
excellence, and therefore no notion how very rare it is to find men
really capable of doing anything great in poetry, philosophy, or art,
or that their works are alone worthy of exclusive attention. The
dabblers, whether in verse or in any other high sphere, should be
every day unsparingly reminded that neither gods, nor men, nor
booksellers have pardoned their mediocrity:

      _mediocribus esse poetis
  Non homines, non Dî, non concessere columnae_.[1]

[Footnote 1: Horace, _Ars Poetica_, 372.]

Are they not the weeds that prevent the corn coming up, so that they
may cover all the ground themselves? And then there happens that which
has been well and freshly described by the lamented Feuchtersleben,[1]
who died so young: how people cry out in their haste that nothing
is being done, while all the while great work is quietly growing to
maturity; and then, when it appears, it is not seen or heard in the
clamor, but goes its way silently, in modest grief:

  "_Ist doch"--rufen sie vermessen--
  Nichts im Werke, nichts gethan!"
  Und das Grosse, reift indessen
  Still heran_.

  _Es ersheint nun: niemand sieht es,
  Niemand hört es im Geschrei
  Mit bescheid'ner Trauer zieht es
  Still vorbei_.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Ernst Freiherr von Feuchtersleben
(1806-49), an Austrian physician, philosopher, and poet, and a
specialist in medical psychology. The best known of his songs is that
beginning "_Es ist bestimmt in Gottes Rath_" to which Mendelssohn
composed one of his finest melodies.]

This lamentable death of the critical faculty is not less obvious in
the case of science, as is shown by the tenacious life of false and
disproved theories. If they are once accepted, they may go on bidding
defiance to truth for fifty or even a hundred years and more, as
stable as an iron pier in the midst of the waves. The Ptolemaic system
was still held a century after Copernicus had promulgated his theory.
Bacon, Descartes and Locke made their way extremely slowly and only
after a long time; as the reader may see by d'Alembert's celebrated
Preface to the _Encyclopedia_. Newton was not more successful; and
this is sufficiently proved by the bitterness and contempt with which
Leibnitz attacked his theory of gravitation in the controversy with
Clarke.[1] Although Newton lived for almost forty years after the
appearance of the _Principia_, his teaching was, when he died, only
to some extent accepted in his own country, whilst outside England he
counted scarcely twenty adherents; if we may believe the introductory
note to Voltaire's exposition of his theory. It was, indeed, chiefly
owing to this treatise of Voltaire's that the system became known in
France nearly twenty years after Newton's death. Until then a firm,
resolute, and patriotic stand was made by the Cartesian _Vortices_;
whilst only forty years previously, this same Cartesian philosophy had
been forbidden in the French schools; and now in turn d'Agnesseau, the
Chancellor, refused Voltaire the _Imprimatur_ for his treatise on the
Newtonian doctrine. On the other hand, in our day Newton's absurd
theory of color still completely holds the field, forty years after
the publication of Goethe's. Hume, too, was disregarded up to his
fiftieth year, though he began very early and wrote in a thoroughly
popular style. And Kant, in spite of having written and talked all his
life long, did not become a famous man until he was sixty.

[Footnote 1: See especially §§ 35, 113, 118, 120, 122, 128.]

Artists and poets have, to be sure, more chance than thinkers, because
their public is at least a hundred times as large. Still, what was
thought of Beethoven and Mozart during their lives? what of Dante?
what even of Shakespeare? If the latter's contemporaries had in any
way recognized his worth, at least one good and accredited portrait of
him would have come down to us from an age when the art of painting
flourished; whereas we possess only some very doubtful pictures, a
bad copperplate, and a still worse bust on his tomb.[1] And in like
manner, if he had been duly honored, specimens of his handwriting
would have been preserved to us by the hundred, instead of being
confined, as is the case, to the signatures to a few legal documents.
The Portuguese are still proud of their only poet Camoëns. He lived,
however, on alms collected every evening in the street by a black
slave whom he had brought with him from the Indies. In time, no doubt,
justice will be done everyone; _tempo è galant uomo_; but it is
as late and slow in arriving as in a court of law, and the secret
condition of it is that the recipient shall be no longer alive. The
precept of Jesus the son of Sirach is faithfully followed: _Judge none
blessed before his death._[2] He, then, who has produced immortal
works, must find comfort by applying to them the words of the Indian
myth, that the minutes of life amongst the immortals seem like years
of earthly existence; and so, too, that years upon earth are only as
the minutes of the immortals.

[Footnote 1: A. Wivell: _An Inquiry into the History, Authenticity,
and Characteristics of Shakespeare's Portraits_; with 21 engravings.
London, 1836.]

[Footnote 2: _Ecclesiasticus_, xi. 28.]

This lack of critical insight is also shown by the fact that, while
in every century the excellent work of earlier time is held in honor,
that of its own is misunderstood, and the attention which is its due
is given to bad work, such as every decade carries with it only to be
the sport of the next. That men are slow to recognize genuine merit
when it appears in their own age, also proves that they do not
understand or enjoy or really value the long-acknowledged works of
genius, which they honor only on the score of authority. The crucial
test is the fact that bad work--Fichte's philosophy, for example--if
it wins any reputation, also maintains it for one or two generations;
and only when its public is very large does its fall follow sooner.

Now, just as the sun cannot shed its light but to the eye that sees
it, nor music sound but to the hearing ear, so the value of all
masterly work in art and science is conditioned by the kinship and
capacity of the mind to which it speaks. It is only such a mind as
this that possesses the magic word to stir and call forth the spirits
that lie hidden in great work. To the ordinary mind a masterpiece is
a sealed cabinet of mystery,--an unfamiliar musical instrument from
which the player, however much he may flatter himself, can draw none
but confused tones. How different a painting looks when seen in a good
light, as compared with some dark corner! Just in the same way, the
impression made by a masterpiece varies with the capacity of the mind
to understand it.

A fine work, then, requires a mind sensitive to its beauty; a
thoughtful work, a mind that can really think, if it is to exist and
live at all. But alas! it may happen only too often that he who gives
a fine work to the world afterwards feels like a maker of fireworks,
who displays with enthusiasm the wonders that have taken him so much
time and trouble to prepare, and then learns that he has come to the
wrong place, and that the fancied spectators were one and all inmates
of an asylum for the blind. Still even that is better than if his
public had consisted entirely of men who made fireworks themselves; as
in this case, if his display had been extraordinarily good, it might
possibly have cost him his head.

The source of all pleasure and delight is the feeling of kinship. Even
with the sense of beauty it is unquestionably our own species in the
animal world, and then again our own race, that appears to us the
fairest. So, too, in intercourse with others, every man shows a
decided preference for those who resemble him; and a blockhead will
find the society of another blockhead incomparably more pleasant
than that of any number of great minds put together. Every man must
necessarily take his chief pleasure in his own work, because it is the
mirror of his own mind, the echo of his own thought; and next in order
will come the work of people like him; that is to say, a dull, shallow
and perverse man, a dealer in mere words, will give his sincere and
hearty applause only to that which is dull, shallow, perverse or
merely verbose. On the other hand, he will allow merit to the work of
great minds only on the score of authority, in other words, because
he is ashamed to speak his opinion; for in reality they give him no
pleasure at all. They do not appeal to him; nay, they repel him; and
he will not confess this even to himself. The works of genius cannot
be fully enjoyed except by those who are themselves of the privileged
order. The first recognition of them, however, when they exist without
authority to support them, demands considerable superiority of mind.

When the reader takes all this into consideration, he should be
surprised, not that great work is so late in winning reputation, but
that it wins it at all. And as a matter of fact, fame comes only by a
slow and complex process. The stupid person is by degrees forced, and
as it were, tamed, into recognizing the superiority of one who stands
immediately above him; this one in his turn bows before some one else;
and so it goes on until the weight of the votes gradually prevail over
their number; and this is just the condition of all genuine, in other
words, deserved fame. But until then, the greatest genius, even after
he has passed his time of trial, stands like a king amidst a crowd of
his own subjects, who do not know him by sight and therefore will not
do his behests; unless, indeed, his chief ministers of state are in
his train. For no subordinate official can be the direct recipient of
the royal commands, as he knows only the signature of his immediate
superior; and this is repeated all the way up into the highest ranks,
where the under-secretary attests the minister's signature, and the
minister that of the king. There are analogous stages to be passed
before a genius can attain widespread fame. This is why his reputation
most easily comes to a standstill at the very outset; because the
highest authorities, of whom there can be but few, are most frequently
not to be found; but the further down he goes in the scale the more
numerous are those who take the word from above, so that his fame is
no more arrested.

We must console ourselves for this state of things by reflecting that
it is really fortunate that the greater number of men do not form a
judgment on their own responsibility, but merely take it on authority.
For what sort of criticism should we have on Plato and Kant, Homer,
Shakespeare and Goethe, if every man were to form his opinion by what
he really has and enjoys of these writers, instead of being forced by
authority to speak of them in a fit and proper way, however little
he may really feel what he says. Unless something of this kind took
place, it would be impossible for true merit, in any high sphere, to
attain fame at all. At the same time it is also fortunate that every
man has just so much critical power of his own as is necessary for
recognizing the superiority of those who are placed immediately over
him, and for following their lead. This means that the many come in
the end to submit to the authority of the few; and there results that
hierarchy of critical judgments on which is based the possibility of a
steady, and eventually wide-reaching, fame.

The lowest class in the community is quite impervious to the merits
of a great genius; and for these people there is nothing left but the
monument raised to him, which, by the impression it produces on their
senses, awakes in them a dim idea of the man's greatness.

Literary journals should be a dam against the unconscionable
scribbling of the age, and the ever-increasing deluge of bad and
useless books. Their judgments should be uncorrupted, just and
rigorous; and every piece of bad work done by an incapable person;
every device by which the empty head tries to come to the assistance
of the empty purse, that is to say, about nine-tenths of all existing
books, should be mercilessly scourged. Literary journals would then
perform their duty, which is to keep down the craving for writing and
put a check upon the deception of the public, instead of furthering
these evils by a miserable toleration, which plays into the hands of
author and publisher, and robs the reader of his time and his money.

If there were such a paper as I mean, every bad writer, every
brainless compiler, every plagiarist from other's books, every hollow
and incapable place-hunter, every sham-philosopher, every vain and
languishing poetaster, would shudder at the prospect of the pillory
in which his bad work would inevitably have to stand soon after
publication. This would paralyze his twitching fingers, to the true
welfare of literature, in which what is bad is not only useless but
positively pernicious. Now, most books are bad and ought to have
remained unwritten. Consequently praise should be as rare as is now
the case with blame, which is withheld under the influence of personal
considerations, coupled with the maxim _accedas socius, laudes
lauderis ut absens_.

It is quite wrong to try to introduce into literature the same
toleration as must necessarily prevail in society towards those
stupid, brainless people who everywhere swarm in it. In literature
such people are impudent intruders; and to disparage the bad is here
duty towards the good; for he who thinks nothing bad will think
nothing good either. Politeness, which has its source in social
relations, is in literature an alien, and often injurious, element;
because it exacts that bad work shall be called good. In this way the
very aim of science and art is directly frustrated.

The ideal journal could, to be sure, be written only by people who
joined incorruptible honesty with rare knowledge and still rarer power
of judgment; so that perhaps there could, at the very most, be one,
and even hardly one, in the whole country; but there it would stand,
like a just Aeropagus, every member of which would have to be elected
by all the others. Under the system that prevails at present, literary
journals are carried on by a clique, and secretly perhaps also by
booksellers for the good of the trade; and they are often nothing but
coalitions of bad heads to prevent the good ones succeeding. As
Goethe once remarked to me, nowhere is there so much dishonesty as in
literature.

But, above all, anonymity, that shield of all literary rascality,
would have to disappear. It was introduced under the pretext of
protecting the honest critic, who warned the public, against the
resentment of the author and his friends. But where there is one case
of this sort, there will be a hundred where it merely serves to take
all responsibility from the man who cannot stand by what he has said,
or possibly to conceal the shame of one who has been cowardly and base
enough to recommend a book to the public for the purpose of putting
money into his own pocket. Often enough it is only a cloak for
covering the obscurity, incompetence and insignificance of the critic.
It is incredible what impudence these fellows will show, and what
literary trickery they will venture to commit, as soon as they know
they are safe under the shadow of anonymity. Let me recommend a
general _Anti-criticism_, a universal medicine or panacea, to put a
stop to all anonymous reviewing, whether it praises the bad or blames
the good: _Rascal! your name_! For a man to wrap himself up and draw
his hat over his face, and then fall upon people who are walking about
without any disguise--this is not the part of a gentleman, it is the
part of a scoundrel and a knave.

An anonymous review has no more authority than an anonymous letter;
and one should be received with the same mistrust as the other. Or
shall we take the name of the man who consents to preside over what
is, in the strict sense of the word, _une société anonyme_ as a
guarantee for the veracity of his colleagues?

Even Rousseau, in the preface to the _Nouvelle Heloïse_, declares
_tout honnête homme doit avouer les livres qu'il public_; which in
plain language means that every honorable man ought to sign his
articles, and that no one is honorable who does not do so. How much
truer this is of polemical writing, which is the general character
of reviews! Riemer was quite right in the opinion he gives in his
_Reminiscences of Goethe:[1] An overt enemy_, he says, _an enemy
who meets you face to face, is an honorable man, who will treat you
fairly, and with whom you can come to terms and be reconciled: but an
enemy who conceals himself_ is a base, cowardly scoundrel, _who has
not courage enough to avow his own judgment; it is not his opinion
that he cares about, but only the secret pleasures of wreaking his
anger without being found out or punished._ This will also have been
Goethe's opinion, as he was generally the source from which Riemer
drew his observations. And, indeed, Rousseau's maxim applies to
every line that is printed. Would a man in a mask ever be allowed to
harangue a mob, or speak in any assembly; and that, too, when he was
going to attack others and overwhelm them with abuse?

[Footnote 1: Preface, p. xxix.]

Anonymity is the refuge for all literary and journalistic rascality.
It is a practice which must be completely stopped. Every article, even
in a newspaper, should be accompanied by the name of its author; and
the editor should be made strictly responsible for the accuracy of the
signature. The freedom of the press should be thus far restricted; so
that when a man publicly proclaims through the far-sounding trumpet of
the newspaper, he should be answerable for it, at any rate with his
honor, if he has any; and if he has none, let his name neutralize the
effect of his words. And since even the most insignificant person is
known in his own circle, the result of such a measure would be to
put an end to two-thirds of the newspaper lies, and to restrain the
audacity of many a poisonous tongue.




ON REPUTATION.


Writers may be classified as meteors, planets and fixed stars. A
meteor makes a striking effect for a moment. You look up and cry
_There!_ and it is gone for ever. Planets and wandering stars last
a much longer time. They often outshine the fixed stars and are
confounded with them by the inexperienced; but this only because they
are near. It is not long before they must yield their place; nay, the
light they give is reflected only, and the sphere of their influence
is confined to their own orbit--their contemporaries. Their path is
one of change and movement, and with the circuit of a few years their
tale is told. Fixed stars are the only ones that are constant; their
position in the firmament is secure; they shine with a light of their
own; their effect to-day is the same as it was yesterday, because,
having no parallax, their appearance does not alter with a difference
in our standpoint. They belong not to _one_ system, _one_ nation only,
but to the universe. And just because they are so very far away, it is
usually many years before their light is visible to the inhabitants of
this earth.

We have seen in the previous chapter that where a man's merits are of
a high order, it is difficult for him to win reputation, because the
public is uncritical and lacks discernment. But another and no less
serious hindrance to fame comes from the envy it has to encounter. For
even in the lowest kinds of work, envy balks even the beginnings of a
reputation, and never ceases to cleave to it up to the last. How great
a part is played by envy in the wicked ways of the world! Ariosto is
right in saying that the dark side of our mortal life predominates, so
full it is of this evil:

    _questa assai più oscura che serena
  Vita mortal, tutta d'invidia piena_.

For envy is the moving spirit of that secret and informal, though
flourishing, alliance everywhere made by mediocrity against individual
eminence, no matter of what kind. In his own sphere of work no one
will allow another to be distinguished: he is an intruder who cannot
be tolerated. _Si quelq'un excelle parmi nous, qu'il aille exceller
ailleurs_! this is the universal password of the second-rate. In
addition, then, to the rarity of true merit and the difficulty it has
in being understood and recognized, there is the envy of thousands to
be reckoned with, all of them bent on suppressing, nay, on smothering
it altogether. No one is taken for what he is, but for what others
make of him; and this is the handle used by mediocrity to keep down
distinction, by not letting it come up as long as that can possibly be
prevented.

There are two ways of behaving in regard to merit: either to have some
of one's own, or to refuse any to others. The latter method is more
convenient, and so it is generally adopted. As envy is a mere sign
of deficiency, so to envy merit argues the lack of it. My excellent
Balthazar Gracian has given a very fine account of this relation
between envy and merit in a lengthy fable, which may be found in his
_Discreto_ under the heading _Hombre de ostentacion_. He describes
all the birds as meeting together and conspiring against the peacock,
because of his magnificent feathers. _If_, said the magpie, _we could
only manage to put a stop to the cursed parading of his tail, there
would soon be an end of his beauty; for what is not seen is as good as
what does not exist_.

This explains how modesty came to be a virtue. It was invented only as
a protection against envy. That there have always been rascals to urge
this virtue, and to rejoice heartily over the bashfulness of a man of
merit, has been shown at length in my chief work.[1] In Lichtenberg's
_Miscellaneous Writings_ I find this sentence quoted: _Modesty should
be the virtue of those who possess no other_. Goethe has a well-known
saying, which offends many people: _It is only knaves who are
modest_!--_Nur die Lumpen sind bescheiden_! but it has its prototype
in Cervantes, who includes in his _Journey up Parnassus_ certain rules
of conduct for poets, and amongst them the following: _Everyone whose
verse shows him to be a poet should have a high opinion of himself,
relying on the proverb that he is a knave who thinks himself one_.
And Shakespeare, in many of his Sonnets, which gave him the only
opportunity he had of speaking of himself, declares, with a confidence
equal to his ingenuousness, that what he writes is immortal.[2]

[Footnote 1: _Welt als Wille_, Vol. II. c. 37.]

[Footnote 2: Collier, one of his critical editors, in his Introduction
to the Sonettes, remarks upon this point: "In many of them are to be
found most remarkable indications of self-confidence and of assurance
in the immortality of his verses, and in this respect the author's
opinion was constant and uniform. He never scruples to express it,...
and perhaps there is no writer of ancient or modern times who, for the
quantity of such writings left behind him, has so frequently or so
strongly declared that what he had produced in this department of
poetry 'the world would not willingly let die.'"]

A method of underrating good work often used by envy--in reality,
however, only the obverse side of it--consists in the dishonorable and
unscrupulous laudation of the bad; for no sooner does bad work gain
currency than it draws attention from the good. But however effective
this method may be for a while, especially if it is applied on a large
scale, the day of reckoning comes at last, and the fleeting credit
given to bad work is paid off by the lasting discredit which overtakes
those who abjectly praised it. Hence these critics prefer to remain
anonymous.

A like fate threatens, though more remotely, those who depreciate and
censure good work; and consequently many are too prudent to attempt
it. But there is another way; and when a man of eminent merit appears,
the first effect he produces is often only to pique all his rivals,
just as the peacock's tail offended the birds. This reduces them to
a deep silence; and their silence is so unanimous that it savors of
preconcertion. Their tongues are all paralyzed. It is the _silentium
livoris_ described by Seneca. This malicious silence, which is
technically known as _ignoring_, may for a long time interfere with
the growth of reputation; if, as happens in the higher walks of
learning, where a man's immediate audience is wholly composed of rival
workers and professed students, who then form the channel of his fame,
the greater public is obliged to use its suffrage without being able
to examine the matter for itself. And if, in the end, that malicious
silence is broken in upon by the voice of praise, it will be but
seldom that this happens entirely apart from some ulterior aim,
pursued by those who thus manipulate justice. For, as Goethe says in
the _West-östlicher Divan_, a man can get no recognition, either from
many persons or from only one, unless it is to publish abroad the
critic's own discernment:

  _Denn es ist kein Anerkenen,
  Weder Vieler, noch des Einen,
  Wenn es nicht am Tage fördert,
  Wo man selbst was möchte scheinen_.

The credit you allow to another man engaged in work similar to your
own or akin to it, must at bottom be withdrawn from yourself; and you
can praise him only at the expense of your own claims.

Accordingly, mankind is in itself not at all inclined to award praise
and reputation; it is more disposed to blame and find fault, whereby
it indirectly praises itself. If, notwithstanding this, praise is
won from mankind, some extraneous motive must prevail. I am not here
referring to the disgraceful way in which mutual friends will puff one
another into a reputation; outside of that, an effectual motive is
supplied by the feeling that next to the merit of doing something
oneself, comes that of correctly appreciating and recognizing what
others have done. This accords with the threefold division of heads
drawn up by Hesiod[1] and afterwards by Machiavelli[2] _There are_,
says the latter, _in the capacities of mankind, three varieties:
one man will understand a thing by himself; another so far as it is
explained to him; a third, neither of himself nor when it is put
clearly before him_. He, then, who abandons hope of making good his
claims to the first class, will be glad to seize the opportunity of
taking a place in the second. It is almost wholly owing to this state
of things that merit may always rest assured of ultimately meeting
with recognition.

[Footnote 1: _Works and Days_, 293.]

[Footnote 2: _The Prince_, ch. 22.]

To this also is due the fact that when the value of a work has once
been recognized and may no longer be concealed or denied, all men vie
in praising and honoring it; simply because they are conscious
of thereby doing themselves an honor. They act in the spirit of
Xenophon's remark: _he must be a wise man who knows what is wise_.
So when they see that the prize of original merit is for ever out of
their reach, they hasten to possess themselves of that which comes
second best--the correct appreciation of it. Here it happens as with
an army which has been forced to yield; when, just as previously every
man wanted to be foremost in the fight, so now every man tries to
be foremost in running away. They all hurry forward to offer their
applause to one who is now recognized to be worthy of praise, in
virtue of a recognition, as a rule unconscious, of that law of
homogeneity which I mentioned in the last chapter; so that it may seem
as though their way of thinking and looking at things were homogeneous
with that of the celebrated man, and that they may at least save the
honor of their literary taste, since nothing else is left them.

From this it is plain that, whereas it is very difficult to win
fame, it is not hard to keep it when once attained; and also that a
reputation which comes quickly does not last very long; for here
too, _quod cito fit, cito perit_. It is obvious that if the ordinary
average man can easily recognize, and the rival workers willingly
acknowledge, the value of any performance, it will not stand very much
above the capacity of either of them to achieve it for themselves.
_Tantum quisque laudat, quantum se posse sperat imitari_--a man will
praise a thing only so far as he hopes to be able to imitate it
himself. Further, it is a suspicious sign if a reputation comes
quickly; for an application of the laws of homogeneity will show that
such a reputation is nothing but the direct applause of the multitude.
What this means may be seen by a remark once made by Phocion, when he
was interrupted in a speech by the loud cheers of the mob. Turning
to his friends who were standing close by, he asked: _Have I made a
mistake and said something stupid?_[1]

[Footnote 1: Plutarch, _Apophthegms_.]

Contrarily, a reputation that is to last a long time must be slow
in maturing, and the centuries of its duration have generally to be
bought at the cost of contemporary praise. For that which is to keep
its position so long, must be of a perfection difficult to attain; and
even to recognize this perfection requires men who are not always to
be found, and never in numbers sufficiently great to make themselves
heard; whereas envy is always on the watch and doing its best to
smother their voice. But with moderate talent, which soon meets with
recognition, there is the danger that those who possess it will
outlive both it and themselves; so that a youth of fame may be
followed by an old age of obscurity. In the case of great merit, on
the other hand, a man may remain unknown for many years, but make up
for it later on by attaining a brilliant reputation. And if it should
be that this comes only after he is no more, well! he is to be
reckoned amongst those of whom Jean Paul says that extreme unction is
their baptism. He may console himself by thinking of the Saints, who
also are canonized only after they are dead.

Thus what Mahlmann[1] has said so well in _Herodes_ holds good; in
this world truly great work never pleases at once, and the god set up
by the multitude keeps his place on the altar but a short time:

  _Ich denke, das wahre Grosse in der Welt
  Ist immer nur Das was nicht gleich gefällt
  Und wen der Pöbel zum Gotte weiht,
  Der steht auf dem Altar nur kurze Zeit_.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--August Mahlmann (1771-1826),
journalist, poet and story-writer. His _Herodes vor Bethlehem_ is a
parody of Kotzebue's _Hussiten vor Naumburg_.]

It is worth mention that this rule is most directly confirmed in the
case of pictures, where, as connoisseurs well know, the greatest
masterpieces are not the first to attract attention. If they make
a deep impression, it is not after one, but only after repeated,
inspection; but then they excite more and more admiration every time
they are seen.

Moreover, the chances that any given work will be quickly and rightly
appreciated, depend upon two conditions: firstly, the character of
the work, whether high or low, in other words, easy or difficult to
understand; and, secondly, the kind of public it attracts, whether
large or small. This latter condition is, no doubt, in most instances
a, corollary of the former; but it also partly depends upon whether
the work in question admits, like books and musical compositions, of
being produced in great numbers. By the compound action of these two
conditions, achievements which serve no materially useful end--and
these alone are under consideration here--will vary in regard to
the chances they have of meeting with timely recognition and due
appreciation; and the order of precedence, beginning with those who
have the greatest chance, will be somewhat as follows: acrobats,
circus riders, ballet-dancers, jugglers, actors, singers, musicians,
composers, poets (both the last on account of the multiplication of
their works), architects, painters, sculptors, philosophers.

The last place of all is unquestionably taken by philosophers because
their works are meant not for entertainment, but for instruction, and
because they presume some knowledge on the part of the reader, and
require him to make an effort of his own to understand them. This
makes their public extremely small, and causes their fame to be more
remarkable for its length than for its breadth. And, in general, it
may be said that the possibility of a man's fame lasting a long time,
stands in almost inverse ratio with the chance that it will be early
in making its appearance; so that, as regards length of fame, the
above order of precedence may be reversed. But, then, the poet and
the composer will come in the end to stand on the same level as the
philosopher; since, when once a work is committed to writing, it is
possible to preserve it to all time. However, the first place still
belongs by right to the philosopher, because of the much greater
scarcity of good work in this sphere, and the high importance of it;
and also because of the possibility it offers of an almost perfect
translation into any language. Sometimes, indeed, it happens that a
philosopher's fame outlives even his works themselves; as has happened
with Thales, Empedocles, Heraclitus, Democritus, Parmenides, Epicurus
and many others.

My remarks are, as I have said, confined to achievements that are not
of any material use. Work that serves some practical end, or ministers
directly to some pleasure of the senses, will never have any
difficulty in being duly appreciated. No first-rate pastry-cook could
long remain obscure in any town, to say nothing of having to appeal to
posterity.

Under fame of rapid growth is also to be reckoned fame of a false
and artificial kind; where, for instance, a book is worked into a
reputation by means of unjust praise, the help of friends, corrupt
criticism, prompting from above and collusion from below. All this
tells upon the multitude, which is rightly presumed to have no power
of judging for itself. This sort of fame is like a swimming bladder,
by its aid a heavy body may keep afloat. It bears up for a certain
time, long or short according as the bladder is well sewed up and
blown; but still the air comes out gradually, and the body sinks. This
is the inevitable fate of all works which are famous by reason of
something outside of themselves. False praise dies away; collusion
comes to an end; critics declare the reputation ungrounded; it
vanishes, and is replaced by so much the greater contempt. Contrarily,
a genuine work, which, having the source of its fame in itself,
can kindle admiration afresh in every age, resembles a body of low
specific gravity, which always keeps up of its own accord, and so goes
floating down the stream of time.

Men of great genius, whether their work be in poetry, philosophy or
art, stand in all ages like isolated heroes, keeping up single-handed
a desperate struggling against the onslaught of an army of
opponents.[1] Is not this characteristic of the miserable nature of
mankind? The dullness, grossness, perversity, silliness and brutality
of by far the greater part of the race, are always an obstacle to the
efforts of the genius, whatever be the method of his art; they so form
that hostile army to which at last he has to succumb. Let the isolated
champion achieve what he may: it is slow to be acknowledged; it is
late in being appreciated, and then only on the score of authority;
it may easily fall into neglect again, at any rate for a while. Ever
afresh it finds itself opposed by false, shallow, and insipid ideas,
which are better suited to that large majority, that so generally hold
the field. Though the critic may step forth and say, like Hamlet when
he held up the two portraits to his wretched mother, _Have you eyes?
Have you eyes_? alas! they have none. When I watch the behavior of a
crowd of people in the presence of some great master's work, and mark
the manner of their applause, they often remind me of trained monkeys
in a show. The monkey's gestures are, no doubt, much like those of
men; but now and again they betray that the real inward spirit of
these gestures is not in them. Their irrational nature peeps out.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--At this point Schopenhauer
interrupts the thread of his discourse to speak at length upon an
example of false fame. Those who are at all acquainted with the
philosopher's views will not be surprised to find that the writer thus
held up to scorn is Hegel; and readers of the other volumes in this
series will, with the translator, have had by now quite enough of the
subject. The passage is therefore omitted.]

It is often said of a man that _he is in advance of his age_; and it
follows from the above remarks that this must be taken to mean that
he is in advance of humanity in general. Just because of this fact,
a genius makes no direct appeal except to those who are too rare to
allow of their ever forming a numerous body at any one period. If he
is in this respect not particularly favored by fortune, he will
be _misunderstood by his own age_; in other words, he will remain
unaccepted until time gradually brings together the voices of those
few persons who are capable of judging a work of such high character.
Then posterity will say: _This man was in advance of his age_, instead
of _in advance of humanity_; because humanity will be glad to lay the
burden of its own faults upon a single epoch.

Hence, if a man has been superior to his own age, he would also have
been superior to any other; provided that, in that age, by some rare
and happy chance, a few just men, capable of judging in the sphere of
his achievements, had been born at the same time with him; just as
when, according to a beautiful Indian myth, Vischnu becomes incarnate
as a hero, so, too, Brahma at the same time appears as the singer of
his deeds; and hence Valmiki, Vyasa and Kalidasa are incarnations of
Brahma.

In this sense, then, it may be said that every immortal work puts its
age to the proof, whether or no it will be able to recognize the merit
of it. As a rule, the men of any age stand such a test no better than
the neighbors of Philemon and Baucis, who expelled the deities they
failed to recognize. Accordingly, the right standard for judging the
intellectual worth of any generation is supplied, not by the great
minds that make their appearance in it--for their capacities are the
work of Nature, and the possibility of cultivating them a matter of
chance circumstance--but by the way in which contemporaries receive
their works; whether, I mean, they give their applause soon and with
a will, or late and in niggardly fashion, or leave it to be bestowed
altogether by posterity.

This last fate will be especially reserved for works of a high
character. For the happy chance mentioned above will be all the more
certain not to come, in proportion as there are few to appreciate
the kind of work done by great minds. Herein lies the immeasurable
advantage possessed by poets in respect of reputation; because their
work is accessible to almost everyone. If it had been possible for Sir
Walter Scott to be read and criticised by only some hundred persons,
perhaps in his life-time any common scribbler would have been
preferred to him; and afterwards, when he had taken his proper place,
it would also have been said in his honor that he was _in advance of
his age_. But if envy, dishonesty and the pursuit of personal aims are
added to the incapacity of those hundred persons who, in the name of
their generation, are called upon to pass judgment on a work, then
indeed it meets with the same sad fate as attends a suitor who pleads
before a tribunal of judges one and all corrupt.

In corroboration of this, we find that the history of literature
generally shows all those who made knowledge and insight their goal
to have remained unrecognized and neglected, whilst those who
paraded with the vain show of it received the admiration of their
contemporaries, together with the emoluments.

The effectiveness of an author turns chiefly upon his getting the
reputation that he should be read. But by practicing various arts,
by the operation of chance, and by certain natural affinities, this
reputation is quickly won by a hundred worthless people: while a
worthy writer may come by it very slowly and tardily. The former
possess friends to help them; for the rabble is always a numerous body
which holds well together. The latter has nothing but enemies; because
intellectual superiority is everywhere and under all circumstances the
most hateful thing in the world, and especially to bunglers in the
same line of work, who want to pass for something themselves.[1]

[Footnote 1: If the professors of philosophy should chance to think
that I am here hinting at them and the tactics they have for more than
thirty years pursued toward my works, they have hit the nail upon the
head.]

This being so, it is a prime condition for doing any great work--any
work which is to outlive its own age, that a man pay no heed to his
contemporaries, their views and opinions, and the praise or blame
which they bestow. This condition is, however, fulfilled of itself
when a man really does anything great, and it is fortunate that it is
so. For if, in producing such a work, he were to look to the general
opinion or the judgment of his colleagues, they would lead him astray
at every step. Hence, if a man wants to go down to posterity, he must
withdraw from the influence of his own age. This will, of course,
generally mean that he must also renounce any influence upon it, and
be ready to buy centuries of fame by foregoing the applause of his
contemporaries.

For when any new and wide-reaching truth comes into the world--and if
it is new, it must be paradoxical--an obstinate stand will be made
against it as long as possible; nay, people will continue to deny it
even after they slacken their opposition and are almost convinced of
its truth. Meanwhile it goes on quietly working its way, and, like an
acid, undermining everything around it. From time to time a crash is
heard; the old error comes tottering to the ground, and suddenly the
new fabric of thought stands revealed, as though it were a monument
just uncovered. Everyone recognizes and admires it. To be sure, this
all comes to pass for the most part very slowly. As a rule, people
discover a man to be worth listening to only after he is gone; their
_hear, hear_, resounds when the orator has left the platform.

Works of the ordinary type meet with a better fate. Arising as they
do in the course of, and in connection with, the general advance in
contemporary culture, they are in close alliance with the spirit of
their age--in other words, just those opinions which happen to be
prevalent at the time. They aim at suiting the needs of the moment. If
they have any merit, it is soon recognized; and they gain currency as
books which reflect the latest ideas. Justice, nay, more than justice,
is done to them. They afford little scope for envy; since, as was said
above, a man will praise a thing only so far as he hopes to be able to
imitate it himself.

But those rare works which are destined to become the property of all
mankind and to live for centuries, are, at their origin, too far in
advance of the point at which culture happens to stand, and on that
very account foreign to it and the spirit of their own time. They
neither belong to it nor are they in any connection with it, and hence
they excite no interest in those who are dominated by it. They belong
to another, a higher stage of culture, and a time that is still far
off. Their course is related to that of ordinary works as the orbit
of Uranus to the orbit of Mercury. For the moment they get no justice
done to them. People are at a loss how to treat them; so they leave
them alone, and go their own snail's pace for themselves. Does the
worm see the eagle as it soars aloft?

Of the number of books written in any language about one in 100,000
forms a part of its real and permanent literature. What a fate this
one book has to endure before it outstrips those 100,000 and gains its
due place of honor! Such a book is the work of an extraordinary and
eminent mind, and therefore it is specifically different from the
others; a fact which sooner or later becomes manifest.

Let no one fancy that things will ever improve in this respect. No!
the miserable constitution of humanity never changes, though it may,
to be sure, take somewhat varying forms with every generation. A
distinguished mind seldom has its full effect in the life-time of
its possessor; because, at bottom, it is completely and properly
understood only by minds already akin to it.

As it is a rare thing for even one man out of many millions to tread
the path that leads to immortality, he must of necessity be very
lonely. The journey to posterity lies through a horribly dreary
region, like the Lybian desert, of which, as is well known, no one has
any idea who has not seen it for himself. Meanwhile let me before
all things recommend the traveler to take light baggage with him;
otherwise he will have to throw away too much on the road. Let him
never forget the words of Balthazar Gracian: _lo bueno si breve, dos
vezes bueno_--good work is doubly good if it is short. This advice is
specially applicable to my own countrymen.

Compared with the short span of time they live, men of great intellect
are like huge buildings, standing on a small plot of ground. The size
of the building cannot be seen by anyone, just in front of it; nor,
for an analogous reason, can the greatness of a genius be estimated
while he lives. But when a century has passed, the world recognizes it
and wishes him back again.

If the perishable son of time has produced an imperishable work, how
short his own life seems compared with that of his child! He is like
Semela or Maia--a mortal mother who gave birth to an immortal son; or,
contrarily, he is like Achilles in regard to Thetis. What a contrast
there is between what is fleeting and what is permanent! The short
span of a man's life, his necessitous, afflicted, unstable existence,
will seldom allow of his seeing even the beginning of his immortal
child's brilliant career; nor will the father himself be taken for
that which he really is. It may be said, indeed, that a man whose fame
comes after him is the reverse of a nobleman, who is preceded by it.

However, the only difference that it ultimately makes to a man to
receive his fame at the hands of contemporaries rather than from
posterity is that, in the former case, his admirers are separated
from him by space, and in the latter by time. For even in the case
of contemporary fame, a man does not, as a rule, see his admirers
actually before him. Reverence cannot endure close proximity; it
almost always dwells at some distance from its object; and in the
presence of the person revered it melts like butter in the sun.
Accordingly, if a man is celebrated with his contemporaries,
nine-tenths of those amongst whom he lives will let their esteem be
guided by his rank and fortune; and the remaining tenth may perhaps
have a dull consciousness of his high qualities, because they have
heard about him from remote quarters. There is a fine Latin letter of
Petrarch's on this incompatibility between reverence and the presence
of the person, and between fame and life. It comes second in his
_Epistolae familiares?_[1] and it is addressed to Thomas Messanensis.
He there observes, amongst other things, that the learned men of his
age all made it a rule to think little of a man's writings if they had
even once seen him.

[Footnote 1: In the Venetian edition of 1492.]

Since distance, then, is essential if a famous man is to be recognized
and revered, it does not matter whether it is distance of space or of
time. It is true that he may sometimes hear of his fame in the one
case, but never in the other; but still, genuine and great merit may
make up for this by confidently anticipating its posthumous fame.
Nay, he who produces some really great thought is conscious of his
connection with coming generations at the very moment he conceives it;
so that he feels the extension of his existence through centuries
and thus lives _with_ posterity as well as _for_ it. And when, after
enjoying a great man's work, we are seized with admiration for him,
and wish him back, so that we might see and speak with him, and have
him in our possession, this desire of ours is not unrequited; for
he, too, has had his longing for that posterity which will grant
the recognition, honor, gratitude and love denied by envious
contemporaries.

If intellectual works of the highest order are not allowed their due
until they come before the tribunal of posterity, a contrary fate
is prepared for certain brilliant errors which proceed from men of
talent, and appear with an air of being well grounded. These errors
are defended with so much acumen and learning that they actually
become famous with their own age, and maintain their position at least
during their author's lifetime. Of this sort are many false theories
and wrong criticisms; also poems and works of art, which exhibit some
false taste or mannerism favored by contemporary prejudice. They gain
reputation and currency simply because no one is yet forthcoming who
knows how to refute them or otherwise prove their falsity; and when
he appears, as he usually does, in the next generation, the glory of
these works is brought to an end. Posthumous judges, be their decision
favorable to the appellant or not, form the proper court for quashing
the verdict of contemporaries. That is why it is so difficult and so
rare to be victorious alike in both tribunals.

The unfailing tendency of time to correct knowledge and judgment
should always be kept in view as a means of allaying anxiety, whenever
any grievous error appears, whether in art, or science, or practical
life, and gains ground; or when some false and thoroughly perverse
policy of movement is undertaken and receives applause at the hands of
men. No one should be angry, or, still less, despondent; but simply
imagine that the world has already abandoned the error in question,
and now only requires time and experience to recognize of its own
accord that which a clear vision detected at the first glance.

When the facts themselves are eloquent of a truth, there is no need to
rush to its aid with words: for time will give it a thousand tongues.
How long it may be before they speak, will of course depend upon the
difficulty of the subject and the plausibility of the error; but come
they will, and often it would be of no avail to try to anticipate
them. In the worst cases it will happen with theories as it happens
with affairs in practical life; where sham and deception, emboldened
by success, advance to greater and greater lengths, until discovery is
made almost inevitable. It is just so with theories; through the blind
confidence of the blockheads who broach them, their absurdity reaches
such a pitch that at last it is obvious even to the dullest eye. We
may thus say to such people: _the wilder your statements, the better_.

There is also some comfort to be found in reflecting upon all the
whims and crotchets which had their day and have now utterly vanished.
In style, in grammar, in spelling, there are false notions of this
sort which last only three or four years. But when the errors are on
a large scale, while we lament the brevity of human life, we shall
in any case, do well to lag behind our own age when we see it on a
downward path. For there are two ways of not keeping on a level with
the times. A man may be below it; or he may be above it.




ON GENIUS.


No difference of rank, position, or birth, is so great as the gulf
that separates the countless millions who use their head only in the
service of their belly, in other words, look upon it as an instrument
of the will, and those very few and rare persons who have the courage
to say: No! it is too good for that; my head shall be active only in
its own service; it shall try to comprehend the wondrous and varied
spectacle of this world, and then reproduce it in some form, whether
as art or as literature, that may answer to my character as an
individual. These are the truly noble, the real _noblesse_ of the
world. The others are serfs and go with the soil--_glebae adscripti_.
Of course, I am here referring to those who have not only the courage,
but also the call, and therefore the right, to order the head to quit
the service of the will; with a result that proves the sacrifice to
have been worth the making. In the case of those to whom all this can
only partially apply, the gulf is not so wide; but even though their
talent be small, so long as it is real, there will always be a sharp
line of demarcation between them and the millions.[1]

[Footnote 1: The correct scale for adjusting the hierarchy of
intelligences is furnished by the degree in which the mind takes
merely individual or approaches universal views of things. The brute
recognizes only the individual as such: its comprehension does not
extend beyond the limits of the individual. But man reduces the
individual to the general; herein lies the exercise of his reason; and
the higher his intelligence reaches, the nearer do his general ideas
approach the point at which they become universal.]

The works of fine art, poetry and philosophy produced by a nation are
the outcome of the superfluous intellect existing in it.

For him who can understand aright--_cum grano salis_--the relation
between the genius and the normal man may, perhaps, be best expressed
as follows: A genius has a double intellect, one for himself and the
service of his will; the other for the world, of which he becomes the
mirror, in virtue of his purely objective attitude towards it. The
work of art or poetry or philosophy produced by the genius is
simply the result, or quintessence, of this contemplative attitude,
elaborated according to certain technical rules.

The normal man, on the other hand, has only a single intellect, which
may be called _subjective_ by contrast with the _objective_ intellect
of genius. However acute this subjective intellect may be--and it
exists in very various degrees of perfection--it is never on the same
level with the double intellect of genius; just as the open chest
notes of the human voice, however high, are essentially different from
the falsetto notes. These, like the two upper octaves of the flute
and the harmonics of the violin, are produced by the column of air
dividing itself into two vibrating halves, with a node between them;
while the open chest notes of the human voice and the lower octave of
the flute are produced by the undivided column of air vibrating as
a whole. This illustration may help the reader to understand that
specific peculiarity of genius which is unmistakably stamped on the
works, and even on the physiognomy, of him who is gifted with it. At
the same time it is obvious that a double intellect like this must, as
a rule, obstruct the service of the will; and this explains the poor
capacity often shown by genius in the conduct of life. And what
specially characterizes genius is that it has none of that sobriety of
temper which is always to be found in the ordinary simple intellect,
be it acute or dull.

The brain may be likened to a parasite which is nourished as a part of
the human frame without contributing directly to its inner economy;
it is securely housed in the topmost story, and there leads a
self-sufficient and independent life. In the same way it may be said
that a man endowed with great mental gifts leads, apart from the
individual life common to all, a second life, purely of the intellect.
He devotes himself to the constant increase, rectification and
extension, not of mere learning, but of real systematic knowledge
and insight; and remains untouched by the fate that overtakes him
personally, so long as it does not disturb him in his work. It is thus
a life which raises a man and sets him above fate and its changes.
Always thinking, learning, experimenting, practicing his knowledge,
the man soon comes to look upon this second life as the chief mode
of existence, and his merely personal life as something subordinate,
serving only to advance ends higher than itself.

An example of this independent, separate existence is furnished by
Goethe. During the war in the Champagne, and amid all the bustle of
the camp, he made observations for his theory of color; and as soon as
the numberless calamities of that war allowed of his retiring for a
short time to the fortress of Luxembourg, he took up the manuscript of
his _Farbenlehre_. This is an example which we, the salt of the earth,
should endeavor to follow, by never letting anything disturb us in the
pursuit of our intellectual life, however much the storm of the world
may invade and agitate our personal environment; always remembering
that we are the sons, not of the bondwoman, but of the free. As our
emblem and coat of arms, I propose a tree mightily shaken by the wind,
but still bearing its ruddy fruit on every branch; with the motto _Dum
convellor mitescunt_, or _Conquassata sed ferax._

That purely intellectual life of the individual has its counterpart in
humanity as a whole. For there, too, the real life is the life of the
_will_, both in the empirical and in the transcendental meaning of the
word. The purely intellectual life of humanity lies in its effort to
increase knowledge by means of the sciences, and its desire to perfect
the arts. Both science and art thus advance slowly from one generation
to another, and grow with the centuries, every race as it hurries by
furnishing its contribution. This intellectual life, like some gift
from heaven, hovers over the stir and movement of the world; or it
is, as it were, a sweet-scented air developed out of the ferment
itself--the real life of mankind, dominated by will; and side by side
with the history of nations, the history of philosophy, science and
art takes its innocent and bloodless way.

The difference between the genius and the ordinary man is, no doubt, a
_quantitative_ one, in so far as it is a difference of degree; but I
am tempted to regard it also as _qualitative_, in view of the fact
that ordinary minds, notwithstanding individual variation, have a
certain tendency to think alike. Thus on similar occasions their
thoughts at once all take a similar direction, and run on the same
lines; and this explains why their judgments constantly agree--not,
however, because they are based on truth. To such lengths does this go
that certain fundamental views obtain amongst mankind at all times,
and are always being repeated and brought forward anew, whilst the
great minds of all ages are in open or secret opposition to them.

A genius is a man in whose mind the world is presented as an object
is presented in a mirror, but with a degree more of clearness and a
greater distinction of outline than is attained by ordinary people.
It is from him that humanity may look for most instruction; for the
deepest insight into the most important matters is to be acquired, not
by an observant attention to detail, but by a close study of things as
a whole. And if his mind reaches maturity, the instruction he gives
will be conveyed now in one form, now in another. Thus genius may be
defined as an eminently clear consciousness of things in general, and
therefore, also of that which is opposed to them, namely, one's own
self.

The world looks up to a man thus endowed, and expects to learn
something about life and its real nature. But several highly favorable
circumstances must combine to produce genius, and this is a very rare
event. It happens only now and then, let us say once in a century,
that a man is born whose intellect so perceptibly surpasses the
normal measure as to amount to that second faculty which seems to be
accidental, as it is out of all relation to the will. He may remain
a long time without being recognized or appreciated, stupidity
preventing the one and envy the other. But should this once come to
pass, mankind will crowd round him and his works, in the hope that he
may be able to enlighten some of the darkness of their existence or
inform them about it. His message is, to some extent, a revelation,
and he himself a higher being, even though he may be but little above
the ordinary standard.

Like the ordinary man, the genius is what he is chiefly for himself.
This is essential to his nature: a fact which can neither be avoided
nor altered, he may be for others remains a matter of chance and of
secondary importance. In no case can people receive from his mind
more than a reflection, and then only when he joins with them in the
attempt to get his thought into their heads; where, however, it is
never anything but an exotic plant, stunted and frail.

In order to have original, uncommon, and perhaps even immortal
thoughts, it is enough to estrange oneself so fully from the world of
things for a few moments, that the most ordinary objects and events
appear quite new and unfamiliar. In this way their true nature is
disclosed. What is here demanded cannot, perhaps, be said to be
difficult; it is not in our power at all, but is just the province of
genius.

By itself, genius can produce original thoughts just as little as a
woman by herself can bear children. Outward circumstances must come to
fructify genius, and be, as it were, a father to its progeny.

The mind of genius is among other minds what the carbuncle is among
precious stones: it sends forth light of its own, while the others
reflect only that which they have received. The relation of the
genius to the ordinary mind may also be described as that of
an idio-electrical body to one which merely is a conductor of
electricity.

The mere man of learning, who spends his life in teaching what he
has learned, is not strictly to be called a man of genius; just as
idio-electrical bodies are not conductors. Nay, genius stands to mere
learning as the words to the music in a song. A man of learning is a
man who has learned a great deal; a man of genius, one from whom we
learn something which the genius has learned from nobody. Great minds,
of which there is scarcely one in a hundred millions, are thus the
lighthouses of humanity; and without them mankind would lose itself in
the boundless sea of monstrous error and bewilderment.

And so the simple man of learning, in the strict sense of the
word--the ordinary professor, for instance--looks upon the genius much
as we look upon a hare, which is good to eat after it has been killed
and dressed up. So long as it is alive, it is only good to shoot at.

He who wishes to experience gratitude from his contemporaries, must
adjust his pace to theirs. But great things are never produced in
this way. And he who wants to do great things must direct his gaze
to posterity, and in firm confidence elaborate his work for coming
generations. No doubt, the result may be that he will remain quite
unknown to his contemporaries, and comparable to a man who, compelled
to spend his life upon a lonely island, with great effort sets up a
monument there, to transmit to future sea-farers the knowledge of his
existence. If he thinks it a hard fate, let him console himself with
the reflection that the ordinary man who lives for practical aims
only, often suffers a like fate, without having any compensation to
hope for; inasmuch as he may, under favorable conditions, spend a life
of material production, earning, buying, building, fertilizing,
laying out, founding, establishing, beautifying with daily effort
and unflagging zeal, and all the time think that he is working for
himself; and yet in the end it is his descendants who reap the benefit
of it all, and sometimes not even his descendants. It is the same with
the man of genius; he, too, hopes for his reward and for honor at
least; and at last finds that he has worked for posterity alone. Both,
to be sure, have inherited a great deal from their ancestors.

The compensation I have mentioned as the privilege of genius lies, not
in what it is to others, but in what it is to itself. What man has in
any real sense lived more than he whose moments of thought make their
echoes heard through the tumult of centuries? Perhaps, after all, it
would be the best thing for a genius to attain undisturbed possession
of himself, by spending his life in enjoying the pleasure of his own
thoughts, his own works, and by admitting the world only as the heir
of his ample existence. Then the world would find the mark of his
existence only after his death, as it finds that of the Ichnolith.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note._--For an illustration of this feeling
in poetry, Schopenhauer refers the reader to Byron's _Prophecy of
Dante_: introd. to C. 4.]

It is not only in the activity of his highest powers that the genius
surpasses ordinary people. A man who is unusually well-knit, supple
and agile, will perform all his movements with exceptional ease, even
with comfort, because he takes a direct pleasure in an activity for
which he is particularly well-equipped, and therefore often exercises
it without any object. Further, if he is an acrobat or a dancer, not
only does he take leaps which other people cannot execute, but he also
betrays rare elasticity and agility in those easier steps which others
can also perform, and even in ordinary walking. In the same way a man
of superior mind will not only produce thoughts and works which could
never have come from another; it will not be here alone that he will
show his greatness; but as knowledge and thought form a mode of
activity natural and easy to him, he will also delight himself in them
at all times, and so apprehend small matters which are within the
range of other minds, more easily, quickly and correctly than they.
Thus he will take a direct and lively pleasure in every increase of
Knowledge, every problem solved, every witty thought, whether of his
own or another's; and so his mind will have no further aim than to be
constantly active. This will be an inexhaustible spring of delight;
and boredom, that spectre which haunts the ordinary man, can never
come near him.

Then, too, the masterpieces of past and contemporary men of genius
exist in their fullness for him alone. If a great product of genius
is recommended to the ordinary, simple mind, it will take as much
pleasure in it as the victim of gout receives in being invited to a
ball. The one goes for the sake of formality, and the other reads the
book so as not to be in arrear. For La Bruyère was quite right when he
said: _All the wit in the world is lost upon him who has none_. The
whole range of thought of a man of talent, or of a genius, compared
with the thoughts of the common man, is, even when directed to objects
essentially the same, like a brilliant oil-painting, full of life,
compared with a mere outline or a weak sketch in water-color.

All this is part of the reward of genius, and compensates him for a
lonely existence in a world with which he has nothing in common and
no sympathies. But since size is relative, it comes to the same thing
whether I say, Caius was a great man, or Caius has to live amongst
wretchedly small people: for Brobdingnack and Lilliput vary only
in the point from which they start. However great, then, however
admirable or instructive, a long posterity may think the author
of immortal works, during his lifetime he will appear to his
contemporaries small, wretched, and insipid in proportion. This is
what I mean by saying that as there are three hundred degrees from the
base of a tower to the summit, so there are exactly three hundred
from the summit to the base. Great minds thus owe little ones some
indulgence; for it is only in virtue of these little minds that they
themselves are great.

Let us, then, not be surprised if we find men of genius generally
unsociable and repellent. It is not their want of sociability that is
to blame. Their path through the world is like that of a man who goes
for a walk on a bright summer morning. He gazes with delight on the
beauty and freshness of nature, but he has to rely wholly on that for
entertainment; for he can find no society but the peasants as they
bend over the earth and cultivate the soil. It is often the case that
a great mind prefers soliloquy to the dialogue he may have in this
world. If he condescends to it now and then, the hollowness of it may
possibly drive him back to his soliloquy; for in forgetfulness of his
interlocutor, or caring little whether he understands or not, he talks
to him as a child talks to a doll.

Modesty in a great mind would, no doubt, be pleasing to the world;
but, unluckily, it is a _contradictio in adjecto_. It would compel a
genius to give the thoughts and opinions, nay, even the method and
style, of the million preference over his own; to set a higher value
upon them; and, wide apart as they are, to bring his views into
harmony with theirs, or even suppress them altogether, so as to let
the others hold the field. In that case, however, he would either
produce nothing at all, or else his achievements would be just upon a
level with theirs. Great, genuine and extraordinary work can be done
only in so far as its author disregards the method, the thoughts, the
opinions of his contemporaries, and quietly works on, in spite of
their criticism, on his side despising what they praise. No one
becomes great without arrogance of this sort. Should his life and work
fall upon a time which cannot recognize and appreciate him, he is at
any rate true to himself; like some noble traveler forced to pass the
night in a miserable inn; when morning comes, he contentedly goes his
way.

A poet or philosopher should have no fault to find with his age if it
only permits him to do his work undisturbed in his own corner; nor
with his fate if the corner granted him allows of his following his
vocation without having to think about other people.

For the brain to be a mere laborer in the service of the belly, is
indeed the common lot of almost all those who do not live on the work
of their hands; and they are far from being discontented with
their lot. But it strikes despair into a man of great mind, whose
brain-power goes beyond the measure necessary for the service of
the will; and he prefers, if need be, to live in the narrowest
circumstances, so long as they afford him the free use of his time for
the development and application of his faculties; in other words, if
they give him the leisure which is invaluable to him.

It is otherwise with ordinary people: for them leisure has no value in
itself, nor is it, indeed, without its dangers, as these people
seem to know. The technical work of our time, which is done to an
unprecedented perfection, has, by increasing and multiplying objects
of luxury, given the favorites of fortune a choice between more
leisure and culture upon the one side, and additional luxury and good
living, but with increased activity, upon the other; and, true to
their character, they choose the latter, and prefer champagne to
freedom. And they are consistent in their choice; for, to them, every
exertion of the mind which does not serve the aims of the will is
folly. Intellectual effort for its own sake, they call eccentricity.
Therefore, persistence in the aims of the will and the belly will be
concentricity; and, to be sure, the will is the centre, the kernel of
the world.

But in general it is very seldom that any such alternative is
presented. For as with money, most men have no superfluity, but only
just enough for their needs, so with intelligence; they possess just
what will suffice for the service of the will, that is, for the
carrying on of their business. Having made their fortune, they are
content to gape or to indulge in sensual pleasures or childish
amusements, cards or dice; or they will talk in the dullest way, or
dress up and make obeisance to one another. And how few are those who
have even a little superfluity of intellectual power! Like the others
they too make themselves a pleasure; but it is a pleasure of the
intellect. Either they will pursue some liberal study which brings
them in nothing, or they will practice some art; and in general, they
will be capable of taking an objective interest in things, so that
it will be possible to converse with them. But with the others it is
better not to enter into any relations at all; for, except when they
tell the results of their own experience or give an account of their
special vocation, or at any rate impart what they have learned from
some one else, their conversation will not be worth listening to; and
if anything is said to them, they will rarely grasp or understand it
aright, and it will in most cases be opposed to their own opinions.
Balthazar Gracian describes them very strikingly as men who are not
men--_hombres che non lo son_. And Giordano Bruno _says_ the same
thing: _What a difference there is in having to do with men compared
with those who are only made in their image and likeness_![1] And how
wonderfully this passage agrees with that remark in the Kurral: _The
common people look like men but I have never seen anything quite like
them_. If the reader will consider the extent to which these ideas
agree in thought and even in expression, and in the wide difference
between them in point of date and nationality, he cannot doubt but
that they are at one with the facts of life. It was certainly not
under the influence of those passages that, about twenty years ago, I
tried to get a snuff-box made, the lid of which should have two fine
chestnuts represented upon it, if possible in mosaic; together with a
leaf which was to show that they were horse-chestnuts. This symbol was
meant to keep the thought constantly before my mind. If anyone wishes
for entertainment, such as will prevent him feeling solitary even when
he is alone, let me recommend the company of dogs, whose moral and
intellectual qualities may almost afford delight and gratification.

[Footnote 1: Opera: ed. Wagner, 1. 224.]

Still, we should always be careful to avoid being unjust. I am often
surprised by the cleverness, and now and again by the stupidity of my
dog; and I have similar experiences with mankind. Countless times,
in indignation at their incapacity, their total lack of discernment,
their bestiality, I have been forced to echo the old complaint that
folly is the mother and the nurse of the human race:

  _Humani generis mater nutrixque profecto
  Stultitia est_.

But at other times I have been astounded that from such a race there
could have gone forth so many arts and sciences, abounding in so much
use and beauty, even though it has always been the few that produce
them. Yet these arts and sciences have struck root, established and
perfected themselves: and the race has with persistent fidelity
preserved Homer, Plato, Horace and others for thousands of years, by
copying and treasuring their writings, thus saving them from oblivion,
in spite of all the evils and atrocities that have happened in the
world. Thus the race has proved that it appreciates the value of these
things, and at the same time it can form a correct view of special
achievements or estimate signs of judgment and intelligence. When this
takes place amongst those who belong to the great multitude, it is by
a kind of inspiration. Sometimes a correct opinion will be formed by
the multitude itself; but this is only when the chorus of praise
has grown full and complete. It is then like the sound of untrained
voices; where there are enough of them, it is always harmonious.

Those who emerge from the multitude, those who are called men of
genius, are merely the _lucida intervalla_ of the whole human race.
They achieve that which others could not possibly achieve. Their
originality is so great that not only is their divergence from others
obvious, but their individuality is expressed with such force, that
all the men of genius who have ever existed show, every one of them,
peculiarities of character and mind; so that the gift of his works is
one which he alone of all men could ever have presented to the world.
This is what makes that simile of Ariosto's so true and so justly
celebrated: _Natura lo fece e poi ruppe lo stampo._ After Nature
stamps a man of genius, she breaks the die.

But there is always a limit to human capacity; and no one can be a
great genius without having some decidedly weak side, it may even be,
some intellectual narrowness. In other words, there will foe some
faculty in which he is now and then inferior to men of moderate
endowments. It will be a faculty which, if strong, might have been an
obstacle to the exercise of the qualities in which he excels. What
this weak point is, it will always be hard to define with any accuracy
even in a given case. It may be better expressed indirectly; thus
Plato's weak point is exactly that in which Aristotle is strong, and
_vice versa_; and so, too, Kant is deficient just where Goethe is
great.

Now, mankind is fond of venerating something; but its veneration is
generally directed to the wrong object, and it remains so directed
until posterity comes to set it right. But the educated public is
no sooner set right in this, than the honor which is due to genius
degenerates; just as the honor which the faithful pay to their saints
easily passes into a frivolous worship of relics. Thousands of
Christians adore the relics of a saint whose life and doctrine are
unknown to them; and the religion of thousands of Buddhists lies more
in veneration of the Holy Tooth or some such object, or the vessel
that contains it, or the Holy Bowl, or the fossil footstep, or the
Holy Tree which Buddha planted, than in the thorough knowledge and
faithful practice of his high teaching. Petrarch's house in Arqua;
Tasso's supposed prison in Ferrara; Shakespeare's house in Stratford,
with his chair; Goethe's house in Weimar, with its furniture; Kant's
old hat; the autographs of great men; these things are gaped at with
interest and awe by many who have never read their works. They cannot
do anything more than just gape.

The intelligent amongst them are moved by the wish to see the objects
which the great man habitually had before his eyes; and by a strange
illusion, these produce the mistaken notion that with the objects they
are bringing back the man himself, or that something of him must
cling to them. Akin to such people are those who earnestly strive to
acquaint themselves with the subject-matter of a poet's works, or to
unravel the personal circumstances and events in his life which have
suggested particular passages. This is as though the audience in a
theatre were to admire a fine scene and then rush upon the stage to
look at the scaffolding that supports it. There are in our day enough
instances of these critical investigators, and they prove the truth of
the saying that mankind is interested, not in the _form_ of a work,
that is, in its manner of treatment, but in its actual matter. All it
cares for is the theme. To read a philosopher's biography, instead of
studying his thoughts, is like neglecting a picture and attending only
to the style of its frame, debating whether it is carved well or ill,
and how much it cost to gild it.

This is all very well. However, there is another class of
persons whose interest is also directed to material and personal
considerations, but they go much further and carry it to a point where
it becomes absolutely futile. Because a great man has opened up to
them the treasures of his inmost being, and, by a supreme effort
of his faculties, produced works which not only redound to their
elevation and enlightenment, but will also benefit their posterity to
the tenth and twentieth generation; because he has presented mankind
with a matchless gift, these varlets think themselves justified in
sitting in judgment upon his personal morality, and trying if they
cannot discover here or there some spot in him which will soothe the
pain they feel at the sight of so great a mind, compared with the
overwhelming feeling of their own nothingness.

This is the real source of all those prolix discussions, carried on in
countless books and reviews, on the moral aspect of Goethe's life, and
whether he ought not to have married one or other of the girls with
whom he fell in love in his young days; whether, again, instead of
honestly devoting himself to the service of his master, he should not
have been a man of the people, a German patriot, worthy of a seat in
the _Paulskirche_, and so on. Such crying ingratitude and malicious
detraction prove that these self-constituted judges are as great
knaves morally as they are intellectually, which is saying a great
deal.

A man of talent will strive for money and reputation; but the spring
that moves genius to the production of its works is not as easy to
name. Wealth is seldom its reward. Nor is it reputation or glory; only
a Frenchman could mean that. Glory is such an uncertain thing, and,
if you look at it closely, of so little value. Besides it never
corresponds to the effort you have made:

  _Responsura tuo nunquam est par fama labori._

Nor, again, is it exactly the pleasure it gives you; for this is
almost outweighed by the greatness of the effort. It is rather a
peculiar kind of instinct, which drives the man of genius to give
permanent form to what he sees and feels, without being conscious of
any further motive. It works, in the main, by a necessity similar to
that which makes a tree bear its fruit; and no external condition is
needed but the ground upon which it is to thrive.

On a closer examination, it seems as though, in the case of a genius,
the will to live, which is the spirit of the human species, were
conscious of having, by some rare chance, and for a brief period,
attained a greater clearness of vision, and were now trying to secure
it, or at least the outcome of it, for the whole species, to which the
individual genius in his inmost being belongs; so that the light which
he sheds about him may pierce the darkness and dullness of ordinary
human consciousness and there produce some good effect.

Arising in some such way, this instinct drives the genius to carry
his work to completion, without thinking of reward or applause or
sympathy; to leave all care for his own personal welfare; to make his
life one of industrious solitude, and to strain his faculties to
the utmost. He thus comes to think more about posterity than about
contemporaries; because, while the latter can only lead him astray,
posterity forms the majority of the species, and time will gradually
bring the discerning few who can appreciate him. Meanwhile it is with
him as with the artist described by Goethe; he has no princely patron
to prize his talents, no friend to rejoice with him:

  _Ein Fürst der die Talente schätzt,
  Ein Freund, der sich mit mir ergötzt,
  Die haben leider mir gefehlt_.

His work is, as it were, a sacred object and the true fruit of his
life, and his aim in storing it away for a more discerning posterity
will be to make it the property of mankind. An aim like this far
surpasses all others, and for it he wears the crown of thorns which
is one day to bloom into a wreath of laurel. All his powers are
concentrated in the effort to complete and secure his work; just as
the insect, in the last stage of its development, uses its whole
strength on behalf of a brood it will never live to see; it puts its
eggs in some place of safety, where, as it well knows, the young will
one day find life and nourishment, and then dies in confidence.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Art of Literature, by Arthur Schopenhauer


================================================================================
[Religion, A Dialogue (종교 대화)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Essays of Arthur Schopenhauer; Counsels and Maxims
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Essays of Arthur Schopenhauer; Counsels and Maxims

Author: Arthur Schopenhauer

Translator: T. Bailey Saunders


        
Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #10715]
                Most recently updated: October 28, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10715

Credits: Etext produced by Juliet Sutherland, Josephine Paolucci and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team.
        
        HTML file produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ESSAYS OF ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER; COUNSELS AND MAXIMS ***

THE ESSAYS

OF

ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER


TRANSLATED BY

T. BAILEY SAUNDERS, M.A.




COUNSELS AND MAXIMS.

  _Le bonheur n'est pas chose aisée: il est
  très difficile de le trouver en nous, et impossible
  de le trouver ailleurs_.

CHAMFORT.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER

  INTRODUCTION
  I.   GENERAL RULES
  II.  OUR RELATION TO OURSELVES
  III. OUR RELATION TO OTHERS
  IV.  WORLDLY FORTUNE
  V.   THE AGES OF LIFE




INTRODUCTION.

If my object in these pages were to present a complete scheme of
counsels and maxims for the guidance of life, I should have to repeat
the numerous rules--some of them excellent--which have been drawn
up by thinkers of all ages, from Theognis and Solomon[1] down to La
Rochefoucauld; and, in so doing, I should inevitably entail upon the
reader a vast amount of well-worn commonplace. But the fact is that in
this work I make still less claim to exhaust my subject than in any
other of my writings.

[Footnote 1: I refer to the proverbs and maxims ascribed, in the Old
Testament, to the king of that name.]

An author who makes no claims to completeness must also, in a great
measure, abandon any attempt at systematic arrangement. For his double
loss in this respect, the reader may console himself by reflecting
that a complete and systematic treatment of such a subject as the
guidance of life could hardly fail to be a very wearisome business.
I have simply put down those of my thoughts which appear to be worth
communicating--thoughts which, as far as I know, have not been
uttered, or, at any rate, not just in the same form, by any one else;
so that my remarks may be taken as a supplement to what has been
already achieved in the immense field.

However, by way of introducing some sort of order into the great
variety of matters upon which advice will be given in the following
pages, I shall distribute what I have to say under the following
heads: (1) general rules; (2) our relation to ourselves; (3) our
relation to others; and finally, (4) rules which concern our manner of
life and our worldly circumstances. I shall conclude with some remarks
on the changes which the various periods of life produce in us.




CHAPTER I.

GENERAL RULES.--SECTION 1.


The first and foremost rule for the wise conduct of life seems to me
to be contained in a view to which Aristotle parenthetically refers in
the _Nichomachean Ethics_:[1] [Greek: o phronimoz to alupon dioke e ou
to aedu] or, as it may be rendered, _not pleasure, but freedom from
pain, is what the wise man will aim at_.

[Footnote 1: vii. (12) 12.]

The truth of this remark turns upon the negative character of
happiness,--the fact that pleasure is only the negation of pain, and
that pain is the positive element in life. Though I have given a
detailed proof of this proposition in my chief work,[1] I may supply
one more illustration of it here, drawn from a circumstance of daily
occurrence. Suppose that, with the exception of some sore or painful
spot, we are physically in a sound and healthy condition: the sore of
this one spot, will completely absorb our attention, causing us to
lose the sense of general well-being, and destroying all our comfort
in life. In the same way, when all our affairs but one turn out as
we wish, the single instance in which our aims are frustrated is a
constant trouble to us, even though it be something quite trivial. We
think a great deal about it, and very little about those other and
more important matters in which we have been successful. In both these
cases what has met with resistance is _the will_; in the one case, as
it is objectified in the organism, in the other, as it presents
itself in the struggle of life; and in both, it is plain that the
satisfaction of the will consists in nothing else than that it meets
with no resistance. It is, therefore, a satisfaction which is not
directly felt; at most, we can become conscious of it only when we
reflect upon our condition. But that which checks or arrests the will
is something positive; it proclaims its own presence. All pleasure
consists in merely removing this check--in other words, in freeing us
from its action; and hence pleasure is a state which can never last
very long.

[Footnote 1: _Welt als Wille und Vorstellung_. Vol. I., p. 58.]

This is the true basis of the above excellent rule quoted from
Aristotle, which bids us direct our aim, not toward securing what is
pleasurable and agreeable in life, but toward avoiding, as far as
possible, its innumerable evils. If this were not the right course to
take, that saying of Voltaire's, _Happiness is but a dream and sorrow
is real_, would be as false as it is, in fact, true. A man who desires
to make up the book of his life and determine where the balance of
happiness lies, must put down in his accounts, not the pleasures which
he has enjoyed, but the evils which he has escaped. That is the
true method of eudaemonology; for all eudaemonology must begin by
recognizing that its very name is a euphemism, and that _to live
happily_ only means _to live less unhappily_--to live a tolerable
life. There is no doubt that life is given us, not to be enjoyed,
but to be overcome--to be got over. There are numerous expressions
illustrating this--such as _degere vitam, vita defungi_; or
in Italian, _si scampa cosi_; or in German, _man muss suchen
durchzukommen; er wird schon durch die Welt kommen_, and so on. In old
age it is indeed a consolation to think that the work of life is over
and done with. The happiest lot is not to have experienced the keenest
delights or the greatest pleasures, but to have brought life to a
close without any very great pain, bodily or mental. To measure the
happiness of a life by its delights or pleasures, is to apply a false
standard. For pleasures are and remain something negative; that
they produce happiness is a delusion, cherished by envy to its own
punishment. Pain is felt to be something positive, and hence its
absence is the true standard of happiness. And if, over and above
freedom from pain, there is also an absence of boredom, the essential
conditions of earthly happiness are attained; for all else is
chimerical.

It follows from this that a man should never try to purchase pleasure
at the cost of pain, or even at the risk of incurring it; to do so is
to pay what is positive and real, for what is negative and illusory;
while there is a net profit in sacrificing pleasure for the sake of
avoiding pain. In either case it is a matter of indifference whether
the pain follows the pleasure or precedes it. While it is a complete
inversion of the natural order to try and turn this scene of misery
into a garden of pleasure, to aim at joy and pleasure rather than
at the greatest possible freedom from pain--and yet how many do
it!--there is some wisdom in taking a gloomy view, in looking upon the
world as a kind of Hell, and in confining one's efforts to securing
a little room that shall not be exposed to the fire. The fool rushes
after the pleasures of life and finds himself their dupe; the wise man
avoids its evils; and even if, notwithstanding his precautions, he
falls into misfortunes, that is the fault of fate, not of his own
folly. As far as he is successful in his endeavors, he cannot be said
to have lived a life of illusion; for the evils which he shuns are
very real. Even if he goes too far out of his way to avoid evils, and
makes an unnecessary sacrifice of pleasure, he is, in reality, not the
worse off for that; for all pleasures are chimerical, and to mourn
for having lost any of them is a frivolous, and even ridiculous
proceeding.

The failure to recognize this truth--a failure promoted by optimistic
ideas--is the source of much unhappiness. In moments free from pain,
our restless wishes present, as it were in a mirror, the image of a
happiness that has no counterpart in reality, seducing us to follow
it; in doing so we bring pain upon ourselves, and that is something
undeniably real. Afterwards, we come to look with regret upon that
lost state of painlessness; it is a paradise which we have gambled
away; it is no longer with us, and we long in vain to undo what has
been done.

One might well fancy that these visions of wishes fulfilled were the
work of some evil spirit, conjured up in order to entice us away from
that painless state which forms our highest happiness.

A careless youth may think that the world is meant to be enjoyed, as
though it were the abode of some real or positive happiness, which
only those fail to attain who are not clever enough to overcome the
difficulties that lie in the way. This false notion takes a stronger
hold on him when he comes to read poetry and romance, and to be
deceived by outward show--the hypocrisy that characterizes the
world from beginning to end; on which I shall have something to say
presently. The result is that his life is the more or less deliberate
pursuit of positive happiness; and happiness he takes to be equivalent
to a series of definite pleasures. In seeking for these pleasures he
encounters danger--a fact which should not be forgotten. He hunts for
game that does not exist; and so he ends by suffering some very
real and positive misfortune--pain, distress, sickness, loss, care,
poverty, shame, and all the thousand ills of life. Too late he
discovers the trick that has been played upon him.

But if the rule I have mentioned is observed, and a plan of life is
adopted which proceeds by avoiding pain--in other words, by taking
measures of precaution against want, sickness, and distress in all its
forms, the aim is a real one, and something may be achieved which will
be great in proportion as the plan is not disturbed by striving after
the chimera of positive happiness. This agrees with the opinion
expressed by Goethe in the _Elective Affinities_, and there put into
the mouth of Mittler--the man who is always trying to make other
people happy: _To desire to get rid of an evil is a definite object,
but to desire a better fortune than one has is blind folly_. The same
truth is contained in that fine French proverb: _le mieux est l'ennemi
du bien_--leave well alone. And, as I have remarked in my chief
work,[1] this is the leading thought underlying the philosophical
system of the Cynics. For what was it led the Cynics to repudiate
pleasure in every form, if it was not the fact that pain is, in a
greater or less degree, always bound up with pleasure? To go out of
the way of pain seemed to them so much easier than to secure pleasure.
Deeply impressed as they were by the negative nature of pleasure and
the positive nature of pain, they consistently devoted all their
efforts to the avoidance of pain. The first step to that end was, in
their opinion, a complete and deliberate repudiation of pleasure, as
something which served only to entrap the victim in order that he
might be delivered over to pain.

[Footnote 1: _Welt als Wille und Vorstellung_, vol. ii., ch. 16.]

We are all born, as Schiller says, in Arcadia. In other words, we
come into the world full of claims to happiness and pleasure, and we
cherish the fond hope of making them good. But, as a rule, Fate soon
teaches us, in a rough and ready way that we really possess nothing at
all, but that everything in the world is at its command, in virtue of
an unassailable right, not only to all we have or acquire, to wife or
child, but even to our very limbs, our arms, legs, _eyes_ and ears,
nay, even to the nose in the middle of our face. And in any case,
after some little time, we learn by experience that happiness and
pleasure are a _fata morgana_, which, visible from afar, vanish as we
approach; that, on the other hand, suffering and pain are a reality,
which makes its presence felt without any intermediary, and for its
effect, stands in no need of illusion or the play of false hope.

If the teaching of experience bears fruit in us, we soon give up the
pursuit of pleasure and happiness, and think much more about making
ourselves secure against the attacks of pain and suffering. We see
that the best the world has to offer is an existence free from pain--a
quiet, tolerable life; and we confine our claims to this, as to
something we can more surely hope to achieve. For the safest way of
not being very miserable is not to expect to be very happy. Merck, the
friend of Goethe's youth, was conscious of this truth when he
wrote: _It is the wretched way people have of setting up a claim to
happiness_--_and, that to, in a measure corresponding with their
desires_--_that ruins everything in this world. A man will make
progress if he can get rid of this claim,[1] and desire nothing but
what he sees before him_. Accordingly it is advisable to put very
moderate limits upon our expectations of pleasure, possessions, rank,
honor and so on; because it is just this striving and struggling to
be happy, to dazzle the world, to lead a life full of pleasure, which
entail great misfortune. It is prudent and wise, I say, to reduce
one's claims, if only for the reason that it is extremely easy to be
very unhappy; while to be very happy is not indeed difficult, but
quite impossible. With justice sings the poet of life's wisdom:

  _Auream quisquis mediocritatem
  Diligit, tutus caret obsoleti
  Sordibus tecti, caret invidenda
        Sobrius aula.
  Savius ventis agitatur ingens
  Pinus: et celsae graviori casu
  Decidunt turres; feriuntque summos
        Fulgura monies.[2]_

--the golden mean is best--to live free from the squalor of a mean
abode, and yet not be a mark for envy. It is the tall pine which is
cruelly shaken by the wind, the highest summits that are struck in the
storm, and the lofty towers that fall so heavily.

[Footnote 1: Letters to and from Merck.]

[Footnote 2: Horace. Odes II. x.]

He who has taken to heart the teaching of my philosophy--who knows,
therefore, that our whole existence is something which had better
not have been, and that to disown and disclaim it is the highest
wisdom--he will have no great expectations from anything or any
condition in life: he will spend passion upon nothing in the world,
nor lament over-much if he fails in any of his undertakings. He
will feel the deep truth of what Plato[1] says: [Greek: oute ti ton
anthropinon haxion on megalaes spondaes]--nothing in human affairs is
worth any great anxiety; or, as the Persian poet has it,

  _Though from thy grasp all worldly things should flee,
    Grieve not for them, for they are nothing worth:
  And though a world in thy possession be,
    Joy not, for worthless are the things of earth.
  Since to that better world 'tis given to thee
    To pass, speed on, for this is nothing worth._[2]

[Footnote 1: _Republic_, x. 604.]

[Footnote 2: _Translator's Note_. From the Anvár-i Suhailí--_The
Lights of Canopus_--being the Persian version of the _Table of
Bidpai_. Translated by E.B. Eastwick, ch. iii. Story vi., p. 289.]

The chief obstacle to our arriving at these salutary views is that
hypocrisy of the world to which I have already alluded--an hypocrisy
which should be early revealed to the young. Most of the glories of
the world are mere outward show, like the scenes on a stage: there
is nothing real about them. Ships festooned and hung with pennants,
firing of cannon, illuminations, beating of drums and blowing of
trumpets, shouting and applauding--these are all the outward sign, the
pretence and suggestion,--as it were the hieroglyphic,--of _joy_: but
just there, joy is, as a rule, not to be found; it is the only guest
who has declined to be present at the festival. Where this guest may
really be found, he comes generally without invitation; he is not
formerly announced, but slips in quietly by himself _sans facon_;
often making his appearance under the most unimportant and trivial
circumstances, and in the commonest company--anywhere, in short, but
where the society is brilliant and distinguished. Joy is like the gold
in the Australian mines--found only now and then, as it were, by the
caprice of chance, and according to no rule or law; oftenest in very
little grains, and very seldom in heaps. All that outward show which I
have described, is only an attempt to make people believe that it
is really joy which has come to the festival; and to produce this
impression upon the spectators is, in fact, the whole object of it.

With _mourning_ it is just the same. That long funeral procession,
moving up so slowly; how melancholy it looks! what an endless row of
carriages! But look into them--they are all empty; the coachmen of the
whole town are the sole escort the dead man has to his grave. Eloquent
picture of the friendship and esteem of the world! This is the
falsehood, the hollowness, the hypocrisy of human affairs!

Take another example--a roomful of guests in full dress, being
received with great ceremony. You could almost believe that this is
a noble and distinguished company; but, as a matter of fact, it is
compulsion, pain and boredom who are the real guests. For where many
are invited, it is a rabble--even if they all wear stars. Really good
society is everywhere of necessity very small. In brilliant festivals
and noisy entertainments, there is always, at bottom, a sense of
emptiness prevalent. A false tone is there: such gatherings are in
strange contrast with the misery and barrenness of our existence. The
contrast brings the true condition into greater relief. Still, these
gatherings are effective from the outside; and that is just their
purpose. Chamfort[1] makes the excellent remark that _society_--_les
cercles, les salons, ce qu'on appelle le monde_--is like a miserable
play, or a bad opera, without any interest in itself, but supported
for a time by mechanical aid, costumes and scenery.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_. Nicholas "Chamfort" (1741-94), a
French miscellaneous writer, whose brilliant conversation, power of
sarcasm, and epigrammic force, coupled with an extraordinary career,
render him one of the most interesting and remarkable men of his
time. Schopenhauer undoubtedly owed much to this writer, to whom he
constantly refers.]

And so, too, with academies and chairs of philosophy. You have a kind
of sign-board hung out to show the apparent abode of _wisdom_: but
wisdom is another guest who declines the invitation; she is to be
found elsewhere. The chiming of bells, ecclesiastical millinery,
attitudes of devotion, insane antics--these are the pretence, the
false show of _piety_. And so on. Everything in the world is like a
hollow nut; there is little kernel anywhere, and when it does exist,
it is still more rare to find it in the shell. You may look for it
elsewhere, and find it, as a rule, only by chance.

SECTION 2. To estimate a man's condition in regard to happiness, it is
necessary to ask, not what things please him, but what things trouble
him; and the more trivial these things are in themselves, the happier
the man will be. To be irritated by trifles, a man must be well off;
for in misfortunes trifles are unfelt.

SECTION 3. Care should be taken not to build the happiness of life
upon a _broad foundation_--not to require a great many things in order
to be happy. For happiness on such a foundation is the most easily
undermined; it offers many more opportunities for accidents; and
accidents are always happening. The architecture of happiness follows
a plan in this respect just the opposite of that adopted in every
other case, where the broadest foundation offers the greatest
security. Accordingly, to reduce your claims to the lowest possible
degree, in comparison with your means,--of whatever kind these may
be--is the surest way of avoiding extreme misfortune.

To make extensive preparations for life--no matter what form they
may take--is one of the greatest and commonest of follies. Such
preparations presuppose, in the first place, a long life, the full and
complete term of years appointed to man--and how few reach it! and
even if it be reached, it is still too short for all the plans that
have been made; for to carry them out requites more time than was
thought necessary at the beginning. And then how many mischances and
obstacles stand in the way! how seldom the goal is ever reached in
human affairs!

And lastly, even though the goal should be reached, the changes which
Time works in us have been left out of the reckoning: we forget that
the capacity whether for achievement or for enjoyment does not last a
whole lifetime. So we often toil for things which are no longer suited
to us when we attain them; and again, the years we spend in preparing
for some work, unconsciously rob us of the power for carrying it out.

How often it happens that a man is unable to enjoy the wealth which he
acquired at so much trouble and risk, and that the fruits of his
labor are reserved for others; or that he is incapable of filling the
position which he has won after so many years of toil and struggle.
Fortune has come too late for him; or, contrarily, he has come too
late for fortune,--when, for instance, he wants to achieve great
things, say, in art or literature: the popular taste has changed, it
may be; a new generation has grown up, which takes no interest in his
work; others have gone a shorter way and got the start of him. These
are the facts of life which Horace must have had in view, when he
lamented the uselessness of all advice:--

            _quid eternis minorem
  Consiliis animum fatigas?_[1]

[Footnote 1: Odes II. xi.]

The cause of this commonest of all follies is that optical illusion of
the mind from which everyone suffers, making life, at its beginning,
seem of long duration; and at its end, when one looks back over the
course of it, how short a time it seems! There is some advantage in
the illusion; but for it, no great work would ever be done.

Our life is like a journey on which, as we advance, the landscape
takes a different view from that which it presented at first,
and changes again, as we come nearer. This is just what
happens--especially with our wishes. We often find something else,
nay, something better than what we are looking for; and what we look
for, we often find on a very different path from that on which we
began a vain search. Instead of finding, as we expected, pleasure,
happiness, joy, we get experience, insight, knowledge--a real and
permanent blessing, instead of a fleeting and illusory one.

This is the thought that runs through _Wilkelm Meister_, like the bass
in a piece of music. In this work of Goethe's, we have a novel of the
_intellectual_ kind, and, therefore, superior to all others, even to
Sir Walter Scott's, which are, one and all, _ethical_; in other words,
they treat of human nature only from the side of the will. So, too,
in the _Zauberflöte_--that grotesque, but still significant, and even
hieroglyphic--the same thought is symbolized, but in great, coarse
lines, much in the way in which scenery is painted. Here the symbol
would be complete if Tamino were in the end to be cured of his desire
to possess Tainina, and received, in her stead, initiation into the
mysteries of the Temple of Wisdom. It is quite right for Papageno, his
necessary contrast, to succeed in getting his Papagena.

Men of any worth or value soon come to see that they are in the hands
of Fate, and gratefully submit to be moulded by its teachings. They
recognize that the fruit of life is experience, and not happiness;
they become accustomed and content to exchange hope for insight; and,
in the end, they can say, with Petrarch, that all they care for is to
learn:--

  _Altro diletto che 'mparar, non provo_.

It may even be that they to some extent still follow their old wishes
and aims, trifling with them, as it were, for the sake of appearances;
all the while really and seriously looking for nothing but
instruction; a process which lends them an air of genius, a trait of
something contemplative and sublime.

In their search for gold, the alchemists discovered other
things--gunpowder, china, medicines, the laws of nature. There is a
sense in which we are all alchemists.




CHAPTER II.

OUR RELATION TO OURSELVES.--SECTION 4.


The mason employed on the building of a house may be quite ignorant of
its general design; or at any rate, he may not keep it constantly in
mind. So it is with man: in working through the days and hours of his
life, he takes little thought of its character as a whole.

If there is any merit or importance attaching to a man's career, if he
lays himself out carefully for some special work, it is all the more
necessary and advisable for him to turn his attention now and then
to its _plan_, that is to say, the miniature sketch of its general
outlines. Of course, to do that, he must have applied the maxim
[Greek: Gnothi seauton]; he must have made some little progress in the
art of understanding himself. He must know what is his real, chief,
and foremost object in life,--what it is that he most wants in order
to be happy; and then, after that, what occupies the second and third
place in his thoughts; he must find out what, on the whole, his
vocation really is--the part he has to play, his general relation to
the world. If he maps out important work for himself on great lines,
a glance at this miniature plan of his life will, more than anything
else stimulate, rouse and ennoble him, urge him on to action and keep
him from false paths.

Again, just as the traveler, on reaching a height, gets a connected
view over the road he has taken, with its many turns and windings; so
it is only when we have completed a period in our life, or approach
the end of it altogether, that we recognize the true connection
between all our actions,--what it is we have achieved, what work we
have done. It is only then that we see the precise chain of cause and
effect, and the exact value of all our efforts. For as long as we are
actually engaged in the work of life, we always act in accordance with
the nature of our character, under the influence of motive, and within
the limits of our capacity,--in a word, from beginning to end, under
a law of _necessity_; at every moment we do just what appears to us
right and proper. It is only afterwards, when we come to look back at
the whole course of our life and its general result, that we see the
why and wherefore of it all.

When we are actually doing some great deed, or creating some immortal
work, we are not conscious of it as such; we think only of satisfying
present aims, of fulfilling the intentions we happen to have at the
time, of doing the right thing at the moment. It is only when we
come to view our life as a connected whole that our character and
capacities show themselves in their true light; that we see how, in
particular instances, some happy inspiration, as it were, led us to
choose the only true path out of a thousand which might have brought
us to ruin. It was our genius that guided us, a force felt in the
affairs of the intellectual as in those of the world; and working by
its defect just in the same way in regard to evil and disaster.

SECTION 5. Another important element in the wise conduct of life is to
preserve a proper proportion between our thought for the present and
our thought for the future; in order not to spoil the one by paying
over-great attention to the other. Many live too long in the
present--frivolous people, I mean; others, too much in the future,
ever anxious and full of care. It is seldom that a man holds the right
balance between the two extremes. Those who strive and hope and live
only in the future, always looking ahead and impatiently anticipating
what is coming, as something which will make them happy when they
get it, are, in spite of their very clever airs, exactly like those
donkeys one sees in Italy, whose pace may be hurried by fixing a stick
on their heads with a wisp of hay at the end of it; this is always
just in front of them, and they keep on trying to get it. Such people
are in a constant state of illusion as to their whole existence; they
go on living _ad interim_, until at last they die.

Instead, therefore, of always thinking about our plans and anxiously
looking to the future, or of giving ourselves up to regret for the
past, we should never forget that the present is the only reality, the
only certainty; that the future almost always turns out contrary to
our expectations; that the past, too, was very different from what
we suppose it to have been. But the past and the future are, on the
whole, of less consequence than we think. Distance, which makes
objects look small to the outward eye, makes them look big to the eye
of thought. The present alone is true and actual; it is the only
time which possesses full reality, and our existence lies in it
exclusively. Therefore we should always be glad of it, and give it
the welcome it deserves, and enjoy every hour that is bearable by
its freedom from pain and annoyance with a full consciousness of its
value. We shall hardly be able to do this if we make a wry face over
the failure of our hopes in the past or over our anxiety for the
future. It is the height of folly to refuse the present hour of
happiness, or wantonly to spoil it by vexation at by-gones or
uneasiness about what is to come. There is a time, of course, for
forethought, nay, even for repentance; but when it is over let us
think of what is past as of something to which we have said farewell,
of necessity subduing our hearts--

  [Greek: alla ta men protuchthai easomen achnumenoi per
  tumhon eni staethessi philon damasntes hanankae],[1]

and of the future as of that which lies beyond our power, in the lap
of the gods--

[Greek: all aetoi men tauta theon en gounasi keitai.][2]

[Footnote 1: _Iliad_, xix, 65.]

[Footnote 2: _Ibid_, xvii, 514]

But in regard to the present let us remember Seneca's advice, and live
each day as if it were our whole life,--_singulas dies singulas vitas
puta_: let us make it as agreeable as possible, it is the only real
time we have.

Only those evils which are sure to come at a definite date have
any right to disturb us; and how few there are which fulfill this
description. For evils are of two kinds; either they are possible
only, at most probable; or they are inevitable. Even in the case of
evils which are sure to happen, the time at which they will happen is
uncertain. A man who is always preparing for either class of evil will
not have a moment of peace left him. So, if we are not to lose all
comfort in life through the fear of evils, some of which are uncertain
in themselves, and others, in the time at which they will occur, we
should look upon the one kind as never likely to happen, and the other
as not likely to happen very soon.

Now, the less our peace of mind is disturbed by fear, the more likely
it is to be agitated by desire and expectation. This is the true
meaning of that song of Goethe's which is such a favorite with
everyone: _Ich hab' mein' Sach' auf nichts gestellt_. It is only
after a man has got rid of all pretension, and taken refuge in mere
unembellished existence, that he is able to attain that peace of mind
which is the foundation of human happiness. Peace of mind! that is
something essential to any enjoyment of the present moment; and unless
its separate moments are enjoyed, there is an end of life's happiness
as a whole. We should always collect that _To-day_ comes only once,
and never returns. We fancy that it will come again to-morrow; but
_To-morrow_ is another day, which, in its turn, comes once only.
We are apt to forget that every day is an integral, and therefore
irreplaceable portion of life, and to look upon life as though it
were a collective idea or name which does not suffer if one of the
individuals it covers is destroyed.

We should be more likely to appreciate and enjoy the present, if,
in those good days when we are well and strong, we did not fail to
reflect how, in sickness and sorrow, every past hour that was free
from pain and privation seemed in our memory so infinitely to be
envied--as it were, a lost paradise, or some one who was only then
seen to have acted as a friend. But we live through our days of
happiness without noticing them; it is only when evil comes upon us
that we wish them back. A thousand gay and pleasant hours are wasted
in ill-humor; we let them slip by unenjoyed, and sigh for them in vain
when the sky is overcast. Those present moments that are bearable, be
they never so trite and common,--passed by in indifference, or, it may
be, impatiently pushed away,--those are the moments we should honor;
never failing to remember that the ebbing tide is even how hurrying
them into the past, where memory will store them transfigured and
shining with an imperishable light,--in some after-time, and above
all, when our days are evil, to raise the veil and present them as the
object of our fondest regret.

SECTION 6. _Limitations always make for happiness_. We are happy in
proportion as our range of vision, our sphere of work, our points of
contact with the world, are restricted and circumscribed. We are more
likely to feel worried and anxious if these limits are wide; for
it means that our cares, desires and terrors are increased and
intensified. That is why the blind are not so unhappy as we might be
inclined to suppose; otherwise there would not be that gentle and
almost serene expression of peace in their faces.

Another reason why limitation makes for happiness is that the second
half of life proves even more dreary that the first. As the years wear
on, the horizon of our aims and our points of contact with the world
become more extended. In childhood our horizon is limited to
the narrowest sphere about us; in youth there is already a very
considerable widening of our view; in manhood it comprises the whole
range of our activity, often stretching out over a very distant
sphere,--the care, for instance, of a State or a nation; in old age it
embraces posterity.

But even in the affairs of the intellect, limitation is necessary if
we are to be happy. For the less the will is excited, the less we
suffer. We have seen that suffering is something positive, and that
happiness is only a negative condition. To limit the sphere of outward
activity is to relieve the will of external stimulus: to limit the
sphere of our intellectual efforts is to relieve the will of internal
sources of excitement. This latter kind of limitation is attended by
the disadvantage that it opens the door to boredom, which is a direct
source of countless sufferings; for to banish boredom, a man will
have recourse to any means that may be handy--dissipation, society,
extravagance, gaming, and drinking, and the like, which in their turn
bring mischief, ruin and misery in their train. _Difficiles in otio
quies_--it is difficult to keep quiet if you have nothing to do. That
limitation in the sphere of outward activity is conducive, nay, even
necessary to human happiness, such as it is, may be seen in the fact
that the only kind of poetry which depicts men in a happy state of
life--Idyllic poetry, I mean,--always aims, as an intrinsic part of
its treatment, at representing them in very simple and restricted
circumstances. It is this feeling, too, which is at the bottom of the
pleasure we take in what are called _genre_ pictures.

_Simplicity_, therefore, as far as it can be attained, and even
_monotony_, in our manner of life, if it does not mean that we
are bored, will contribute to happiness; just because, under such
circumstances, life, and consequently the burden which is the
essential concomitant of life, will be least felt. Our existence
will glide on peacefully like a stream which no waves or whirlpools
disturb.

SECTION 7. Whether we are in a pleasant or a painful state depends,
ultimately, upon the kind of matter that pervades and engrosses our
consciousness. In this respect, purely intellectual occupation, for
the mind that is capable of it, will, as a rule, do much more in the
way of happiness than any form of practical life, with its constant
alternations of success and failure, and all the shocks and torments
it produces. But it must be confessed that for such occupation a
pre-eminent amount of intellectual capacity is necessary. And in this
connection it may be noted that, just as a life devoted to outward
activity will distract and divert a man from study, and also deprive
him of that quiet concentration of mind which is necessary for such
work; so, on the other hand, a long course of thought will make
him more or less unfit for the noisy pursuits of real life. It
is advisable, therefore, to suspend mental work for a while, if
circumstances happen which demand any degree of energy in affairs of a
practical nature.

SECTION 8. To live a life that shall be entirely prudent and discreet,
and to draw from experience all the instruction it contains, it
is requisite to be constantly thinking back,--to make a kind
of recapitulation of what we have done, of our impressions and
sensations, to compare our former with our present judgments--what
we set before us and struggle to achieve, with the actual result and
satisfaction we have obtained. To do this is to get a repetition of
the private lessons of experience,--lessons which are given to every
one.

Experience of the world may be looked upon as a kind of text, to which
reflection and knowledge form the commentary. Where there is great
deal of reflection and intellectual knowledge, and very little
experience, the result is like those books which have on each page two
lines of text to forty lines of commentary. A great deal of experience
with little reflection and scant knowledge, gives us books like those
of the _editio Bipontina_[1] where there are no notes and much that is
unintelligible.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_. A series of Greek, Latin and French
classics published at Zweibräcken in the Palatinate, from and after
the year 1779. Cf. Butter, _Ueber die Bipontiner und die editiones
Bipontinae_.]

The advice here given is on a par with a rule recommended by
Pythagoras,--to review, every night before going to sleep, what we
have done during the day. To live at random, in the hurly-burly of
business or pleasure, without ever reflecting upon the past,--to go
on, as it were, pulling cotton off the reel of life,--is to have no
clear idea of what we are about; and a man who lives in this state
will have chaos in his emotions and certain confusion in his thoughts;
as is soon manifest by the abrupt and fragmentary character of his
conversation, which becomes a kind of mincemeat. A man will be all the
more exposed to this fate in proportion as he lives a restless life
in the world, amid a crowd of various impressions and with a
correspondingly small amount of activity on the part of his own mind.

And in this connection it will be in place to observe that, when
events and circumstances which have influenced us pass away in the
course of time, we are unable to bring back and renew the particular
mood or state of feeling which they aroused in us: but we can remember
what we were led to say and do in regard to them; and thus form, as it
were, the result, expression and measure of those events. We should,
therefore, be careful to preserve the memory of our thoughts at
important points in our life; and herein lies the great advantage of
keeping a journal.

SECTION 9. To be self-sufficient, to be all in all to oneself, to
want for nothing, to be able to say _omnia mea mecum porto_--that is
assuredly the chief qualification for happiness. Hence Aristotle's
remark, [Greek: hae eudaimonia ton autarchon esti][1]--to be happy
means to be self-sufficient--cannot be too often repeated. It is,
at bottom, the same thought as is present in the very well-turned
sentence from Chamfort:

_Le bonheur n'est pas chose aisée: il est très difficile de le trouver
en nous, et impossible de le trouver ailleurs_.

[Footnote 1: _Eudem. Eth_. VII. ii. 37.]

For while a man cannot reckon with certainty upon anyone but himself,
the burdens and disadvantages, the dangers and annoyances, which arise
from having to do with others, are not only countless but unavoidable.

There is no more mistaken path to happiness than worldliness, revelry,
_high life_: for the whole object of it is to transform our miserable
existence into a succession of joys, delights and pleasures,--a
process which cannot fail to result in disappointment and delusion;
on a par, in this respect, with its _obligato_ accompaniment, the
interchange of lies.[1]

[Footnote 1: As our body is concealed by the clothes we wear, so our
mind is veiled in lies. The veil is always there, and it is only
through it that we can sometimes guess at what a man really thinks;
just as from his clothes we arrive at the general shape of his body.]

All society necessarily involves, as the first condition of its
existence, mutual accommodation and restraint upon the part of its
members. This means that the larger it is, the more insipid will be
its tone. A man can be _himself_ only so long as he is alone; and if
he does not love solitude, he will not love freedom; for it is only
when he is alone that he is really free. Constraint is always present
in society, like a companion of whom there is no riddance; and in
proportion to the greatness of a man's individuality, it will be hard
for him to bear the sacrifices which all intercourse with others
demands, Solitude will be welcomed or endured or avoided, according as
a man's personal value is large or small,--the wretch feeling, when
he is alone, the whole burden of his misery; the great intellect
delighting in its greatness; and everyone, in short, being just what
he is.

Further, if a man stands high in Nature's lists, it is natural and
inevitable that he should feel solitary. It will be an advantage to
him if his surroundings do not interfere with this feeling; for if he
has to see a great deal of other people who are not of like character
with himself, they will exercise a disturbing influence upon him,
adverse to his peace of mind; they will rob him, in fact, of himself,
and give him nothing to compensate for the loss.

But while Nature sets very wide differences between man and man in
respect both of morality and of intellect, society disregards and
effaces them; or, rather, it sets up artificial differences in
their stead,--gradations of rank and position, which are very often
diametrically opposed to those which Nature establishes. The result of
this arrangement is to elevate those whom Nature has placed low,
and to depress the few who stand high. These latter, then, usually
withdraw from society, where, as soon as it is at all numerous,
vulgarity reigns supreme.

What offends a great intellect in society is the equality of rights,
leading to equality of pretensions, which everyone enjoys; while at
the same time, inequality of capacity means a corresponding disparity
of social power. So-called _good society_ recognizes every kind of
claim but that of intellect, which is a contraband article; and people
are expected to exhibit an unlimited amount of patience towards every
form of folly and stupidity, perversity and dullness; whilst personal
merit has to beg pardon, as it were, for being present, or else
conceal itself altogether. Intellectual superiority offends by its
very existence, without any desire to do so.

The worst of what is called good society is not only that it offers us
the companionship of people who are unable to win either our praise or
our affection, but that it does not allow of our being that which we
naturally are; it compels us, for the sake of harmony, to shrivel up,
or even alter our shape altogether. Intellectual conversation, whether
grave or humorous, is only fit for intellectual society; it is
downright abhorrent to ordinary people, to please whom it is
absolutely necessary to be commonplace and dull. This demands an act
of severe self-denial; we have to forfeit three-fourths of ourselves
in order to become like other people. No doubt their company may be
set down against our loss in this respect; but the more a man is
worth, the more he will find that what he gains does not cover what he
loses, and that the balance is on the debit side of the account; for
the people with whom he deals are generally bankrupt,--that is to say,
there is nothing to be got from their society which can compensate
either for its boredom, annoyance and disagreeableness, or for the
self-denial which it renders necessary. Accordingly, most society is
so constituted as to offer a good profit to anyone who will exchange
it for solitude.

Nor is this all. By way of providing a substitute for real--I mean
intellectual--superiority, which is seldom to be met with, and
intolerable when it is found, society has capriciously adopted a false
kind of superiority, conventional in its character, and resting upon
arbitrary principles,--a tradition, as it were, handed down in the
higher circles, and, like a password, subject to alteration; I refer
to _bon-ton_ fashion. Whenever this kind of superiority comes into
collision with the real kind, its weakness is manifest. Moreover, the
presence of _good tone_ means the absence of _good sense_.

No man can be in _perfect accord_ with any one but himself--not even
with a friend or the partner of his life; differences of individuality
and temperament are always bringing in some degree of discord, though
it may be a very slight one. That genuine, profound peace of mind,
that perfect tranquillity of soul, which, next to health, is the
highest blessing the earth can give, is to be attained only in
solitude, and, as a permanent mood, only in complete retirement; and
then, if there is anything great and rich in the man's own self, his
way of life is the happiest that may be found in this wretched world.

Let me speak plainly. However close the bond of friendship, love,
marriage--a man, ultimately, looks to himself, to his own welfare
alone; at most, to his child's too. The less necessity there is for
you to come into contact with mankind in general, in the relations
whether of business or of personal intimacy, the better off you are.
Loneliness and solitude have their evils, it is true; but if you
cannot feel them all at once, you can at least see where they lie; on
the other hand, society is _insidious_ in this respect; as in offering
you what appears to be the pastime of pleasing social intercourse, it
works great and often irreparable mischief. The young should early be
trained to bear being left alone; for it is a source of happiness and
peace of mind.

It follows from this that a man is best off if he be thrown upon his
own resources and can be all in all to himself; and Cicero goes so far
as to say that a man who is in this condition cannot fail to be very
happy--_nemo potest non beatissimus esse qui est totus aptus ex sese,
quique in se uno ponit omnia._[1] The more a man has in himself, the
less others can be to him. The feeling of self-sufficiency! it is that
which restrains those whose personal value is in itself great riches,
from such considerable sacrifices as are demanded by intercourse with
the world, let alone, then, from actually practicing self-denial by
going out of their way to seek it. Ordinary people are sociable and
complaisant just from the very opposite feeling;--to bear others'
company is easier for them than to bear their own. Moreover, respect
is not paid in this world to that which has real merit; it is reserved
for that which has none. So retirement is at once a proof and a result
of being distinguished by the possession of meritorious qualities. It
will therefore show real wisdom on the part of any one who is worth
anything in himself, to limit his requirements as may be necessary, in
order to preserve or extend his freedom, and,--since a man must come
into some relations with his fellow-men--to admit them to his intimacy
as little as possible.

[Footnote 1: _Paradoxa Stoidorum_: II.]

I have said that people are rendered sociable by their ability to
endure solitude, that is to say, their own society. They become
sick of themselves. It is this vacuity of soul which drives them to
intercourse with others,--to travels in foreign countries. Their mind
is wanting in elasticity; it has no movement of its own, and so they
try to give it some,--by drink, for instance. How much drunkenness
is due to this cause alone! They are always looking for some form of
excitement, of the strongest kind they can bear--the excitement of
being with people of like nature with themselves; and if they fail
in this, their mind sinks by its own weight, and they fall into a
grievous lethargy.[1] Such people, it may be said, possess only a
small fraction of humanity in themselves; and it requires a great many
of them put together to make up a fair amount of it,--to attain any
degree of consciousness as men. A man, in the full sense of the
word,--a man _par excellence_--does not represent a fraction, but a
whole number: he is complete in himself.

[Footnote 1: It is a well-known fact, that we can more easily bear up
under evils which fall upon a great many people besides ourselves.
As boredom seems to be an evil of this kind, people band together to
offer it a common resistance. The love of life is at bottom only the
fear of death; and, in the same way, the social impulse does not rest
directly upon the love of society, but upon the fear of solitude; it
is not alone the charm of being in others' company that people seek,
it is the dreary oppression of being alone--the monotony of their own
consciousness--that they would avoid. They will do anything to escape
it,--even tolerate bad companions, and put up with the feeling of
constraint which all society involves, in this case a very burdensome
one. But if aversion to such society conquers the aversion to being
alone, they become accustomed to solitude and hardened to its
immediate effects. They no longer find solitude to be such a very bad
thing, and settle down comfortably to it without any hankering after
society;--and this, partly because it is only indirectly that they
need others' company, and partly because they have become accustomed
to the benefits of being alone.]

Ordinary society is, in this respect, very like the kind of music to
be obtained from an orchestra composed of Russian horns. Each horn has
only one note; and the music is produced by each note coming in just
at the right moment. In the monotonous sound of a single horn, you
have a precise illustration of the effect of most people's minds. How
often there seems to be only one thought there! and no room for any
other. It is easy to see why people are so bored; and also why they
are sociable, why they like to go about in crowds--why mankind is so
_gregarious_. It is the monotony of his own nature that makes a man
find solitude intolerable. _Omnis stultitia laborat fastidio sui_:
folly is truly its own burden. Put a great many men together, and you
may get some result--some music from your horns!

A man of intellect is like an artist who gives a concert without any
help from anyone else, playing on a single instrument--a piano, say,
which is a little orchestra in itself. Such a man is a little world in
himself; and the effect produced by various instruments together, he
produces single-handed, in the unity of his own consciousness. Like
the piano, he has no place in a symphony: he is a soloist and performs
by himself,--in solitude, it may be; or, if in company with other
instruments, only as principal; or for setting the tone, as in
singing. However, those who are fond of society from time to time
may profit by this simile, and lay it down as a general rule that
deficiency of quality in those we meet may be to some extent
compensated by an increase in quantity. One man's company may be quite
enough, if he is clever; but where you have only ordinary people to
deal with, it is advisable to have a great many of them, so that
some advantage may accrue by letting them all work together,--on the
analogy of the horns; and may Heaven grant you patience for your task!

That mental vacuity and barrenness of soul to which I have alluded, is
responsible for another misfortune. When men of the better class form
a society for promoting some noble or ideal aim, the result almost
always is that the innumerable mob of humanity comes crowding in too,
as it always does everywhere, like vermin--their object being to try
and get rid of boredom, or some other defect of their nature; and
anything that will effect that, they seize upon at once, without the
slightest discrimination. Some of them will slip into that society,
or push themselves in, and then either soon destroy it altogether, or
alter it so much that in the end it comes to have a purpose the exact
opposite of that which it had at first.

This is not the only point of view from which the social impulse may
be regarded. On cold days people manage to get some warmth by crowding
together; and you can warm your mind in the same way--by bringing
it into contact with others. But a man who has a great deal of
intellectual warmth in himself will stand in no need of such
resources. I have written a little fable illustrating this: it may be
found elsewhere.[1] As a general rule, it may be said that a man's
sociability stands very nearly in inverse ratio to his intellectual
value: to say that "so and so" is very unsociable, is almost
tantamount to saying that he is a man of great capacity.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_. The passage to which Schopenhauer
refers is _Parerga_: vol. ii. § 413 (4th edition). The fable is of
certain porcupines, who huddled together for warmth on a cold day;
but as they began to prick one another with their quills, they were
obliged to disperse. However the cold drove them together again, when
just the same thing happened. At last, after many turns of huddling
and dispersing, they discovered that they would be best off by
remaining at a little distance from one another. In the same way,
the need of society drives the human porcupines together--only to be
mutually repelled by the many prickly and disagreeable qualities of
their nature. The moderate distance which they at last discover to be
the only tolerable condition of intercourse, is the code of politeness
and fine manners; and those who transgress it are roughly told--in
the English phrase--_to keep their distance_. By this arrangement the
mutual need of warmth is only very moderately satisfied,--but then
people do not get pricked. A man who has some heat in himself prefers
to remain outside, where he will neither prick other people nor get
pricked himself.]

Solitude is doubly advantageous to such a man. Firstly, it allows
him to be with himself, and, secondly, it prevents him being with
others--an advantage of great moment; for how much constraint,
annoyance, and even danger there is in all intercourse with the world.
_Tout notre mal_, says La Bruyère, _vient de ne pouvoir être seul_. It
is really a very risky, nay, a fatal thing, to be sociable; because
it means contact with natures, the great majority of which are bad
morally, and dull or perverse, intellectually. To be unsociable is not
to care about such people; and to have enough in oneself to dispense
with the necessity of their company is a great piece of good fortune;
because almost all our sufferings spring from having to do with other
people; and that destroys the peace of mind, which, as I have said,
comes next after health in the elements of happiness. Peace of mind
is impossible without a considerable amount of solitude. The Cynics
renounced all private property in order to attain the bliss of having
nothing to trouble them; and to renounce society with the same object
is the wisest thing a man can do. Bernardin de Saint Pierre has the
very excellent and pertinent remark that to be sparing in regard
to food is a means of health; in regard to society, a means of
tranquillity--_la diète des ailmens nous rend la santé du corps, et
celle des hommes la tranquillité de l'âme._ To be soon on friendly, or
even affectionate, terms with solitude is like winning a gold mine;
but this is not something which everybody can do. The prime reason for
social intercourse is mutual need; and as soon as that is satisfied,
boredom drives people together once more. If it were not for these two
reasons, a man would probably elect to remain alone; if only because
solitude is the sole condition of life which gives full play to
that feeling of exclusive importance which every man has in his own
eyes,--as if he were the only person in the world! a feeling which,
in the throng and press of real life, soon shrivels up to nothing,
getting, at every step, a painful _démenti_. From this point of view
it may be said that solitude is the original and natural state of man,
where, like another Adam, he is as happy as his nature will allow.

But still, had Adam no father or mother? There is another sense in
which solitude is not the natural state; for, at his entrance into the
world, a man finds himself with parents, brothers, sisters, that is to
say, in society, and not alone. Accordingly it cannot be said that the
love of solitude is an original characteristic of human nature; it is
rather the result of experience and reflection, and these in their
turn depend upon the development of intellectual power, and increase
with the years.

Speaking generally, sociability stands in inverse ratio with age. A
little child raises a piteous cry of fright if it is left alone for
only a few minutes; and later on, to be shut up by itself is a great
punishment. Young people soon get on very friendly terms with one
another; it is only the few among them of any nobility of mind who are
glad now and then to be alone;--but to spend the whole day thus would
be disagreeable. A grown-up man can easily do it; it is little trouble
to him to be much alone, and it becomes less and less trouble as he
advances in years. An old man who has outlived all his friends, and is
either indifferent or dead to the pleasures of life, is in his proper
element in solitude; and in individual cases the special tendency
to retirement and seclusion will always be in direct proportion to
intellectual capacity.

For this tendency is not, as I have said, a purely natural one; it
does not come into existence as a direct need of human nature; it is
rather the effect of the experience we go through, the product
of reflection upon what our needs really are; proceeding, more
especially, from the insight we attain into the wretched stuff of
which most people are made, whether you look at their morals or their
intellects. The worst of it all is that, in the individual, moral and
intellectual shortcomings are closely connected and play into each
other's hands, so that all manner of disagreeable results are
obtained, which make intercourse with most people not only unpleasant
but intolerable. Hence, though the world contains many things which
are thoroughly bad, the worst thing in it is society. Even Voltaire,
that sociable Frenchman, was obliged to admit that there are
everywhere crowds of people not worth talking to: _la terre est
couverte de gens qui ne méritent pas qu'on leur parle_. And Petrarch
gives a similar reason for wishing to be alone--that tender spirit! so
strong and constant in his love of seclusion. The streams, the plains
and woods know well, he says, how he has tried to escape the perverse
and stupid people who have missed the way to heaven:--

  _Cercato ho sempre solitaria vita
    (Le rive il sanno, e le campagne e i boschi)
  Per fuggir quest' ingegni storti e loschi
    Che la strada del ciel' hanno smarrita_.

He pursues the same strain in that delightful book of his, _DeVita
Solitaria_, which seems to have given Zimmerman the idea of his
celebrated work on _Solitude_. It is the secondary and indirect
character of the love of seclusion to which Chamfort alludes in the
following passage, couched in his sarcastic vein: _On dit quelquefois
d'un homme qui vit seul, il n'aime pas la société. C'est souvent
comme si on disait d'un homme qu'il n'aime pas la promenade, sous le
pretexte qu'il ne se promène pas volontiers le soir dans le forêt de
Bondy_.

You will find a similar sentiment expressed by the Persian poet Sadi,
in his _Garden of Roses. Since that time_, he says, _we have taken
leave of society, preferring the path of seclusion; for there is
safety in solitude_. Angelus Silesius,[1] a very gentle and Christian
writer, confesses to the same feeling, in his own mythical language.
Herod, he says, is the common enemy; and when, as with Joseph, God
warns us of danger, we fly from the world to solitude, from Bethlehem
to Egypt; or else suffering and death await us!--

  _Herodes ist ein Feind; der Joseph der Verstand,
  Dem machte Gott die Gefahr im Traum (in Geist) bekannt;
  Die Welt ist Bethlehem, Aegypten Einsamkeit,
  Fleuch, meine Seele! fleuch, sonst stirbest du vor Leid_.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_. Angelus Silesius, pseudonym for
Johannes Scheffler, a physician and mystic poet of the seventeenth
century (1624-77).]

Giordano Bruno also declares himself a friend of seclusion. _Tanti
uomini_, he says, _che in terra hanno voluto gustare vita
celeste, dissero con una voce, "ecce elongavi fugiens et mansi in
solitudine_"--those who in this world have desired a foretaste of the
divine life, have always proclaimed with one voice:

  _Lo! then would I wander far off;
  I would lodge in the wilderness._[1]

[Footnote 1: Psalms, lv. 7.]

And in the work from which I have already quoted, Sadi says of
himself: _In disgust with my friends at Damascus, I withdrew into
the desert about Jerusalem, to seek the society of the beasts of the
field_. In short, the same thing has been said by all whom Prometheus
has formed out of better clay. What pleasure could they find in the
company of people with whom their only common ground is just what is
lowest and least noble in their own nature--the part of them that is
commonplace, trivial and vulgar? What do they want with people who
cannot rise to a higher level, and for whom nothing remains but to
drag others down to theirs? for this is what they aim at. It is an
aristocratic feeling that is at the bottom of this propensity to
seclusion and solitude.

Rascals are always sociable--more's the pity! and the chief sign that
a man has any nobility in his character is the little pleasure he
takes in others' company. He prefers solitude more and more, and, in
course of time, comes to see that, with few exceptions, the world
offers no choice beyond solitude on one side and vulgarity on the
other. This may sound a hard thing to say; but even Angelus Silesius,
with all his Christian feelings of gentleness and love, was obliged to
admit the truth of it. However painful solitude may be, he says, be
careful not to be vulgar; for then you may find a desert everywhere:--

  _Die Einsamkeit ist noth: doch sei nur nicht gemein,
  So kannst du überall in einer Wüste sein_.

It is natural for great minds--the true teachers of humanity--to care
little about the constant company of others; just as little as the
schoolmaster cares for joining in the gambols of the noisy crowd of
boys which surround him. The mission of these great minds is to guide
mankind over the sea of error to the haven of truth--to draw it forth
from the dark abysses of a barbarous vulgarity up into the light of
culture and refinement. Men of great intellect live in the world
without really belonging to it; and so, from their earliest years,
they feel that there is a perceptible difference between them and
other people. But it is only gradually, with the lapse of years,
that they come to a clear understanding of their position. Their
intellectual isolation is then reinforced by actual seclusion in their
manner of life; they let no one approach who is not in some degree
emancipated from the prevailing vulgarity.

From what has been said it is obvious that the love of solitude is
not a direct, original impulse in human nature, but rather something
secondary and of gradual growth. It is the more distinguishing feature
of nobler minds, developed not without some conquest of natural
desires, and now and then in actual opposition to the promptings of
Mephistopheles--bidding you exchange a morose and soul-destroying
solitude for life amongst men, for society; even the worst, he says,
will give a sense of human fellowship:--

  _Hör' auf mit deinem Gram zu spielen,
  Der, wie ein Geier, dir am Leben frisst:
  Die schlechteste Gesellschaft lässt dich fühlen
  Dass du ein Mensch mit Menschen bist.[1]_

[Footnote 1: Goethe's _Faust_, Part I., 1281-5.]

To be alone is the fate of all great minds--a fate deplored at times,
but still always chosen as the less grievous of two evils. As
the years increase, it always becomes easier to say, Dare to be
wise--_sapere aude_. And after sixty, the inclination to be alone
grows into a kind of real, natural instinct; for at that age
everything combines in favor of it. The strongest impulse--the love of
woman's society--has little or no effect; it is the sexless condition
of old age which lays the foundation of a certain self-sufficiency,
and that gradually absorbs all desire for others' company. A thousand
illusions and follies are overcome; the active years of life are
in most cases gone; a man has no more expectations or plans or
intentions. The generation to which he belonged has passed away, and a
new race has sprung up which looks upon him as essentially outside its
sphere of activity. And then the years pass more quickly as we become
older, and we want to devote our remaining time to the intellectual
rather than to the practical side of life. For, provided that the mind
retains its faculties, the amount of knowledge and experience we have
acquired, together with the facility we have gained in the use of our
powers, makes it then more than ever easy and interesting to us to
pursue the study of any subject. A thousand things become clear which
were formerly enveloped in obscurity, and results are obtained which
give a feeling of difficulties overcome. From long experience of men,
we cease to expect much from them; we find that, on the whole, people
do not gain by a nearer acquaintance; and that--apart from a few rare
and fortunate exceptions--we have come across none but defective
specimens of human nature which it is advisable to leave in peace.
We are no more subject to the ordinary illusions of life; and as, in
individual instances, we soon see what a man is made of, we seldom
feel any inclination to come into closer relations with him. Finally,
isolation--our own society--has become a habit, as it were a second
nature to us, more especially if we have been on friendly terms with
it from our youth up. The love of solitude which was formerly indulged
only at the expense of our desire for society, has now come to be the
simple quality of our natural disposition--the element proper to our
life, as water to a fish. This is why anyone who possesses a unique
individuality--unlike others and therefore necessarily isolated--feels
that, as he becomes older, his position is no longer so burdensome as
when he was young.

For, as a matter of fact, this very genuine privilege of old age is
one which can be enjoyed only if a man is possessed of a certain
amount of intellect; it will be appreciated most of all where there is
real mental power; but in some degree by every one. It is only people
of very barren and vulgar nature who will be just as sociable in their
old age as they were in their youth. But then they become troublesome
to a society to which they are no longer suited, and, at most, manage
to be tolerated; whereas, they were formerly in great request.

There is another aspect of this inverse proportion between age and
sociability--the way in which it conduces to education. The younger
that people are, the more in every respect they have to learn; and it
is just in youth that Nature provides a system of mutual education,
so that mere intercourse with others, at that time of life, carries
instruction with it. Human society, from this point of view, resembles
a huge academy of learning, on the Bell and Lancaster system, opposed
to the system of education by means of books and schools, as something
artificial and contrary to the institutions of Nature. It is therefore
a very suitable arrangement that, in his young days, a man should be
a very diligent student at the place of learning provided by Nature
herself.

But there is nothing in life which has not some drawback--_nihil est
ab omni parte beatum_, as Horace says; or, in the words of an Indian
proverb, _no lotus without a stalk_. Seclusion, which has so many
advantages, has also its little annoyances and drawbacks, which are
small, however, in comparison with those of society; hence anyone who
is worth much in himself will get on better without other people than
with them. But amongst the disadvantages of seclusion there is one
which is not so easy to see as the rest. It is this: when people
remain indoors all day, they become physically very sensitive to
atmospheric changes, so that every little draught is enough to make
them ill; so with our temper; a long course of seclusion makes it so
sensitive that the most trivial incidents, words, or even looks, are
sufficient to disturb or to vex and offend us--little things which are
unnoticed by those who live in the turmoil of life.

When you find human society disagreeable and feel yourself justified
in flying to solitude, you can be so constituted as to be unable to
bear the depression of it for any length of time, which will probably
be the case if you are young. Let me advise you, then, to form the
habit of taking some of your solitude with you into society, to learn
to be to some extent alone even though you are in company; not to say
at once what you think, and, on the other hand, not to attach too
precise a meaning to what others say; rather, not to expect much of
them, either morally or intellectually, and to strengthen yourself in
the feeling of indifference to their opinion, which is the surest way
of always practicing a praiseworthy toleration. If you do that, you
will not live so much with other people, though you may appear to move
amongst them: your relation to them will be of a purely objective
character. This precaution will keep you from too close contact with
society, and therefore secure you against being contaminated or even
outraged by it.[1] Society is in this respect like a fire--the wise
man warming himself at a proper distance from it; not coming too
close, like the fool, who, on getting scorched, runs away and shivers
in solitude, loud in his complaint that the fire burns.

[Footnote 1: This restricted, or, as it were, entrenched kind of
sociability has been dramatically illustrated in a play--well worth
reading--of Moratin's, entitled _El Café o sea la Comedia Nuova_ (The
Cafe or the New Comedy), chiefly by one of the characters, Don Pedro
and especially in the second and third scenes of the first act.]

SECTION 10. _Envy_ is natural to man; and still, it is at once a vice
and a source of misery.[1] We should treat it as the enemy of our
happiness, and stifle it like an evil thought. This is the advice
given by Seneca; as he well puts it, we shall be pleased with what we
have, if we avoid the self-torture of comparing our own lot with
some other and happier one--_nostra nos sine comparatione delectent;
nunquam erit felix quem torquebit felicior.[2]_ And again, _quum
adspexeris quot te antecedent, cogita quot sequantur_[3]--if a great
many people appear to be better off than yourself, think how many
there are in a worse position. It is a fact that if real calamity
comes upon us, the most effective consolation--though it springs from
the same source as envy--is just the thought of greater misfortunes
than ours; and the next best is the society of those who are in the
same luck as we--the partners of our sorrows.

[Footnote 1: Envy shows how unhappy people are; and their constant
attention to what others do and leave undone, how much they are
bored.]

[Footnote 2: _De Ira_: iii., 30.]

[Footnote 3: Epist. xv.]

So much for the envy which we may feel towards others. As regards the
envy which we may excite in them, it should always be remembered that
no form of hatred is so implacable as the hatred that comes from envy;
and therefore we should always carefully refrain from doing anything
to rouse it; nay, as with many another form of vice, it is better
altogether to renounce any pleasure there may be in it, because of the
serious nature of its consequences.

Aristocracies are of three kinds: (1) of birth and rank; (2)
of wealth; and (3) of intellect. The last is really the most
distinguished of the three, and its claim to occupy the first position
comes to be recognized, if it is only allowed time to work. So eminent
a king as Frederick the Great admitted it--_les âmes privilegiées
rangent à l'égal des souverains_, as he said to his chamberlain, when
the latter expressed his surprise that Voltaire should have a seat
at the table reserved for kings and princes, whilst ministers and
generals were relegated to the chamberlain's.

Every one of these aristocracies is surrounded by a host of envious
persons. If you belong to one of them, they will be secretly
embittered against you; and unless they are restrained by fear, they
will always be anxious to let you understand that _you are no better
than they_. It is by their anxiety to let you know this, that they
betray how greatly they are conscious that the opposite is the truth.

The line of conduct to be pursued if you are exposed to envy, is to
keep the envious persons at a distance, and, as far as possible, avoid
all contact with them, so that there may be a wide gulf fixed between
you and them; if this cannot be done, to bear their attacks with the
greatest composure. In the latter case, the very thing that provokes
the attack will also neutralize it. This is what appears to be
generally done.

The members of one of these aristocracies usually get on very well
with those of another, and there is no call for envy between them,
because their several privileges effect an equipoise.

SECTION 11. Give mature and repeated consideration to any plan before
you proceed to carry it out; and even after you have thoroughly turned
it over in your mind, make some concession to the incompetency of
human judgment; for it may always happen that circumstances which
cannot be investigated or foreseen, will come in and upset the whole
of your calculation. This is a reflection that will always influence
the negative side of the balance--a kind of warning to refrain from
unnecessary action in matters of importance--_quieta non movere._ But
having once made up your mind and begun your work, you must let it
run its course and abide the result--not worry yourself by fresh
reflections on what is already accomplished, or by a renewal of your
scruples on the score of possible danger: free your mind from the
subject altogether, and refuse to go into it again, secure in the
thought that you gave it mature attention at the proper time. This is
the same advice as is given by an Italian proverb--_legala bene e poi
lascia la andare_--which Goethe has translated thus: See well to your
girths, and then ride on boldly.[1]

[Footnote 1: It may be observed, in passing, that a great many of
the maxims which Goethe puts under the head of _Proverbial_, are
translations from the Italian.]

And if, notwithstanding that, you fail, it is because human affairs
are the sport of chance and error. Socrates, the wisest of men, needed
the warning voice of his good genius, or [Greek: daimonion], to enable
him to do what was right in regard to his own personal affairs, or at
any rate, to avoid mistakes; which argues that the human intellect is
incompetent for the purpose. There is a saying--which is reported to
have originated with one of the Popes--that when misfortune happens to
us, the blame of it, at least in some degree, attaches to ourselves.
If this is not true absolutely and in every instance, it is certainly
true in the great majority of cases. It even looks as if this truth
had a great deal to do with the effort people make as far as possible
to conceal their misfortunes, and to put the best face they can upon
them, for fear lest their misfortunes may show how much they are to
blame.

SECTION 12.

In the case of a misfortune which has already happened and therefore
cannot be altered, you should not allow yourself to think that it
might have been otherwise; still less, that it might have been avoided
by such and such means; for reflections of this kind will only add
to your distress and make it intolerable, so that you will become a
tormentor to yourself--[Greek: heautontimoroumeaeos]. It is better to
follow the example of King David; who, as long as his son lay on the
bed of sickness, assailed Jehovah with unceasing supplications and
entreaties for his recovery; but when he was dead, snapped his fingers
and thought no more of it. If you are not light-hearted enough for
that, you can take refuge in fatalism, and have the great truth
revealed to you that everything which happens is the result of
necessity, and therefore inevitable.

However good this advice may be, it is one-sided and partial. In
relieving and quieting us for the moment, it is no doubt effective
enough; but when our misfortunes have resulted--as is usually the
case--from our own carelessness or folly, or, at any rate, partly by
our own fault, it is a good thing to consider how they might have
been avoided, and to consider it often in spite of its being a tender
subject--a salutary form of self-discipline, which will make us wiser
and better men for the future. If we have made obvious mistakes, we
should not try, as we generally do, to gloss them over, or to find
something to excuse or extenuate them; we should admit to ourselves
that we have committed faults, and open our eyes wide to all their
enormity, in order that we may firmly resolve to avoid them in time to
come. To be sure, that means a great deal of self-inflicted pain, in
the shape of discontent, but it should be remembered that to spare
the rod is to spoil the child--[Greek: ho mae dareis anthropos ou
paideuetai].[1]

[Footnote 1: Menander. Monost: 422.]

SECTION 13. In all matters affecting our weal or woe, we should be
careful not to let our imagination run away with us, and build no
castles in the air. In the first place, they are expensive to build,
because we have to pull them down again immediately, and that is
a source of grief. We should be still more on our guard against
distressing our hearts by depicting possible misfortunes. If these
were misfortunes of a purely imaginary kind, or very remote and
unlikely, we should at once see, on awaking from our dream, that the
whole thing was mere illusion; we should rejoice all the more in
a reality better than our dreams, or at most, be warned against
misfortunes which, though very remote, were still possible. These,
however, are not the sort of playthings in which imagination delights;
it is only in idle hours that we build castles in the air, and they
are always of a pleasing description. The matter which goes to form
gloomy dreams are mischances which to some extent really threaten us,
though it be from some distance; imagination makes us look larger and
nearer and more terrible than they are in reality. This is a kind of
dream which cannot be so readily shaken off on awaking as a pleasant
one; for a pleasant dream is soon dispelled by reality, leaving, at
most, a feeble hope lying in the lap of possibility. Once we have
abandoned ourselves to a fit of the blues, visions are conjured up
which do not so easily vanish again; for it is always just possible
that the visions may be realized. But we are not always able to
estimate the exact degree of possibility: possibility may easily
pass into probability; and thus we deliver ourselves up to torture.
Therefore we should be careful not to be over-anxious on any
matter affecting our weal or our woe, not to carry our anxiety to
unreasonable or injudicious limits; but coolly and dispassionately to
deliberate upon the matter, as though it were an abstract question
which did not touch us in particular. We should give no play to
imagination here; for imagination is not judgment--it only conjures up
visions, inducing an unprofitable and often very painful mood.

The rule on which I am here insisting should be most carefully
observed towards evening. For as darkness makes us timid and apt to
see terrifying shapes everywhere, there is something similar in the
effect of indistinct thought; and uncertainty always brings with it a
sense of danger. Hence, towards evening, when our powers of thought
and judgment are relaxed,--at the hour, as it were, of subjective
darkness,--the intellect becomes tired, easily confused, and unable
to get at the bottom of things; and if, in that state, we meditate
on matters of personal interest to ourselves, they soon assume a
dangerous and terrifying aspect. This is mostly the case at night,
when we are in bed; for then the mind is fully relaxed, and the power
of judgment quite unequal to its duties; but imagination is still
awake. Night gives a black look to everything, whatever it may be.
This is why our thoughts, just before we go to sleep, or as we lie
awake through the hours of the night, are usually such confusions and
perversions of facts as dreams themselves; and when our thoughts at
that time are concentrated upon our own concerns, they are generally
as black and monstrous as possible. In the morning all such nightmares
vanish like dreams: as the Spanish proverb has it, _noche tinta,
bianco el dia_--the night is colored, the day is white. But even
towards nightfall, as soon as the candles are lit, the mind, like the
eye, no longer sees things so clearly as by day: it is a time unsuited
to serious meditation, especially on unpleasant subjects. The morning
is the proper time for that--as indeed for all efforts without
exception, whether mental or bodily. For the morning is the youth of
the day, when everything is bright, fresh, and easy of attainment;
we feel strong then, and all our faculties are completely at our
disposal. Do not shorten the morning by getting up late, or waste it
in unworthy occupations or in talk; look upon it as the quintessence
of life, as to a certain extent sacred. Evening is like old age: we
are languid, talkative, silly. Each day is a little life: every waking
and rising a little birth, every fresh morning a little youth, every
going to rest and sleep a little death.

But condition of health, sleep, nourishment, temperature, weather,
surroundings, and much else that is purely external, have, in general,
an important influence upon our mood and therefore upon our thoughts.
Hence both our view of any matter and our capacity for any work are
very much subject to time and place. So it is best to profit by a good
mood--for how seldom it comes!--

  _Nehmt die gute Stimmung wahr,
  Denn sie kommt so selten_.[1]

[Footnote 1: Goethe.]

We are not always able to form new ideas about; our surroundings, or
to command original thoughts: they come if they will, and when they
will. And so, too, we cannot always succeed in completely considering
some personal matter at the precise time at which we have determined
beforehand to consider it, and just when we set ourselves to do
so. For the peculiar train of thought which is favorable to it may
suddenly become active without any special call being made upon
it, and we may then follow it up with keen interest. In this way
reflection, too, chooses its own time.

This reining-in of the imagination which I am recommending, will also
forbid us to summon up the memory of the past misfortune, to paint
a dark picture of the injustice or harm that has been done us, the
losses we have sustained, the insults, slights and annoyances to which
we have been exposed: for to do that is to rouse into fresh life all
those hateful passions long laid asleep--the anger and resentment
which disturb and pollute our nature. In an excellent parable,
Proclus, the Neoplatonist, points out how in every town the mob dwells
side by side with those who are rich and distinguished: so, too, in
every man, be he never so noble and dignified, there is, in the depth
of his nature, a mob of low and vulgar desires which constitute him an
animal. It will not do to let this mob revolt or even so much as peep
forth from its hiding-place; it is hideous of mien, and its rebel
leaders are those flights of imagination which I have been describing.
The smallest annoyance, whether it comes from our fellow-men or from
the things around us, may swell up into a monster of dreadful aspect,
putting us at our wits' end--and all because we go on brooding over
our troubles and painting them in the most glaring colors and on the
largest scale. It is much better to take a very calm and prosaic view
of what is disagreeable; for that is the easiest way of bearing it.

If you hold small objects close to your eyes, you limit your field of
vision and shut out the world. And, in the same way, the people or the
things which stand nearest, even though they are of the very smallest
consequence, are apt to claim an amount of attention much beyond
their due, occupying us disagreeably, and leaving no room for serious
thoughts and affairs of importance. We ought to work against this
tendency.

SECTION 14. The sight of things which do not belong to us is very apt
to raise the thought: _Ah, if that were only mine_! making us sensible
of our privation. Instead of that we should do better by more
frequently putting to ourselves the opposite case: _Ah, if that were
not mine_. What I mean is that we should sometimes try to look upon
our possessions in the light in which they would appear if we had lost
them; whatever they may be, property, health, friends, a wife or child
or someone else we love, our horse or our dog--it is usually only when
we have lost them that we begin to find out their value. But if we
come to look at things in the way I recommend, we shall be doubly the
gainers; we shall at once get more pleasure out of them than we did
before, and we shall do everything in our power to prevent the loss
of them; for instance, by not risking our property, or angering our
friends, or exposing our wives to temptation, or being careless about
our children's health, and so on.

We often try to banish the gloom and despondency of the present by
speculating upon our chances of success in the future; a process which
leads us to invent a great many chimerical hopes. Every one of them
contains the germ of illusion, and disappointment is inevitable when
our hopes are shattered by the hard facts of life.

It is less hurtful to take the chances of misfortune as a theme for
speculation; because, in doing so, we provide ourselves at once with
measures of precaution against it, and a pleasant surprise when it
fails to make its appearance. Is it not a fact that we always feel a
marked improvement in our spirits when we begin to get over a period
of anxiety? I may go further and say that there is some use in
occasionally looking upon terrible misfortunes--such as might happen
to us--as though they had actually happened, for then the trivial
reverses which subsequently come in reality, are much easier to
bear. It is a source of consolation to look back upon those great
misfortunes which never happened. But in following out this rule,
care must be taken not to neglect what I have said in the preceding
section.

SECTION 15. The things which engage our attention--whether they are
matters of business or ordinary events--are of such diverse kinds,
that, if taken quite separately and in no fixed order or relation,
they present a medley of the most glaring contrasts, with nothing in
common, except that they one and all affect us in particular. There
must be a corresponding abruptness in the thoughts and anxieties which
these various matters arouse in us, if our thoughts are to be in
keeping with their various subjects. Therefore, in setting about
anything, the first step is to withdraw our attention from everything
else: this will enable us to attend to each matter at its own time,
and to enjoy or put up with it, quite apart from any thought of our
remaining interests. Our thoughts must be arranged, as it were, in
little drawers, so that we may open one without disturbing any of the
others.

In this way we can keep the heavy burden of anxiety from weighing upon
us so much as to spoil the little pleasures of the present, or from
robbing us of our rest; otherwise the consideration of one matter will
interfere with every other, and attention to some important business
may lead us to neglect many affairs which happen to be of less moment.
It is most important for everyone who is capable of higher and nobler
thoughts to keep their mind from being so completely engrossed with
private affairs and vulgar troubles as to let them take up all his
attention and crowd out worthier matter; for that is, in a very real
sense, to lose sight of the true end of life--_propter vitam vivendi
perdere causas_.

Of course for this--as for so much else--self-control is necessary;
without it, we cannot manage ourselves in the way I have described.
And self-control may not appear so very difficult, if we consider that
every man has to submit to a great deal of very severe control on the
part of his surroundings, and that without it no form of existence
is possible. Further, a little self-control at the right moment may
prevent much subsequent compulsion at the hands of others; just as a
very small section of a circle close to the centre may correspond to
a part near the circumference a hundred times as large. Nothing
will protect us from external compulsion so much as the control of
ourselves; and, as Seneca says, to submit yourself to reason is
the way to make everything else submit to you--_si tibi vis omnia
subjicere, te subjice rationi_. Self-control, too, is something which
we have in our own power; and if the worst comes to the worst, and it
touches us in a very sensitive part, we can always relax its severity.
But other people will pay no regard to our feelings, if they have
to use compulsion, and we shall be treated without pity or mercy.
Therefore it will be prudent to anticipate compulsion by self-control.

SECTION 16. We must set limits to our wishes, curb our desires,
moderate our anger, always remembering that an individual can attain
only an infinitesimal share in anything that is worth having; and
that, on the other hand, everyone must incur many of the ills of life;
in a word, we must bear and forbear--_abstinere et sustinere_; and
if we fail to observe this rule, no position of wealth or power will
prevent us from feeling wretched. This is what Horace means when he
recommends us to study carefully and inquire diligently what will
best promote a tranquil life--not to be always agitated by fruitless
desires and fears and hopes for things, which, after all, are not
worth very much:--

  _Inter cuncta leges et percontabere doctos
  Qua ratione queas traducere leniter aevum;
  Ne te semper inops agitet vexetque cupido,
  Ne pavor, et rerum mediocriter utilium spes.[1]_

[Footnote 1: Epist. I. xviii. 97.]

SECTION 17. Life consists in movement, says Aristotle; and he is
obviously right. We exist, physically, because our organism is the
seat of constant motion; and if we are to exist intellectually, it can
only be by means of continual occupation--no matter with what so long
as it is some form of practical or mental activity. You may see that
this is so by the way in which people who have no work or nothing to
think about, immediately begin to beat the devil's tattoo with their
knuckles or a stick or anything that comes handy. The truth is, that
our nature is essentially _restless_ in its character: we very soon
get tired of having nothing to do; it is intolerable boredom. This
impulse to activity should be regulated, and some sort of method
introduced into it, which of itself will enhance the satisfaction we
obtain. Activity!--doing something, if possible creating something, at
any rate learning something--how fortunate it is that men cannot exist
without that! A man wants to use his strength, to see, if he can, what
effect it will produce; and he will get the most complete satisfaction
of this desire if he can make or construct something--be it a book or
a basket. There is a direct pleasure in seeing work grow under one's
hands day by day, until at last it is finished. This is the pleasure
attaching to a work of art or a manuscript, or even mere manual labor;
and, of course, the higher the work, the greater pleasure it will
give.

From this point of view, those are happiest of all who are conscious
of the power to produce great works animated by some significant
purpose: it gives a higher kind of interest--a sort of rare flavor--to
the whole of their life, which, by its absence from the life of the
ordinary man, makes it, in comparison, something very insipid. For
richly endowed natures, life and the world have a special interest
beyond the mere everyday personal interest which so many others share;
and something higher than that--a formal interest. It is from life and
the world that they get the material for their works; and as soon
as they are freed from the pressure of personal needs, it is to
the diligent collection of material that they devote their whole
existence. So with their intellect: it is to some extent of a two-fold
character, and devoted partly to the ordinary affairs of every
day--those matters of will which are common to them and the rest of
mankind, and partly to their peculiar work--the pure and objective
contemplation of existence. And while, on the stage of the world, most
men play their little part and then pass away, the genius lives a
double life, at once an actor and a spectator.

Let everyone, then, do something, according to the measure of his
capacities. To have no regular work, no set sphere of activity--what a
miserable thing it is! How often long travels undertaken for pleasure
make a man downright unhappy; because the absence of anything that can
be called occupation forces him, as it were, out of his right element.
Effort, struggles with difficulties! that is as natural to a man as
grubbing in the ground is to a mole. To have all his wants satisfied
is something intolerable--the feeling of stagnation which comes
from pleasures that last too long. To overcome difficulties is
to experience the full delight of existence, no matter where the
obstacles are encountered; whether in the affairs of life, in commerce
or business; or in mental effort--the spirit of inquiry that tries
to master its subject. There is always something pleasurable in the
struggle and the victory. And if a man has no opportunity to excite
himself, he will do what he can to create one, and according to his
individual bent, he will hunt or play Cup and Ball: or led on by this
unsuspected element in his nature, he will pick a quarrel with some
one, or hatch a plot or intrigue, or take to swindling and rascally
courses generally--all to put an end to a state of repose which is
intolerable. As I have remarked, _difficilis in otio quies_--it is
difficult to keep quiet if you have nothing to do.

SECTION 18. A man should avoid being led on by the phantoms of his
imagination. This is not the same thing as to submit to the guidance
of ideas clearly thought out: and yet these are rules of life which
most people pervert. If you examine closely into the circumstances
which, in any deliberation, ultimately turn the scale in favor of
some particular course, you will generally find that the decision is
influenced, not by any clear arrangement of ideas leading to a formal
judgment, but by some fanciful picture which seems to stand for one of
the alternatives in question.

In one of Voltaire's or Diderot's romances,--I forget the precise
reference,--the hero, standing like a young Hercules at the parting
of ways, can see no other representation of Virtue than his old tutor
holding a snuff-box in his left hand, from which he takes a pinch
and moralizes; whilst Vice appears in the shape of his mother's
chambermaid. It is in youth, more especially, that the goal of our
efforts comes to be a fanciful picture of happiness, which continues
to hover before our eyes sometimes for half and even for the whole of
our life--a sort of mocking spirit; for when we think our dream is to
be realized, the picture fades away, leaving us the knowledge that
nothing of what it promised is actually accomplished. How often this
is so with the visions of domesticity--the detailed picture of what
our home will be like; or, of life among our fellow-citizens or in
society; or, again, of living in the country--the kind of house we
shall have, its surroundings, the marks of honor and respect that will
be paid to us, and so on,--whatever our hobby may be; _chaque fou a
sa marotte_. It is often the same, too, with our dreams about one we
love. And this is all quite natural; for the visions we conjure up
affect us directly, as though they were real objects; and so they
exercise a more immediate influence upon our will than an abstract
idea, which gives merely a vague, general outline, devoid of details;
and the details are just the real part of it. We can be only
indirectly affected by an abstract idea, and yet it is the abstract
idea alone which will do as much as it promises; and it is the
function of education to teach us to put our trust in it. Of course
the abstract idea must be occasionally explained--paraphrased, as it
were--by the aid of pictures; but discreetly, _cum grano salis_.

SECTION 19. The preceding rule may be taken as a special case of the
more general maxim, that a man should never let himself be mastered
by the impressions of the moment, or indeed by outward appearances at
all, which are incomparably more powerful in their effects than the
mere play of thought or a train of ideas; not because these momentary
impressions are rich in virtue of the data they supply,--it is often
just the contrary,--but because they are something palpable to the
senses and direct in their working; they forcibly invade our mind,
disturbing our repose and shattering our resolutions.

It is easy to understand that the thing which lies before our very
eyes will produce the whole of its effect at once, but that time and
leisure are necessary for the working of thought and the appreciation
of argument, as it is impossible to think of everything at one and the
same moment. This is why we are so allured by pleasure, in spite of
all our determination to resist it; or so much annoyed by a criticism,
even though we know that its author it totally incompetent to
judge; or so irritated by an insult, though it comes from some very
contemptible quarter. In the same way, to mention no other instances,
ten reasons for thinking that there is no danger may be outweighed by
one mistaken notion that it is actually at hand. All this shows the
radical unreason of human nature. Women frequently succumb altogether
to this predominating influence of present impressions, and there are
few men so overweighted with reason as to escape suffering from a
similar cause.

If it is impossible to resist the effects of some external influence
by the mere play of thought, the best thing to do is to neutralize it
by some contrary influence; for example, the effect of an insult may
be overcome by seeking the society of those who have a good opinion of
us; and the unpleasant sensation of imminent danger may be avoided by
fixing our attention on the means of warding it off.

Leibnitz[1] tells of an Italian who managed to bear up under the
tortures of the rack by never for a moment ceasing to think of the
gallows which would have awaited him, had he revealed his secret; he
kept on crying out: _I see it! I see it_!--afterwards explaining that
this was part of his plan.

[Footnote 1: _Nouveaux Essais_. Liv. I. ch. 2. Sec. 11.]

It is from some such reason as this, that we find it so difficult to
stand alone in a matter of opinion,--not to be made irresolute by the
fact that everyone else disagrees with us and acts accordingly, even
though we are quite sure that they are in the wrong. Take the case of
a fugitive king who is trying to avoid capture; how much consolation
he must find in the ceremonious and submissive attitude of a faithful
follower, exhibited secretly so as not to betray his master's strict
_incognito_; it must be almost necessary to prevent him doubting his
own existence.

SECTION 20. In the first part of this work I have insisted upon the
great value of _health_ as the chief and most important element in
happiness. Let me emphasize and confirm what I have there said by
giving a few general rules as to its preservation.

The way to harden the body is to impose a great deal of labor and
effort upon it in the days of good health,--to exercise it, both as a
whole and in its several parts, and to habituate it to withstand all
kinds of noxious influences. But on the appearance of an illness or
disorder, either in the body as a whole or in many of its parts, a
contrary course should be taken, and every means used to nurse the
body, or the part of it which is affected, and to spare it any effort;
for what is ailing and debilitated cannot be hardened.

The muscles may be strengthened by a vigorous use of them; but not so
the nerves; they are weakened by it. Therefore, while exercising the
muscles in every way that is suitable, care should be taken to spare
the nerves as much as possible. The eyes, for instance, should be
protected from too strong a light,--especially when it is reflected
light,--from any straining of them in the dark, or from the
long-continued examination of minute objects; and the ears from too
loud sounds. Above all, the brain should never be forced, or used too
much, or at the wrong time; let it have a rest during digestion; for
then the same vital energy which forms thoughts in the brain has a
great deal of work to do elsewhere,--I mean in the digestive organs,
where it prepares chyme and chyle. For similar reasons, the brain
should never be used during, or immediately after, violent muscular
exercise. For the motor nerves are in this respect on a par with the
sensory nerves; the pain felt when a limb is wounded has its seat in
the brain; and, in the same way, it is not really our legs and arms
which work and move,--it is the brain, or, more strictly, that part of
it which, through the medium of the spine, excites the nerves in the
limbs and sets them in motion. Accordingly, when our arms and legs
feel tired, the true seat of this feeling is in the brain. This is why
it is only in connection with those muscles which are set in motion
consciously and voluntarily,--in other words, depend for their action
upon the brain,--that any feeling of fatigue can arise; this is not
the case with those muscles which work involuntarily, like the heart.
It is obvious, then, that injury is done to the brain if violent
muscular exercise and intellectual exertion are forced upon it at the
same moment, or at very short intervals.

What I say stands in no contradiction with the fact that at the
beginning of a walk, or at any period of a short stroll, there often
comes a feeling of enhanced intellectual vigor. The parts of the brain
that come into play have had no time to become tired; and besides,
slight muscular exercise conduces to activity of the respiratory
organs, and causes a purer and more oxydated supply of arterial blood
to mount to the brain.

It is most important to allow the brain the full measure of sleep
which is required to restore it; for sleep is to a man's whole nature
what winding up is to a clock.[1] This measure will vary directly with
the development and activity of the brain; to overstep the measure is
mere waste of time, because if that is done, sleep gains only so much
in length as it loses in depth.[2]

[Footnote 1: _Of. Welt als Wille und Vorstellung_, 4th Edition. Bk.
II. pp. 236-40.]

[Footnote: 2: _Cf. loc: cit_: p. 275. Sleep is a morsel of death
borrowed to keep up and renew the part of life which is exhausted by
the day--_le sommeil est un emprunt fait à la mort_. Or it might be
said that sleep is the interest we have to pay on the capital which is
called in at death; and the higher the rate of interest and the
more regularly it is paid, the further the date of redemption is
postponed.]

It should be clearly understood that thought is nothing but the
organic function of the brain; and it has to obey the same laws in
regard to exertion and repose as any other organic function. The brain
can be ruined by overstrain, just like the eyes. As the function of
the stomach is to digest, so it is that of the brain to think. The
notion of a _soul_,--as something elementary and immaterial, merely
lodging in the brain and needing nothing at all for the performance
of its essential function, which consists in always and unweariedly
_thinking_--has undoubtedly driven many people to foolish practices,
leading to a deadening of the intellectual powers; Frederick the
Great, even, once tried to form the habit of doing without sleep
altogether. It would be well if professors of philosophy refrained
from giving currency to a notion which is attended by practical
results of a pernicious character; but then this is just what
professorial philosophy does, in its old-womanish endeavor to keep on
good terms with the catechism. A man should accustom himself to
view his intellectual capacities in no other light than that of
physiological functions, and to manage them accordingly--nursing or
exercising them as the case may be; remembering that every kind of
physical suffering, malady or disorder, in whatever part of the body
it occurs, has its effect upon the mind. The best advice that I know
on this subject is given by Cabanis in his _Rapports du physique et du
moral de l'homme_.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_. The work to which Schopenhauer
here refers is a series of essays by Cabanis, a French philosopher
(1757-1808), treating of mental and moral phenomena on a physiological
basis. In his later days, Cabanis completely abandoned his
materialistic standpoint.]

Through neglect of this rule, many men of genius and great scholars
have become weak-minded and childish, or even gone quite mad, as they
grew old. To take no other instances, there can be no doubt that the
celebrated English poets of the early part of this century, Scott,
Wordsworth, Southey, became intellectually dull and incapable towards
the end of their days, nay, soon after passing their sixtieth year;
and that their imbecility can be traced to the fact that, at that
period of life, they were all led on? by the promise of high pay, to
treat literature as a trade and to write for money. This seduced them
into an unnatural abuse of their intellectual powers; and a man who
puts his Pegasus into harness, and urges on his Muse with the whip,
will have to pay a penalty similar to that which is exacted by the
abuse of other kinds of power.

And even in the case of Kant, I suspect that the second childhood of
his last four years was due to overwork in later life, and after he
had succeeded in becoming a famous man.

Every month of the year has its own peculiar and direct influence upon
health and bodily condition generally; nay, even upon the state of the
mind. It is an influence dependent upon the weather.




CHAPTER III.

OUR RELATION TO OTHERS.--SECTION 21.


In making his way through life, a man will find it useful to be ready
and able to do two things: to look ahead and to overlook: the one
will protect him from loss and injury, the other from disputes and
squabbles.

No one who has to live amongst men should absolutely discard any
person who has his due place in the order of nature, even though he is
very wicked or contemptible or ridiculous. He must accept him as an
unalterable fact--unalterable, because the necessary outcome of an
eternal, fundamental principle; and in bad cases he should
remember the words of Mephistopheles: _es muss auch solche Käuze
geben[1]_--there must be fools and rogues in the world. If he acts
otherwise, he will be committing an injustice, and giving a challenge
of life and death to the man he discards. No one can alter his
own peculiar individuality, his moral character, his intellectual
capacity, his temperament or physique; and if we go so far as to
condemn a man from every point of view, there will be nothing left him
but to engage us in deadly conflict; for we are practically allowing
him the right to exist only on condition that he becomes another
man--which is impossible; his nature forbids it.

[Footnote 1: Goethe's _Faust_, Part I.]

So if you have to live amongst men, you must allow everyone the right
to exist in accordance with the character he has, whatever it turns
out to be: and all you should strive to do is to make use of this
character in such a way as its kind and nature permit, rather than to
hope for any alteration in it, or to condemn it off-hand for what it
is. This is the true sense of the maxim--Live and let live. That,
however, is a task which is difficult in proportion as it is right;
and he is a happy man who can once for all avoid having to do with a
great many of his fellow creatures.

The art of putting up with people may be learned by practicing
patience on inanimate objects, which, in virtue of some mechanical
or general physical necessity, oppose a stubborn resistance to our
freedom of action--a form of patience which is required every day.
The patience thus gained may be applied to our dealings with men,
by accustoming ourselves to regard their opposition, wherever we
encounter it, as the inevitable outcome of their nature, which sets
itself up against us in virtue of the same rigid law of necessity as
governs the resistance of inanimate objects. To become indignant at
their conduct is as foolish as to be angry with a stone because it
rolls into your path. And with many people the wisest thing you can
do, is to resolve to make use of those whom you cannot alter.

SECTION 22. It is astonishing how easily and how quickly similarity,
or difference of mind and disposition, makes itself felt between one
man and another as soon as they begin to talk: every little trifle
shows it. When two people of totally different natures are conversing,
almost everything said by the one will, in a greater or less degree,
displease the other, and in many cases produce positive annoyance;
even though the conversation turn upon the most out-of-the-way
subject, or one in which neither of the parties has any real interest.
People of similar nature, on the other hand, immediately come to feel
a kind of general agreement; and if they are cast very much in the
same mould, complete harmony or even unison will flow from their
intercourse.

This explain two circumstances. First of all, it shows why it is that
common, ordinary people are so sociable and find good company wherever
they go. Ah! those good, dear, brave people. It is just the contrary
with those who are not of the common run; and the less they are so,
the more unsociable they become; so that if, in their isolation, they
chance to come across some one in whose nature they can find even
a single sympathetic chord, be it never so minute, they show
extraordinary pleasure in his society. For one man can be to another
only so much as the other is to him. Great minds are like eagles, and
build their nest in some lofty solitude.

Secondly, we are enabled to understand how it is that people of like
disposition so quickly get on with one another, as though they were
drawn together by magnetic force--kindred souls greeting each other
from afar. Of course the most frequent opportunity of observing this
is afforded by people of vulgar tastes and inferior intellect, but
only because their name is legion; while those who are better off in
this respect and of a rarer nature, are not often to be met with: they
are called rare because you can seldom find them.

Take the case of a large number of people who have formed themselves
into a league for the purpose of carrying out some practical object;
if there be two rascals among them, they will recognize each other as
readily as if they bore a similar badge, and will at once conspire
for some misfeasance or treachery. In the same way, if you can
imagine--_per impossible_--a large company of very intelligent and
clever people, amongst whom there are only two blockheads, these two
will be sure to be drawn together by a feeling of sympathy, and each
of them will very soon secretly rejoice at having found at least one
intelligent person in the whole company. It is really quite curious
to see how two such men, especially if they are morally and
intellectually of an inferior type, will recognize each other at first
sight; with what zeal they will strive to become intimate; how affably
and cheerily they will run to greet each other, just as though they
were old friends;--it is all so striking that one is tempted to
embrace the Buddhist doctrine of metempsychosis and presume that they
were on familiar terms in some former state of existence.

Still, in spite of all this general agreement, men are kept apart who
might come together; or, in some cases, a passing discord springs up
between them. This is due to diversity of mood. You will hardly
ever see two people exactly in the same frame of mind; for that is
something which varies with their condition of life, occupation,
surroundings, health, the train of thought they are in at the moment,
and so on. These differences give rise to discord between persons of
the most harmonious disposition. To correct the balance properly, so
as to remove the disturbance--to introduce, as it were, a uniform
temperature,--is a work demanding a very high degree of culture. The
extent to which uniformity of mood is productive of good-fellowship
may be measured by its effects upon a large company. When, for
instance, a great many people are gathered together and presented with
some objective interest which works upon all alike and influences them
in a similar way, no matter what it be--a common danger or hope, some
great news, a spectacle, a play, a piece of music, or anything of that
kind--you will find them roused to a mutual expression of thought,
and a display of sincere interest. There will be a general feeling
of pleasure amongst them; for that which attracts their attention
produces a unity of mood by overpowering all private and personal
interests.

And in default of some objective interest of the kind I have
mentioned, recourse is usually had to something subjective. A bottle
of wine is not an uncommon means of introducing a mutual feeling of
fellowship; and even tea and coffee are used for a like end.

The discord which so easily finds its way into all society as an
effect of the different moods in which people happen to be for the
moment, also in part explains why it is that memory always idealizes,
and sometimes almost transfigures, the attitude we have taken up at
any period of the past--a change due to our inability to remember all
the fleeting influences which disturbed us on any given occasion.
Memory is in this respect like the lens of a _camera obscura_: it
contracts everything within its range, and so produces a much finer
picture than the actual landscape affords. And, in the case of a man,
absence always goes some way towards securing this advantageous light;
for though the idealizing tendency of the memory requires times to
complete its work, it begins it at once. Hence it is a prudent thing
to see your friends and acquaintances only at considerable intervals
of time; and on meeting them again, you will observe that memory has
been at work.

SECTION 23. No man can see _over his own height._ Let me explain what
I mean.

You cannot see in another man any more than you have in yourself; and
your own intelligence strictly determines the extent to which he comes
within its grasp. If your intelligence is of a very low order, mental
qualities in another, even though they be of the highest kind,
will have no effect at all upon you; you will see nothing in their
possessor except the meanest side of his individuality--in other
words, just those parts of his character and disposition which are
weak and defective. Your whole estimate of the man will be confined to
his defects, and his higher mental qualities will no more exist for
you than colors exist for those who cannot see.

Intellect is invisible to the man who has none. In any attempt to
criticise another's work, the range of knowledge possessed by the
critic is as essential a part of his verdict as the claims of the work
itself.

Hence intercourse with others involves a process of leveling down. The
qualities which are present in one man, and absent in another, cannot
come into play when they meet; and the self-sacrifice which this
entails upon one of the parties, calls forth no recognition from the
other.

Consider how sordid, how stupid, in a word, how _vulgar_ most men
are, and you will see that it is impossible to talk to them without
becoming vulgar yourself for the time being. Vulgarity is in this
respect like electricity; it is easily distributed. You will then
fully appreciate the truth and propriety of the expression, _to make
yourself cheap_; and you will be glad to avoid the society of people
whose only possible point of contact with you is just that part of
your nature of which you have least reason to be proud. So you will
see that, in dealing with fools and blockheads, there is only one way
of showing your intelligence--by having nothing to do with them. That
means, of course, that when you go into society, you may now and then
feel like a good dancer who gets an invitation to a ball, and on
arriving, finds that everyone is lame:--with whom is he to dance?

SECTION 24. I feel respect for the man--and he is one in a
hundred--who, when he is waiting or sitting unoccupied, refrains from
rattling or beating time with anything that happens to be handy,--his
stick, or knife and fork, or whatever else it may be. The probability
is that he is thinking of something.

With a large number of people, it is quite evident that their power of
sight completely dominates over their power of thought; they seem to
be conscious of existence only when they are making a noise; unless
indeed they happen to be smoking, for this serves a similar end. It is
for the same reason that they never fail to be all eyes and ears for
what is going on around them.

SECTION 25. La Rochefoucauld makes the striking remark that it is
difficult to feel deep veneration and great affection for one and the
same person. If this is so, we shall have to choose whether it is
veneration or love that we want from our fellow-men.

Their love is always selfish, though in very different ways; and the
means used to gain it are not always of a kind to make us proud. A
man is loved by others mainly in the degree in which he moderates
his claim on their good feeling and intelligence: but he must act
genuinely in the matter and without dissimulation--not merely out of
forbearance, which is at bottom a kind of contempt. This calls to mind
a very true observation of Helvetius[1]: _the amount of intellect
necessary to please us, is a most accurate measure of the amount of
intellect we have ourselves_. With these remarks as premises, it is
easy to draw the conclusion.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_. Helvetius, Claude-Adrien (1715-71),
a French philosophical writer much esteemed by Schopenhauer. His chief
work, _De l'Esprit_, excited great interest and opposition at the
time of its publication, on account of the author's pronounced
materialism.]

Now with veneration the case is just the opposite; it is wrung from
men reluctantly, and for that very reason mostly concealed. Hence, as
compared with love, veneration gives more real satisfaction; for it is
connected with personal value, and the same is not directly true
of love, which is subjective in its nature, whilst veneration is
objective. To be sure, it is more useful to be loved than to be
venerated.

SECTION 26. Most men are so thoroughly subjective that nothing really
interests them but themselves. They always think of their own case
as soon as ever any remark is made, and their whole attention is
engrossed and absorbed by the merest chance reference to anything
which affects them personally, be it never so remote: with the result
that they have no power left for forming an objective view of things,
should the conversation take that turn; neither can they admit any
validity in arguments which tell against their interest or their
vanity. Hence their attention is easily distracted. They are so
readily offended, insulted or annoyed, that in discussing any
impersonal matter with them, no care is too great to avoid letting
your remarks bear the slightest possible reference to the very worthy
and sensitive individuals whom you have before you; for anything you
may say will perhaps hurt their feelings. People really care about
nothing that does not affect them personally. True and striking
observations, fine, subtle and witty things are lost upon them: they
cannot understand or feel them. But anything that disturbs their petty
vanity in the most remote and indirect way, or reflects prejudicially
upon their exceedingly precious selves--to that, they are most
tenderly sensitive. In this respect they are like the little dog whose
toes you are so apt to tread upon inadvertently--you know it by the
shrill bark it sets up: or, again, they resemble a sick man covered
with sores and boils, with whom the greatest care must be taken to
avoid unnecessary handling. And in some people this feeling reaches
such a pass that, if they are talking with anyone, and he exhibits, or
does not sufficiently conceal, his intelligence and discernment, they
look upon it as a downright insult; although for the moment they hide
their ill will, and the unsuspecting author of it afterwards ruminates
in vain upon their conduct, and racks his brain to discover what he
could possibly have done to excite their malice and hatred.

But it is just as easy to flatter and win them over; and this is why
their judgment is usually corrupt, and why their opinions are swayed,
not by what is really true and right, but by the favor of the party or
class to which they belong. And the ultimate reason of it all is, that
in such people force of will greatly predominates over knowledge; and
hence their meagre intellect is wholly given up to the service of the
will, and can never free itself from that service for a moment.

Astrology furnishes a magnificent proof of this miserable subjective
tendency in men, which leads them to see everything only as bearing
upon themselves, and to think of nothing that is not straightway made
into a personal matter. The aim of astrology is to bring the motions
of the celestial bodies into relation with the wretched _Ego_ and to
establish a connection between a comet in the sky and squabbles and
rascalities on earth.[1]

[Footnote 1: See, for instance, Stobasus, _Eclog. I_. xxii. 9.]

SECTION 27. When any wrong statement is made, whether in public or
in society, or in books, and well received--or, at any rate, not
refuted--that that is no reason why you should despair or think there
the matter will rest. You should comfort yourself with the reflection
that the question will be afterwards gradually subjected to
examination; light will be thrown upon it; it will be thought over,
considered, discussed, and generally in the end the correct view will
be reached; so that, after a time--the length of which will depend
upon the difficulty of the subject--everyone will come to understand
that which a clear head saw at once.

In the meantime, of course, you must have patience. He who can see
truly in the midst of general infatuation is like a man whose watch
keeps good time, when all clocks in the town in which he lives are
wrong. He alone knows the right time; but what use is that to him?
for everyone goes by the clocks which speak false, not even excepting
those who know that his watch is the only one that is right.

SECTION 28. Men are like children, in that, if you spoil them, they
become naughty.

Therefore it is well not to be too indulgent or charitable with
anyone. You may take it as a general rule that you will not lose a
friend by refusing him a loan, but that you are very likely to do
so by granting it; and, for similar reasons, you will not readily
alienate people by being somewhat proud and careless in your
behaviour; but if you are very kind and complaisant towards them, you
will often make them arrogant and intolerable, and so a breach will
ensue.

There is one thing that, more than any other, throws people absolutely
off their balance--the thought that you are dependent upon them. This
is sure to produce an insolent and domineering manner towards you.
There are some people, indeed, who become rude if you enter into any
kind of relation with them; for instance, if you have occasion to
converse with them frequently upon confidential matters, they soon
come to fancy that they can take liberties with you, and so they try
and transgress the laws of politeness. This is why there are so few
with whom you care to become more intimate, and why you should avoid
familiarity with vulgar people. If a man comes to think that I am more
dependent upon him than he is upon me, he at once feels as though I
had stolen something from him; and his endeavor will be to have his
vengeance and get it back. The only way to attain superiority in
dealing with men, is to let it be seen that you are independent of
them.

And in this view it is advisable to let everyone of your
acquaintance--whether man or woman--feel now and then that you
could very well dispense with their company. This will consolidate
friendship. Nay, with most people there will be no harm in
occasionally mixing a grain of disdain with your treatment of them;
that will make them value your friendship all the more. _Chi non
istima vien stimato_, as a subtle Italian proverb has it--to disregard
is to win regard. But if we really think very highly of a person, we
should conceal it from him like a crime. This is not a very gratifying
thing to do, but it is right. Why, a dog will not bear being treated
too kindly, let alone a man!

SECTION 29. It is often the case that people of noble character and
great mental gifts betray a strange lack of worldly wisdom and a
deficiency in the knowledge of men, more especially when they are
young; with the result that it is easy to deceive or mislead them; and
that, on the other hand, natures of the commoner sort are more ready
and successful in making their way in the world.

The reason of this is that, when a man has little or no experience,
he must judge by his own antecedent notions; and in matters demanding
judgment, an antecedent notion is never on the same level as
experience. For, with the commoner sort of people, an antecedent
notion means just their own selfish point of view. This is not the
case with those whose mind and character are above the ordinary; for
it is precisely in this respect--their unselfishness--that they differ
from the rest of mankind; and as they judge other people's thoughts
and actions by their own high standard, the result does not always
tally with their calculation.

But if, in the end, a man of noble character comes to see, as the
effect of his own experience, or by the lessons he learns from others,
what it is that may be expected of men in general,--namely, that
five-sixths of them are morally and intellectually so constituted
that, if circumstances do not place you in relation with them, you had
better get out of their way and keep as far as possible from having
anything to do with them,--still, he will scarcely ever attain an
adequate notion of their wretchedly mean and shabby nature: all his
life long he will have to be extending and adding to the inferior
estimate he forms of them; and in the meantime he will commit a great
many mistakes and do himself harm.

Then, again, after he has really taken to heart the lessons that have
been taught him, it will occasionally happen that, when he is in the
society of people whom he does not know, he will be surprised to
find how thoroughly reasonable they all appear to be, both in their
conversation and in their demeanor--in fact, quite honest, sincere,
virtuous and trustworthy people, and at the same time shrewd and
clever.

But that ought not to perplex him. Nature is not like those bad
poets, who, in setting a fool or a knave before us, do their work so
clumsily, and with such evident design, that you might almost
fancy you saw the poet standing behind each of his characters, and
continually disavowing their sentiments, and telling you in a tone of
warning: _This is a knave; that is a fool; do not mind what he says_.
But Nature goes to work like Shakespeare and Goethe, poets who
make every one of their characters--even if it is the devil
himself!--appear to be quite in the right for the moment that they
come before us in their several parts; the characters are described so
objectively that they excite our interest and compel us to sympathize
with their point of view; for, like the works of Nature, every one
of these characters is evolved as the result of some hidden law
or principle, which makes all they say and do appear natural and
therefore necessary. And you will always be the prey or the plaything
of the devils and fools in this world, if you expect to see them going
about with horns or jangling their bells.

And it should be borne in mind that, in their intercourse with others,
people are like the moon, or like hunchbacks; they show you only one
of their sides. Every man has an innate talent for mimicry,--for
making a mask out of his physiognomy, so that he can always look as
if he really were what he pretends to be; and since he makes his
calculations always within the lines of his individual nature, the
appearance he puts on suits him to a nicety, and its effect is
extremely deceptive. He dons his mask whenever his object is to
flatter himself into some one's good opinion; and you may pay just as
much attention to it as if it were made of wax or cardboard, never
forgetting that excellent Italian proverb: _non é si tristo cane che
non meni la coda_,--there is no dog so bad but that he will wag his
tail.

In any case it is well to take care not to form a highly favorable
opinion of a person whose acquaintance you have only recently made,
for otherwise you are very likely to be disappointed; and then you
will be ashamed of yourself and perhaps even suffer some injury.
And while I am on the subject, there is another fact that deserves
mention. It is this. A man shows his character just in the way in
which he deals with trifles,--for then he is off his guard. This will
often afford a good opportunity of observing the boundless egoism of
man's nature, and his total lack of consideration for others; and
if these defects show themselves in small things, or merely in his
general demeanor, you will find that they also underlie his action in
matters of importance, although he may disguise the fact. This is an
opportunity which should not be missed. If in the little affairs of
every day,--the trifles of life, those matters to which the rule _de
minimis non_ applies,--a man is inconsiderate and seeks only what is
advantageous or convenient to himself, to the prejudice of others'
rights; if he appropriates to himself that which belongs to all alike,
you may be sure there is no justice in his heart, and that he would be
a scoundrel on a wholesale scale, only that law and compulsion bind
his hands. Do not trust him beyond your door. He who is not afraid
to break the laws of his own private circle, will break those of the
State when he can do so with impunity.

If the average man were so constituted that the good in him outweighed
the bad, it would be more advisable to rely upon his sense of justice,
fairness, gratitude, fidelity, love or compassion, than to work upon
his fears; but as the contrary is the case, and it is the bad that
outweighs the good, the opposite course is the more prudent one.

If any person with whom we are associated or have to do, exhibits
unpleasant or annoying qualities, we have only to ask ourselves
whether or not this person is of so much value to us that we can put
up with frequent and repeated exhibitions of the same qualities in a
somewhat aggravated form.[1] In case of an affirmative answer to this
question, there will not be much to be said, because talking is very
little use. We must let the matter pass, with or without some notice;
but we should nevertheless remember that we are thereby exposing
ourselves to a repetition of the offence. If the answer is in the
negative, we must break with our worthy friend at once and forever; or
in the case of a servant, dismiss him. For he will inevitably repeat
the offence, or do something tantamount to it, should the occasion
return, even though for the moment he is deep and sincere in his
assurances of the contrary. There is nothing, absolutely nothing,
that a man cannot forget,--but not _himself, his own character_. For
character is incorrigible; because all a man's actions emanate from an
inward principle, in virtue of which he must always do the same thing
under like circumstances; and he cannot do otherwise. Let me refer to
my prize essay on the so-called _Freedom of the Will_, the perusal
of which will dissipate any delusions the reader may have on this
subject.

[Footnote 1: To _forgive and forget_ means to throw away dearly bought
experience.]

To become reconciled to a friend with whom you have broken, is a form
of weakness; and you pay the penalty of it when he takes the first
opportunity of doing precisely the very thing which brought about
the breach; nay, he does it the more boldly, because he is secretly
conscious that you cannot get on without him. This is also applicable
to servants whom you have dismissed, and then taken into your service
again.

For the same reason, you should just as little expect people to
continue to act in a similar way under altered circumstances. The
truth is that men alter their demeanor and sentiments just as fast as
their interest changes; and their resign in this respect is a bill
drawn for short payment that the man must be still more short-sighted
who accepts the bill without protesting it. Accordingly, suppose you
want to know how a man will behave in an office into which you think
of putting him; you should not build upon expectations, on his
promises or assurances. For, even allowing that he is quite sincere,
he is speaking about a matter of which he has no knowledge. The only
way to calculate how he will behave, is to consider the circumstances
in which he will be placed, and the extent to which they will conflict
with his character.

If you wish to get a clear and profound insight--and it is very
needful--into the true but melancholy elements of which most men are
made, you will find in a very instructive thing to take the way they
behave in the pages of literature as a commentary to their doings in
practical life, and _vice versa._ The experience thus gained will be
very useful in avoiding wrong ideas, whether about yourself or about
others. But if you come across any special trait of meanness or
stupidity--in life or in literature,--you must be careful not to let
it annoy or distress you, but to look upon it merely as an addition to
your knowledge--a new fact to be considered in studying the character
of humanity. Your attitude towards it will be that of the mineralogist
who stumbles upon a very characteristic specimen of a mineral.

Of course there are some facts which are very exceptional, and it is
difficult to understand how they arise, and how it is that there come
to be such enormous differences between man and man; but, in general,
what was said long ago is quite true, and the world is in a very bad
way. In savage countries they eat one another, in civilized they
deceive one another; and that is what people call the way of the
world! What are States and all the elaborate systems of political
machinery, and the rule of force, whether in home or in foreign
affairs,--what are they but barriers against the boundless iniquity
of mankind? Does not all history show that whenever a king is firmly
planted on a throne, and his people reach some degree of prosperity,
he uses it to lead his army, like a band of robbers, against adjoining
countries? Are not almost all wars ultimately undertaken for purposes
of plunder? In the most remote antiquity, and to some extent also in
the Middle Ages, the conquered became slaves,--in other words, they
had to work for those who conquered them; and where is the difference
between that and paying war-taxes, which represent the product of our
previous work?

All war, says Voltaire, is a matter of robbery; and the Germans should
take that as a warning.

SECTION 30. No man is so formed that he can be left entirely to
himself, to go his own ways; everyone needs to be guided by a
preconceived plan, and to follow certain general rules. But if this is
carried too far, and a man tries to take on a character which is not
natural or innate in him, but it artificially acquired and evolved
merely by a process of reasoning, he will very soon discover that
Nature cannot be forced, and that if you drive it out, it will return
despite your efforts:--

_Naturam expelles furca, tamen usque recurret_.

To understand a rule governing conduct towards others, even to
discover it for oneself and to express it neatly, is easy enough; and
still, very soon afterwards, the rule may be broken in practice. But
that is no reason for despair; and you need not fancy that as it is
impossible to regulate your life in accordance with abstract ideas
and maxims, it is better to live just as you please. Here, as in all
theoretical instruction that aims at a practical result, the first
thing to do is to understand the rule; the second thing is to learn
the practice of it. The theory may be understand at once by an effort
of reason, and yet the practice of it acquired only in course of time.

A pupil may lean the various notes on an instrument of music, or the
different position in fencing; and when he makes a mistake, as he
is sure to do, however hard he tries, he is apt to think it will be
impossible to observe the rules, when he is set to read music at sight
or challenged to a furious duel. But for all that, gradual practice
makes him perfect, through a long series of slips, blunders and fresh
efforts. It is just the same in other things; in learning to write and
speak Latin, a man will forget the grammatical rules; it is only
by long practice that a blockhead turns into a courtier, that a
passionate man becomes shrewd and worldly-wise, or a frank person
reserved, or a noble person ironical. But though self-discipline of
this kind is the result of long habit, it always works by a sort of
external compulsion, which Nature never ceases to resist and sometimes
unexpectedly overcomes. The difference between action in accordance
with abstract principles, and action as the result of original,
innate tendency, is the same as that between a work of art, say a
watch--where form and movement are impressed upon shapeless and inert
matter--and a living organism, where form and matter are one, and each
is inseparable from the other.

There is a maxim attributed to the Emperor Napoleon, which expresses
this relation between acquired and innate character, and confirms what
I have said: _everything that is unnatural is imperfect_;--a rule of
universal application, whether in the physical or in the moral sphere.
The only exception I can think of to this rule is aventurine,[1] a
substance known to mineralogists, which in its natural state cannot
compare with the artificial preparation of it.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_. Aventurine is a rare kind of quartz;
and the same name is given to a brownish-colored glass much resembling
it, which is manufactured at Murano. It is so called from the fact
that the glass was discovered by chance _(arventura)_.]

And in this connection let me utter a word of protest against any and
every form of _affectation_. It always arouses contempt; in the first
place, because it argues deception, and the deception is cowardly,
for it is based on fear; and, secondly, it argues self-condemnation,
because it means that a man is trying to appear what he is not, and
therefore something which he things better than he actually is. To
affect a quality, and to plume yourself upon it, is just to confess
that you have not got it. Whether it is courage, or learning, or
intellect, or wit, or success with women, or riches, or social
position, or whatever else it may be that a man boasts of, you may
conclude by his boasting about it that that is precisely the direction
in which he is rather weak; for if a man really possesses any faculty
to the full, it will not occur to him to make a great show of
affecting it; he is quite content to know that he has it. That is the
application of the Spanish proverb: _herradura que chacolotea clavo le
falta_--a clattering hoof means a nail gone. To be sure, as I said at
first, no man ought to let the reins go quite loose, and show himself
just as he is; for there are many evil and bestial sides to our nature
which require to be hidden away out of sight; and this justifies the
negative attitude of dissimulation, but it does not justify a
positive feigning of qualities which are not there. It should also be
remembered that affectation is recognized at once, even before it is
clear what it is that is being affected. And, finally, affectation
cannot last very long, and one day the mask will fall off. _Nemo
potest personam diu ferre fictam_, says Seneca;[1] _ficta cito in
naturam suam recidunt_--no one can persevere long in a fictitious
character; for nature will soon reassert itself.

[Footnote 1: _De Clementia, I_. 1.]

SECTION 31. A man bears the weight of his own body without knowing it,
but he soon feels the weight of any other, if he tries to move it; in
the same way, a man can see other people's shortcoming's and vices,
but he is blind to his own. This arrangement has one advantage: it
turns other people into a kind of mirror, in which a man can see
clearly everything that is vicious, faulty, ill-bred and loathsome in
his own nature; only, it is generally the old story of the dog barking
at is own image; it is himself that he sees and not another dog, as he
fancies.

He who criticises others, works at the reformation of himself. Those
who form the secret habit of scrutinizing other people's general
behavior, and passing severe judgment upon what they do and leave
undone, thereby improve themselves, and work out their own perfection:
for they will have sufficient sense of justice, or at any rate enough
pride and vanity, to avoid in their own case that which they condemn
so harshly elsewhere. But tolerant people are just the opposite,
and claim for themselves the same indulgence that they extend to
others--_hanc veniam damus petimusque vicissim_. It is all very well
for the Bible to talk about the mote in another's eye and the beam in
one's own. The nature of the eye is to look not at itself but at other
things; and therefore to observe and blame faults in another is a
very suitable way of becoming conscious of one's own. We require a
looking-glass for the due dressing of our morals.

The same rule applies in the case of style and fine writing. If,
instead of condemning, you applaud some new folly in these matters,
you will imitate it. That is just why literary follies have such vogue
in Germany. The Germans are a very tolerant people--everybody can see
that! Their maxim is--_Hanc veniam damns petimusque vicissim._

SECTION 32. When he is young, a man of noble character fancies that
the relations prevailing amongst mankind, and the alliances to which
these relations lead, are at bottom and essentially, _ideal_ in their
nature; that is to say, that they rest upon similarity of disposition
or sentiment, or taste, or intellectual power, and so on.

But, later on, he finds out that it is a _real_ foundation which
underlies these alliances; that they are based upon some _material_
interest. This is the true foundation of almost all alliances: nay,
most men have no notion of an alliance resting upon any other basis.
Accordingly we find that a man is always measured by the office he
holds, or by his occupation, nationality, or family relations--in a
word, by the position and character which have been assigned him
in the conventional arrangements of life, where he is ticketed and
treated as so much goods. Reference to what he is in himself, as a
man--to the measure of his own personal qualities--is never made
unless for convenience' sake: and so that view of a man is something
exceptional, to be set aside and ignored, the moment that anyone finds
it disagreeable; and this is what usually happens. But the more of
personal worth a man has, the less pleasure he will take in these
conventional arrangements; and he will try to withdraw from the sphere
in which they apply. The reason why these arrangements exist at all,
is simply that in this world of ours misery and need are the chief
features: therefore it is everywhere the essential and paramount
business of life to devise the means of alleviating them.

SECTION 33. As paper-money circulates in the world instead of real
coin, so, is the place of true esteem and genuine friendship, you have
the outward appearance of it--a mimic show made to look as much like
the real thing as possible.

On the other hand, it may be asked whether there are any people who
really deserve the true coin. For my own part, I should certainly pay
more respect to an honest dog wagging his tail than to a hundred such
demonstrations of human regard.

True and genuine friendship presupposes a strong sympathy with the
weal and woe of another--purely objective in its character and quite
disinterested; and this in its turn means an absolute identification
of self with the object of friendship. The egoism of human nature is
so strongly antagonistic to any such sympathy, that true friendship
belongs to that class of things--the sea-serpent, for instance,--with
regard to which no one knows whether they are fabulous or really exist
somewhere or other.

Still, in many cases, there is a grain of true and genuine friendship
in the relation of man to man, though generally, of course, some
secret personal interest is at the bottom of them--some one among the
many forms that selfishness can take. But in a world where all is
imperfect, this grain of true feeling is such an ennobling influence
that it gives some warrant for calling those relations by the name of
friendship, for they stand far above the ordinary friendships that
prevail amongst mankind. The latter are so constituted that, were you
to hear how your dear friends speak of you behind your back, you would
never say another word to them.

Apart from the case where it would be a real help to you if your
friend were to make some great sacrifice to serve you, there is no
better means of testing the genuineness of his feelings than the way
in which he receives the news of a misfortune that has just happened
to you. At that moment the expression of his features will either show
that his one thought is that of true and sincere sympathy for you; or
else the absolute composure of his countenance, or the passing trace
of something other than sympathy, will confirm the well-known maxim
of La Rochefoucauld: _Dans l'adversite de nos meilleurs amis, nous
trouvons toujours quelque chose qui ne nous deplait pas_. Indeed, at
such a moment, the ordinary so-called friend will find it hard to
suppress the signs of a slight smile of pleasure. There are few ways
by which you can make more certain of putting people into a good humor
than by telling them of some trouble that has recently befallen you,
or by unreservedly disclosing some personal weakness of yours. How
characteristic this is of humanity!

Distance and long absence are always prejudicial to friendship,
however disinclined a man may be to admit. Our regard for people whom
we do not see--even though they be our dearest friends--gradually
dries up in the course of years, and they become abstract notions;
so that our interest in them grows to be more and more
intellectual,--nay, it is kept up only as a kind of tradition; whilst
we retain a lively and deep interest in those who are constantly
before our eyes, even if they be only pet animals. This shows how
much men are limited by their senses, and how true is the remark that
Goethe makes in _Tasso_ about the dominant influence of the present
moment:--

  _Die Gegenwart ist eine mächtige Göttin_[1]

[Footnote 1: Act iv., se. 4.]

_Friends of the house_ are very rightly so called; because they are
friends of the house rather than of its master; in other words, they
are more like cats than dogs.

Your friends will tell you that they are sincere; your enemies are
really so. Let your enemies' censure be like a bitter medicine, to be
used as a means of self-knowledge.

A friend in need, as the saying goes, is rare. Nay, it is just the
contrary; no sooner have you made a friend than he is in need, and
asks for a loan.

SECTION 34. A man must be still a greenhorn in the ways of the
world, if he imagines that he can make himself popular in society by
exhibiting intelligence and discernment. With the immense majority
of people, such qualities excite hatred and resentment, which are
rendered all the harder to bear by the fact that people are obliged to
suppress--even from themselves--the real reason of their anger.

What actually takes place is this. A man feels and perceives that the
person with whom he is conversing is intellectually very much his
superior.[1]

[Footnote 1: Cf. _Welt als Wills und Vorstellung_, Bk. II. p. 256 (4th
Edit.), where I quote from Dr. Johnson, and from Merck, the friend
of Goethe's youth. The former says: _There is nothing by which a man
exasperates most people more, than by displaying a superior ability of
brilliancy in conversation. They seem pleased at the time, but their
envy makes them curse him at their hearts._ (Boswells _Life of
Johnson_ aetat: 74).]

He thereupon secretly and half unconsciously concludes that his
interlocutor must form a proportionately low and limited estimate of
his abilities. That is a method of reasoning--an enthymeme--which
rouses the bitterest feelings of sullen and rancorous hatred. And so
Gracian is quite right in saying that the only way to win affection
from people is to show the most animal-like simplicity of
demeanor--_para ser bien quisto, el unico medio vestirse la piel del
mas simple de los brutos_.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Balthazar Graeian, _Oraculo manual,
y arte de prudencia_, 240. Gracian (1584-1658) was a Spanish prose
writer and Jesuit, whose works deal chiefly with the observation
of character in the various phenomena of life. Schopenhauer, among
others, had a great admiration for his worldly philosophy, and
translated his _Oraculo manual_--a system of rules for the conduct of
life--into German. The same book was translated into English towards
the close of the seventeenth century.]

To show your intelligence and discernment is only an indirect way of
reproaching other people for being dull and incapable. And besides, it
is natural for a vulgar man to be violently agitated by the sight of
opposition in any form; and in this case envy comes in as the secret
cause of his hostility. For it is a matter of daily observation that
people take the greatest pleasure in that which satisfies their
vanity; and vanity cannot be satisfied without comparison with others.
Now, there is nothing of which a man is prouder than of intellectual
ability, for it is this that gives him his commanding place in the
animal world. It is an exceedingly rash thing to let any one see that
you are decidedly superior to him in this respect, and to let other
people see it too; because he will then thirst for vengeance, and
generally look about for an opportunity of taking it by means of
insult, because this is to pass from the sphere of _intellect_ to
that of _will_--and there, all are on an equal footing as regards the
feeling of hostility. Hence, while rank and riches may always reckon
upon deferential treatment in society, that is something which
intellectual ability can never expect; to be ignored is the greatest
favor shown to it; and if people notice it at all, it is because they
regard it as a piece of impertinence, or else as something to which
its possessor has no legitimate right, and upon which he dares to
pride himself; and in retaliation and revenge for his conduct, people
secretly try and humiliate him in some other way; and if they wait to
do this, it is only for a fitting opportunity. A man may be as humble
as possible in his demeanor, and yet hardly ever get people to
overlook his crime in standing intellectually above them. In the
_Garden of Roses_, Sadi makes the remark:--_You should know that
foolish people are a hundredfold more averse to meeting the wise than
the wise are indisposed for the company of the foolish_.

On the other hand, it is a real recommendation to be stupid. For just
as warmth is agreeable to the body, so it does the mind good to feel
its superiority; and a man will seek company likely to give him this
feeling, as instinctively as he will approach the fireplace or walk
in the sun if he wants to get warm. But this means that he will be
disliked on account of his superiority; and if a man is to be liked,
he must really be inferior in point of intellect; and the same thing
holds good of a woman in point of beauty. To give proof of real and
unfeigned inferiority to some of the people you meet--that is a very
difficult business indeed!

Consider how kindly and heartily a girl who is passably pretty will
welcome one who is downright ugly. Physical advantages are not thought
so much of in the case of man, though I suppose you would rather a
little man sat next to you than one who was bigger than yourself. This
is why, amongst men, it is the dull and ignorant, and amongst women,
the ugly, who are always popular and in request.[1] It is likely to
be said of such people that they are extremely good-natured, because
every one wants to find a pretext for caring about them--a pretext
which will blind both himself and other people to the real reason why
he likes them. This is also why mental superiority of any sort always
tends to isolate its possessor; people run away from him out of
pure hatred, and say all manner of bad things about him by way of
justifying their action. Beauty, in the case of women, has a similar
effect: very pretty girls have no friends of their own sex, and they
even find it hard to get another girl to keep them company. A handsome
woman should always avoid applying for a position as companion,
because the moment she enters the room, her prospective mistress will
scowl at her beauty, as a piece of folly with which, both for her own
and for her daughter's sake, she can very well dispense. But if the
girl has advantages of rank, the case is very different; because rank,
unlike personal qualities which work by the force of mere contrast,
produces its effect by a process of reflection; much in the same
way as the particular hue of a person's complexion depends upon the
prevailing tone of his immediate surroundings.

[Footnote 1: If you desire to get on in the world, friends and
acquaintances are by far the best passport to fortune. The possession
of a great deal of ability makes a man proud, and therefore not apt to
flatter those who have very little, and from whom, on that account,
the possession of great ability should be carefully concealed. The
consciousness of small intellectual power has just the opposite
effect, and is very compatible with a humble, affable and
companionable nature, and with respect for what is mean and wretched.
This is why an inferior sort of man has so many friends to befriend
and encourage him.

These remarks are applicable not only to advancement in political
life, but to all competition for places of honor and dignity, nay,
even for reputation in the world of science, literature and art. In
learned societies, for example, mediocrity--that very acceptable
quality--is always to the fore, whilst merit meets with tardy
recognition, or with none at all. So it is in everything.]

SECTION 35. Our trust in other people often consists in great measure
of pure laziness, selfishness and vanity on our own part: I say
_laziness_, because, instead of making inquiries ourselves, and
exercising an active care, we prefer to trust others; _selfishness_,
because we are led to confide in people by the pressure of our own
affairs; and _vanity_, when we ask confidence for a matter on which we
rather pride ourselves. And yet, for all that, we expect people to be
true to the trust we repose in them.

But we ought not to become angry if people put no trust in us: because
that really means that they pay honesty the sincere compliment of
regarding it as a very rare thing,--so rare, indeed, as to leave us in
doubt whether its existence is not merely fabulous.

SECTION 36. _Politeness_,--which the Chinese hold to be a cardinal
virtue,--is based upon two considerations of policy. I have explained
one of these considerations in my _Ethics_; the other is as
follows:--Politeness is a tacit agreement that people's miserable
defects, whether moral or intellectual, shall on either side be
ignored and not made the subject of reproach; and since these defects
are thus rendered somewhat less obtrusive, the result is mutually
advantageous.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--In the passage referred to
_(Grundlage der Moral_, collected works, Vol. IV., pp. 187 and 198),
Schopenhauer explains politeness as a conventional and systematic
attempt to mask the egoism of human nature in the small affairs of
life,--an egoism so repulsive that some such device is necessary for
the purpose of concealing its ugliness. The relation which politeness
bears to the true love of one's neighbor is analogous to that existing
between justice as an affair of legality, and justice as the real
integrity of the heart.]

It is a wise thing to be polite; consequently, it is a stupid thing
to be rude. To make enemies by unnecessary and willful incivility,
is just as insane a proceeding as to set your house on fire. For
politeness is like a counter--an avowedly false coin, with which it is
foolish to be stingy. A sensible man will be generous in the use
of it. It is customary in every country to end a letter with
the words:--_your most obedient servant_--_votre très-humble
serviteur_--_suo devotissimo servo_. (The Germans are the only people
who suppress the word _servant_--_Diener_--because, of course, it is
not true!) However, to carry politeness to such an extent as to damage
your prospects, is like giving money where only counters are expected.

Wax, a substance naturally hard and brittle, can be made soft by the
application of a little warmth, so that it will take any shape you
please. In the same way, by being polite and friendly, you can make
people pliable and obliging, even though they are apt to be crabbed
and malevolent. Hence politeness is to human nature what warmth is to
wax.

Of course, it is no easy matter to be polite; in so far, I mean, as it
requires us to show great respect for everybody, whereas most people
deserve none at all; and again in so far as it demands that we should
feign the most lively interest in people, when we must be very glad
that we have nothing to do with them. To combine politeness with pride
is a masterpiece of wisdom.

We should be much less ready to lose our temper over an
insult,--which, in the strict sense of the word, means that we have
not been treated with respect,--if, on the one hand, we have not such
an exaggerated estimate of our value and dignity--that is to say, if
we were not so immensely proud of ourselves; and, on the other hand,
if we had arrived at any clear notion of the judgment which, in his
heart, one man generally passes upon another. If most people resent
the slightest hint that any blame attaches to them, you may imagine
their feelings if they were to overhear what their acquaintance say
about them. You should never lose sight of the fact that ordinary
politeness is only a grinning mask: if it shifts its place a little,
or is removed for a moment, there is no use raising a hue and cry.
When a man is downright rude, it is as though he had taken off all his
clothes, and stood before you in _puris naturalibus_. Like most men in
this condition, he does not present a very attractive appearance.

SECTION 37. You ought never to take any man as a model for what you
should do or leave undone; because position and circumstances are in
no two cases alike, and difference of character gives a peculiar,
individual tone to what a man does. Hence _duo cum faciunt idem, non
est idem_--two persons may do the same thing with a different result.
A man should act in accordance with his own character, as soon as he
has carefully deliberated on what he is about to do.

The outcome of this is that _originality_ cannot be dispensed with in
practical matters: otherwise, what a man does will not accord with
what he is.

SECTION 38. Never combat any man's opinion; for though you reached the
age of Methuselah, you would never have done setting him right upon
all the absurd things that he believes.

It is also well to avoid correcting people's mistakes in conversation,
however good your intentions may be; for it is easy to offend people,
and difficult, if not impossible, to mend them.

If you feel irritated by the absurd remarks of two people whose
conversation you happen to overhear, you should imagine that you are
listening to a dialogue of two fools in a comedy. _Probatum est._

The man who comes into the world with the notion that he is really
going to instruct in matters of the highest importance, may thank his
stars if he escapes with a whole skin.

SECTION 39. If you want your judgment to be accepted, express it
coolly and without passion. All violence has its seat in the _will_;
and so, if your judgment is expressed with vehemence, people will
consider it an effort of will, and not the outcome of knowledge, which
is in its nature cold and unimpassioned. Since the will is the primary
and radical element in human nature, and _intellect_ merely supervenes
as something secondary, people are more likely to believe that the
opinion you express with so much vehemence is due to the excited state
of your will, rather than that the excitement of the will comes only
from the ardent nature of your opinion.

SECTION 40. Even when you are fully justified in praising yourself,
you should never be seduced into doing so. For vanity is so very
common, and merit so very uncommon, that even if a man appears to be
praising himself, though very indirectly, people will be ready to lay
a hundred to one that he is talking out of pure vanity, and that he
has not sense enough to see what a fool he is making of himself.

Still, for all that, there may be some truth in Bacon's remark that,
as in the case of calumny, if you throw enough dirt, some of it will
stick, so it it also in regard to self-praise; with the conclusion
that self-praise, in small doses, is to be recommended.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Schopenhauer alludes to the
following passage in Bacon's _De Augmentis Scientiarum_, Bk. viii.,
ch. 2: _Sicut enim dici solet de calumnia_, audacter calumniare,
semper aliquid haeret; _sic dici potest de jactantia, (nisi plane
deformis fuerit et ridicula_), audacter te vendita, semper aliquid
haeret. _Haerebit certe apud populum, licet prudentiores subrideant.
Itaque existimatio parta apud plurimos paucorum fastidium abunde
compensabit._]

SECTION 41. If you have reason to suspect that a person is telling you
a lie, look as though you believed every word he said. This will give
him courage to go on; he will become more vehement in his assertions,
and in the end betray himself.

Again, if you perceive that a person is trying to conceal something
from you, but with only partial success, look as though you did not
believe him, This opposition on your part will provoke him into
leading out his reserve of truth and bringing the whole force of it to
bear upon your incredulity.

SECTION 42. You should regard all your private affairs as secrets,
and, in respect of them, treat your acquaintances, even though you
are on good terms with them, as perfect strangers, letting them know
nothing more than they can see for themselves. For in course of time,
and under altered circumstances, you may find it a disadvantage that
they know even the most harmless things about you.

And, as a general rule, it is more advisable to show your intelligence
by saying nothing than by speaking out; for silence is a matter
of prudence, whilst speech has something in it of vanity. The
opportunities for displaying the one or the other quality occur
equally often; but the fleeting satisfaction afforded by speech is
often preferred to the permanent advantage secured by silence.

The feeling of relief which lively people experience in speaking aloud
when no one is listening, should not be indulged, lest it grow into a
habit; for in this way thought establishes such very friendly terms
with speech, that conversation is apt to become a process of thinking
aloud. Prudence exacts that a wide gulf should be fixed between what
we think and what we say.

At times we fancy that people are utterly unable to believe in the
truth of some statement affecting us personally, whereas it never
occurs to them to doubt it; but if we give them the slightest
opportunity of doubting it, they find it absolutely impossible
to believe it any more. We often betray ourselves into revealing
something, simply because we suppose that people cannot help noticing
it,--just as a man will throw himself down from a great height because
he loses his head, in other words, because he fancies that he cannot
retain a firm footing any longer; the torment of his position is so
great, that he thinks it better to put an end to it at once. This is
the kind of insanity which is called _acrophobia_.

But it should not be forgotten how clever people are in regard
to affairs which do not concern them, even though they show no
particularly sign of acuteness in other matters. This is a kind of
algebra in which people are very proficient: give them a single fact
to go upon, and they will solve the most complicated problems. So,
if you wish to relate some event that happened long ago, without
mentioning any names, or otherwise indicating the persons to whom you
refer, you should be very careful not to introduce into your narrative
anything that might point, however distantly, to some definite fact,
whether it is a particular locality, or a date, or the name of some
one who was only to a small extent implicated, or anything else that
was even remotely connected with the event; for that at once gives
people something positive to go upon, and by the aid of their talent
for this sort of algebra, they will discover all the rest. Their
curiosity in these matters becomes a kind of enthusiasm: their will
spurs on their intellect, and drives it forward to the attainment
of the most remote results. For however unsusceptible and different
people may be to general and universal truths, they are very ardent in
the matter of particular details.

In keeping with what I have said, it will be found that all those
who profess to give instructions in the wisdom of life are specially
urgent in commending the practice of silence, and assign manifold
reasons why it should be observed; so it is not necessary for me to
enlarge upon the subject any further. However, I may just add one or
two little known Arabian proverbs, which occur to me as peculiarly
appropriate:--

_Do not tell a friend anything that you would conceal from an enemy_.

_A secret is in my custody, if I keep it; but should it escape me, it
is I who am the prisoner_.

_The tree of silence bears the fruit of peace_.

SECTION 43. Money is never spent to so much advantage as when you have
been cheated out of it; for at one stroke you have purchased prudence.

SECTION 44. If possible, no animosity should be felt for anyone. But
carefully observe and remember the manner in which a man conducts
himself, so that you may take the measure of his value,--at any
rate in regard to yourself,--and regulate your bearing towards
him accordingly; never losing sight of the fact that character
is unalterable, and that to forget the bad features in a man's
disposition is like throwing away hard-won money. Thus you will
protect yourself against the results of unwise intimacy and foolish
friendship.

_Give way neither to love nor to hate_, is one-half of worldly wisdom:
_say nothing and believe nothing_, the other half. Truly, a world
where there is need of such rules as this and the following, is one
upon which a man may well turn his back.

SECTION 45. To speak angrily to a person, to show your hatred by
what you say or by the way you look, is an unnecessary
proceeding--dangerous, foolish, ridiculous, and vulgar.

Anger and hatred should never be shown otherwise than in what you do;
and feelings will be all the more effective in action, in so far
as you avoid the exhibition of them in any other way. It is only
cold-blooded animals whose bite is poisonous.

SECTION 46. To speak without emphasizing your words--_parler sans
accent_--is an old rule with those who are wise in the world's ways.
It means that you should leave other people to discover what it is
that you have said; and as their minds are slow, you can make your
escape in time. On the other hand, to emphasize your meaning--_parler
avec accent_--is to address their feelings; and the result is always
the opposite of what you expect. If you are polite enough in your
manner and courteous in your tone there are many people whom you may
abuse outright, and yet run no immediate risk of offending them.




CHAPTER IV,

WORLDLY FORTUNE.--SECTION 47.


However varied the forms that human destiny may take, the same
elements are always present; and so life is everywhere much of a
piece, whether it passed in the cottage or in the palace, in the
barrack or in the cloister. Alter the circumstance as much as you
please! point to strange adventures, successes, failures! life is like
a sweet-shop, where there is a great variety of things, odd in shape
and diverse in color--one and all made from the same paste. And when
men speak of some one's success, the lot of the man who has failed is
not so very different as it seems. The inequalities in the world are
like the combinations in a kaleidoscope; at every turn a fresh picture
strikes the eye; and yet, in reality, you see only the same bits of
glass as you saw before.

SECTION 48. An ancient writer says, very truly, that there are three
great powers in the world; _Sagacity, Strength_, and _Luck_,--[Greek:
sunetos, kratos, tuchu.] I think the last is the most efficacious.

A man's life is like the voyage of a ship, where luck--_secunda aut
adversa fortuna_--acts the part of the wind, and speeds the vessel on
its way or drives it far out of its course. All that the man can do
for himself is of little avail; like the rudder, which, if worked hard
and continuously, may help in the navigation of the ship; and yet all
may be lost again by a sudden squall. But if the wind is only in the
right quarter, the ship will sail on so as not to need any steering.
The power of luck is nowhere better expressed than in a certain
Spanish proverb: _Da Ventura a tu hijo, y echa lo en el mar_--give
your son luck and throw him into the sea.

Still, chance, it may be said, is a malignant power, and as little
as possible should be left to its agency. And yet where is there any
giver who, in dispensing gifts, tells us quite clearly that we have no
right to them, and that we owe them not to any merit on our part,
but wholly to the goodness and grace of the giver--at the same time
allowing us to cherish the joyful hope of receiving, in all humility,
further undeserved gifts from the same hands--where is there any giver
like that, unless it be _Chance_? who understands the kingly art of
showing the recipient that all merit is powerless and unavailing
against the royal grace and favor.

On looking back over the course of his life,--that _labyrinthine way
of error_,--a man must see many points where luck failed him and
misfortune came; and then it is easy to carry self-reproach to an
unjust excess. For the course of a man's life is in no wise entirely
of his own making; it is the product of two factors--the series of
things that happened, and his own resolves in regard to them, and
these two are constantly interacting upon and modifying each other.
And besides these, another influence is at work in the very limited
extent of a man's horizon, whether it is that he cannot see very far
ahead in respect of the plans he will adopt, or that he is still less
able to predict the course of future events: his knowledge is strictly
confined to present plans and present events. Hence, as long as a
man's goal is far off, he cannot steer straight for it; he must be
content to make a course that is approximately right; and in following
the direction in which he thinks he ought to go, he will often have
occasion to tack.

All that a man can do is to form such resolves as from time to time
accord with the circumstances in which he is placed, in the hope of
thus managing to advance a step nearer towards the final goal. It is
usually the case that the position in which we stand, and the object
at which we aim, resemble two tendencies working with dissimilar
strength in different directions; and the course of our life is
represented by their diagonal, or resultant force.

Terence makes the remark that life is like a game at dice, where if
the number that turns up is not precisely the one you want, you can
still contrive to use it equally:--_in vita est hominum quasi cum
ludas tesseris; si illud quod maxime opus est jactu non cadit, illud
quod cecidit forte, id arte ut corrigas_.[1] Or, to put the matter
more shortly, life is a game of cards, when the cards are shuffled and
dealt by fate. But for my present purpose, the most suitable simile
would be that of a game of chess, where the plan we determined to
follow is conditioned by the play of our rival,--in life, by the
caprice of fate. We are compelled to modify our tactics, often to such
an extent that, as we carry them out, hardly a single feature of the
original plan can be recognized.

[Footnote 1: He seems to have been referring to a game something like
backgammon.]

But above and beyond all this, there is another influence that makes
itself felt in our lives. It is a trite saying--only too frequently
true--that we are often more foolish than we think. On the other hand,
we are often wiser than we fancy ourselves to be. This, however, is a
discovery which only those can make, of whom it is really true; and it
takes them a long time to make it. Our brains are not the wisest
part of us. In the great moments of life, when a man decides upon
an important step, his action is directed not so much by any clear
knowledge of the right thing to do, as by an inner impulse--you may
almost call it an instinct--proceeding from the deepest foundations of
his being. If, later on, he attempts to criticise his action by the
light of hard and fast ideas of what is right in the abstract--those
unprofitable ideas which are learnt by rote, or, it may be, borrowed
from other people; if he begins to apply general rules, the principles
which have guided others, to his own case, without sufficiently
weighing the maxim that one man's meat is another's poison, then he
will run great risk of doing himself an injustice. The result will
show where the right course lay. It is only when a man has reached
the happy age of wisdom that he is capable of just judgment in regard
either to his own actions or to those of others.

It may be that this impulse or instinct is the unconscious effect of a
kind of prophetic dream which is forgotten when we awake--lending
our life a uniformity of tone, a dramatic unity, such as could never
result from the unstable moments of consciousness, when we are so
easily led into error, so liable to strike a false note. It is in
virtue of some such prophetic dream that a man feels himself called to
great achievements in a special sphere, and works in that direction
from his youth up out of an inner and secret feeling that that is his
true path, just as by a similar instinct the bee is led to build up
its cells in the comb. This is the impulse which Balthazar Gracian
calls _la gran sindéresis_[1]--the great power of moral discernment:
it is something that a man instinctively feels to be his salvation
without which he were lost.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--This obscure word appears to be
derived from the Greek _sugtaereo_ (N.T. and Polyb.) meaning "to
observe strictly." It occurs in _The Doctor and Student_, a series of
dialogues between a doctor of divinity and a student on the laws of
England, first published in 1518; and is there (Dialog. I. ch. 13)
explained as "a natural power of the soule, set in the highest part
thereof, moving and stirring it to good, and abhoring evil." This
passage is copied into Milton's Commonplace Book, edit. _Horwood_, §
79. The word is also found in the Dictionary of the Spanish Academy
(vol. vi. of the year 1739) in the sense of an innate discernment
of moral principles, where a quotation is given from Madre Maria de
Jesus, abbess of the convent of the Conception at Agreda, a mystical
writer of the seventeenth century, frequently consulted by Philip
IV.,--and again in the Bolognese Dictionary of 1824, with a similar
meaning, illustrated from the writings of Salvini (1653-1729). For
these references I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. Norman Maccoll.]

To act in accordance with abstract principles is a difficult matter,
and a great deal of practice will be required before you can be even
occasionally successful; it of tens happens that the principles do not
fit in with your particular case. But every man has certain innate
_concrete principles_--a part, as it were, of the very blood that
flows in his veins, the sum or result, in fact, of all his thoughts,
feelings and volitions. Usually he has no knowledge of them in any
abstract form; it is only when he looks back upon the course his life
has taken, that he becomes aware of having been always led on by
them--as though they formed an invisible clue which he had followed
unawares.

SECTION 49. That Time works great changes, and that all things are
in their nature fleeting--these are truths that should never be
forgotten. Hence, in whatever case you may be, it is well to picture
to yourself the opposite: in prosperity, to be mindful of misfortune;
in friendship, of enmity; in good weather, of days when the sky is
overcast; in love, of hatred; in moments of trust, to imagine the
betrayal that will make you regret your confidence; and so, too, when
you are in evil plight, to have a lively sense of happier times--what
a lasting source of true worldly wisdom were there! We should then
always reflect, and not be so very easily deceived; because, in
general, we should anticipate the very changes that the years will
bring.

Perhaps in no form of knowledge is personal experience so
indispensable as in learning to see that all things are unstable and
transitory in this world. There is nothing that, in its own place and
for the time it lasts, is not a product of necessity, and therefore
capable of being fully justified; and it is this fact that makes
circumstances of every year, every month, even of every day, seem as
though they might maintain their right to last to all eternity. But we
know that this can never be the case, and that in a world where all is
fleeting, change alone endures. He is a prudent man who is not only
undeceived by apparent stability, but is able to forecast the lines
upon which movement will take place.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Chance_ plays so great a part in all human affairs that
when a man tries to ward off a remote danger by present sacrifice, the
danger often vanishes under some new and unforeseen development of
events; and then the sacrifice, in addition to being a complete loss,
brings about such an altered state of things as to be in itself a
source of positive danger in the face of this new development. In
taking measures of precaution, then, it is well not to look too far
ahead, but to reckon with chance; and often to oppose a courageous
front to a danger, in the hope that, like many a dark thunder-cloud,
it may pass away without breaking.]

But people generally think that present circumstances will last, and
that matters will go on in the future as they have clone in the past.
Their mistakes arises from the fact that they do not understand the
cause of the things they see--causes which, unlike the effects they
produce, contain in themselves the germ of future change. The
effects are all that people know, and they hold fast to them on the
supposition that those unknown causes, which were sufficient to bring
them about, will also be able to maintain them as they are. This is a
very common error; and the fact that it is common is not without its
advantage, for it means that people always err in unison; and hence
the calamity which results from the error affects all alike, and is
therefore easy to bear; whereas, if a philosopher makes a mistake, he
is alone in his error, and so at a double disadvantage.[1]

[Footnote 1: I may remark, parenthetically, that all this is a
confirmation of the principle laid down in _Die Welt als Wille und
Vorstellung_ (Bk. I. p. 94: 4th edit.), that error always consists in
making _a wrong inference_, that is, in ascribing a given effect to
something that did not cause it.]

But in saying that we should anticipate the effects of time, I mean
that we should mentally forecast what they are likely to be; I do
not mean that we should practically forestall them, by demanding the
immediate performance of promises which time alone can fulfill. The
man who makes his demand will find out that there is no worse or more
exacting usurer than Time; and that, if you compel Time to give money
in advance, you will have to pay a rate of interest more ruinous than
any Jew would require. It is possible, for instance, to make a tree
burst forth into leaf, blossom, or even bear fruit within a few days,
by the application of unslaked lime and artificial heat; but after
that the tree will wither away. So a young man may abuse his
strength--it may be only for a few weeks--by trying to do at nineteen
what he could easily manage at thirty, and Time may give him the loan
for which he asks; but the interest he will have to pay comes out of
the strength of his later years; nay, it is part of his very life
itself.

There are some kinds of illness in which entire restoration to health
is possible only by letting the complaint run its natural course;
after which it disappears without leaving any trace of its existence.
But if the sufferer is very impatient, and, while he is still
affected, insists that he is completely well, in this case, too,
Time will grant the loan, and the complaint may be shaken off; but
life-long weakness and chronic mischief will be the interest paid upon
it.

Again, in time of war or general disturbance, a man may require ready
money at once, and have to sell out his investments in land or consols
for a third or even a still smaller fraction of the sum he would have
received from them, if he could have waited for the market to right
itself, which would have happened in due course; but he compels Time
to grant him a loan, and his loss is the interest he has to pay. Or
perhaps he wants to go on a long journey and requires the money: in
one or two years he could lay by a sufficient sum out of his income,
but he cannot afford to wait; and so he either borrows it or deducts
it from his capital; in other words, he gets Time to lend him the
money in advance. The interest he pays is a disordered state of his
accounts, and permanent and increasing deficits, which he can never
make good.

Such is Time's usury; and all who cannot wait are its victims. There
is no more thriftless proceeding than to try and mend the measured
pace of Time. Be careful, then, not to become its debtor.

SECTION 50. In the daily affairs of life, you will have very many
opportunities of recognizing a characteristic difference between
ordinary people of prudence and discretion. In estimating the
possibility of danger in connection with any undertaking, an ordinary
man will confine his inquiries to the kind of risk that has already
attended such undertakings in the past; whereas a prudent person will
look ahead, and consider everything that might possibly happen in the
future, having regard to a certain Spanish maxim: _lo que no acaece en
un ano, acaece en un rato_--a thing may not happen in a year, and yet
may happen within two minutes.

The difference in question is, of course, quite natural; for it
requires some amount of discernment to calculate possibilities; but
a man need only have his senses about him to see what has already
happened.

Do not omit to sacrifice to evil spirits. What I mean is, that a man
should not hesitate about spending time, trouble, and money, or giving
up his comfort, or restricting his aims and denying himself, if he
can thereby shut the door on the possibility of misfortune. The most
terrible misfortunes are also the most improbable and remote--the
least likely to occur. The rule I am giving is best exemplified in
the practice of insurance,--a public sacrifice made on the altar of
anxiety. Therefore take out your policy of insurance!

SECTION 51. Whatever fate befalls you, do not give way to great
rejoicings or great lamentations; partly because all things are full
of change, and your fortune may turn at any moment; partly because men
are so apt to be deceived in their judgment as to what is good or bad
for them.

Almost every one in his turn has lamented over something which
afterwards turned out to be the very best thing for him that could
have happened--or rejoiced at an event which became the source of his
greatest sufferings. The right state of mind has been finely portrayed
by Shakespeare:

_I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief That the first face of
neither, on the start, Can woman me unto't_.[1]

[Footnote 1: _All's Well that Ends Well, Act. ii. Sc. 2_.]

And, in general, it may be said that, if a man takes misfortunes
quietly, it is because he knows that very many dreadful things may
happen in the course of life; and so he looks upon the trouble of the
moment as only a very small part of that which might come. This is
the Stoic temper--never to be unmindful of the sad fate of
humanity--_condicionis humanoe oblitus_; but always to remember that
our existence is full of woe and misery: and that the ills to which we
are exposed are innumerable. Wherever he be, a man need only cast a
look around, to revive the sense of human misery: there before his
eyes he can see mankind struggling and floundering in torment,--all
for the sake of a wretched existence, barren and unprofitable!

If he remembers this, a man will not expect very much from life, but
learn to accommodate himself to a world where all is relative and no
perfect state exists;--always looking misfortune in the face, and if
he cannot avoid it, meeting it with courage.

It should never be forgotten that misfortune, be it great or small, is
the element in which we live. But that is no reason why a man should
indulge in fretful complaints, and, like Beresford,[1] pull a long
face over the _Miseries of Human Life_,--and not a single hour is free
from them; or still less, call upon the Deity at every flea-bite--_in
pulicis morsu Deum invocare_. Our aim should be to look well about us,
to ward off misfortune by going to meet it, to attain such perfection
and refinement in averting the disagreeable things of life,--whether
they come from our fellow-men or from the physical world,--that, like
a clever fox, we may slip out of the way of every mishap, great or
small; remembering that a mishap is generally only our own awkwardness
in disguise.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Rev. James Beresford (1764-1840),
miscellaneous writer. The full title of this, his chief work, is "The
Miseries of Human Life; or the last groans of Timothy Testy and Samuel
Sensitive, with a few supplementary sighs from Mrs. Testy."]

The main reason why misfortune falls less heavily upon us, if we have
looked upon its occurrence as not impossible, and, as the saying is,
prepared ourselves for it, may be this: if, before this misfortune
comes, we have quietly thought over it as something which may or may
not happen, the whole of its extent and range is known to us, and we
can, at least, determine how far it will affect us; so that, if it
really arrives, it does not depress us unduly--its weight is not felt
to be greater than it actually is. But if no preparation has been
made to meet it, and it comes unexpectedly, the mind is in a state of
terror for the moment and unable to measure the full extent of the
calamity; it seems so far-reaching in its effects that the victim
might well think there was no limit to them; in any case, its range is
exaggerated. In the same way, darkness and uncertainty always increase
the sense of danger. And, of course, if we have thought over the
possibility of misfortune, we have also at the same time considered
the sources to which we shall look for help and consolation; or, at
any rate, we have accustomed ourselves to the idea of it.

There is nothing that better fits us to endure the misfortunes of
life with composure, than to know for certain that _everything
that happens--from the smallest up to the greatest facts of
existence--happens of necessity._[1] A man soon accommodates himself
to the inevitable--to something that must be; and if he knows that
nothing can happen except of necessity, he will see that things cannot
be other that they are, and that even the strangest chances in the
world are just as much a product of necessity as phenomena which obey
well-known rules and turn out exactly in accordance with expectation.
Let me here refer to what I have said elsewhere on the soothing effect
of the knowledge that all things are inevitable and a product of
necessity.[2]

[Footnote 1: This is a truth which I have firmly established in my
prize-essay on the _Freedom of the Will_, where the reader will find a
detailed explanation of the grounds on which it rests. Cf. especially
p. 60. [Schopenhauer's Works, 4th Edit., vol. iv.--_Tr_.]]

[Footnote 2: Cf. _Welt als Wille und Vorstellung_, Bk. I. p. 361 (4th
edit.).]

If a man is steeped in the knowledge of this truth, he will, first of
all, do what he can, and then readily endure what he must.

We may regard the petty vexations of life that are constantly
happening, as designed to keep us in practice for bearing great
misfortunes, so that we may not become completely enervated by a
career of prosperity. A man should be as Siegfried, armed _cap-à-pie_,
towards the small troubles of every day--those little differences we
have with our fellow-men, insignificant disputes, unbecoming conduct
in other people, petty gossip, and many other similar annoyances of
life; he should not feel them at all, much less take them to heart and
brood over them, but hold them at arm's length and push them out of
his way, like stones that lie in the road, and upon no account think
about them and give them a place in his reflections.

SECTION 52. What people commonly call _Fate_ is, as a general rule,
nothing but their own stupid and foolish conduct. There is a fine
passage in Homer,[1] illustrating the truth of this remark, where
the poet praises [GREEK: maetis]--shrewd council; and his advice
is worthy of all attention. For if wickedness is atoned for only in
another world, stupidity gets its reward here--although, now and then,
mercy may be shown to the offender.

[Footnote 1: _Iliad_, xxiii. 313, sqq.]

It is not ferocity but cunning that strikes fear into the heart
and forebodes danger; so true it is that the human brain is a more
terrible weapon than the lion's paw.

The most finished man of the world would be one who was never
irresolute and never in a hurry.

SECTION 53. _Courage_ comes next to prudence as a quality of mind very
essential to happiness. It is quite true that no one can endow himself
with either, since a man inherits prudence from his mother and courage
from his father; still, if he has these qualities, he can do much to
develop them by means of resolute exercise.

In this world, _where the game is played with loaded dice_, a man must
have a temper of iron, with armor proof to the blows of fate, and
weapons to make his way against men. Life is one long battle; we have
to fight at every step; and Voltaire very rightly says that if we
succeed, it is at the point of the sword, and that we die with the
weapon in our hand--on _ne réussit dans ce monde qua la pointe de
l'épee, et on meurt les armes à la main_. It is a cowardly soul that
shrinks or grows faint and despondent as soon as the storm begins to
gather, or even when the first cloud appears on the horizon. Our motto
should be _No Surrender_; and far from yielding to the ills of life,
let us take fresh courage from misfortune:--

_Tu ne cede malis sed contra audentior ito_.[1]

[Footnote 1: Virgil, _Aeneid_, vi. 95.]

As long as the issue of any matter fraught with peril is still in
doubt, and there is yet some possibility left that all may come right,
no one should ever tremble or think of anything but resistance,--just
as a man should not despair of the weather if he can see a bit of blue
sky anywhere. Let our attitude be such that we should not quake even
if the world fell in ruins about us:--

  _Si fractus illabatur orbis
  Impavidum ferient ruinae_.[1]

[Footnote 1: Horace, Odes iii. 3.]

Our whole life itself--let alone its blessings--would not be worth
such a cowardly trembling and shrinking of the heart. Therefore, let
us face life courageously and show a firm front to every ill:--

_Quocirca vivite fortes Fortiaque adversis opponite pectora rebus_.

Still, it is possible for courage to be carried to an excess and to
degenerate into rashness. It may even be said that some amount of fear
is necessary, if we are to exist at all in the world, and cowardice
is only the exaggerated form of it. This truth has been very well
expressed by Bacon, in his account of _Terror Panicus_; and the
etymological account which he gives of its meaning, is very superior
to the ancient explanation preserved for us by Plutarch.[1] He
connects the expression with _Pan_ the personification of Nature;[2]
and observes that fear is innate in every living thing, and, in fact,
tends to its preservation, but that it is apt to come into play
without due cause, and that man is especially exposed to it. The chief
feature of this _Panie Terror_ is that there is no clear notion of any
definite danger bound up with it; that it presumes rather than knows
that danger exists; and that, in case of need, it pleads fright itself
as the reason for being afraid.

[Footnote 1: _De Iside et Osiride_ ch. 14.]

[Footnote 2: _De Sapientia Veterum_, C. 6. _Natura enim rerum omnibus
viventibus indidit mentum ac formidinem, vitae atque essentiae suae
conservatricem, ac mala ingruentia vitantem et depellentem. Verumtamen
eaden natura modum tenere nescia est: sed timoribus salutaribus semper
vanos et innanes admiscet; adeo ut omnia (si intus conspici darentur)
Panicis terroribus plenissima sint praesertim humana_.]




CHAPTER V.

THE AGES OF LIFE.


There is a very fine saying of Voltaire's to the effect that every age
of life has its own peculiar mental character, and that a man will
feel completely unhappy if his mind is not in accordance with his
years:--

  _Qui n'a pas l'esprit de son âge,
  De son âge atout le malheur_.

It will, therefore, be a fitting close to our speculations upon the
nature of happiness, if we glance at the chances which the various
periods of life produce in us.

Our whole life long it is _the present_, and the present alone, that
we actually possess: the only difference is that at the beginning of
life we look forward to a long future, and that towards the end we
look back upon a long past; also that our temperament, but not our
character, undergoes certain well-known changes, which make _the
present_ wear a different color at each period of life.

I have elsewhere stated that in childhood we are more given to using
our _intellect_ than our _will_; and I have explained why this is
so.[1] It is just for this reason that the first quarter of life is so
happy: as we look back upon it in after years, it seems a sort of lost
paradise. In childhood our relations with others are limited, our
wants are few,--in a word, there is little stimulus for the will;
and so our chief concern is the extension of our knowledge. The
intellect--like the brain, which attains its full size in the seventh
year,[2] is developed early, though it takes time to mature; and it
explores the whole world of its surroundings in its constant search
for nutriment: it is then that existence is in itself an ever fresh
delight, and all things sparkle with the charm of novelty.

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Schopenhauer refers to _Die Welt
als Wille und Vorstellung_, Bk. II. c, 31, p. 451 (4th edit.), where
he explains that this is due to the fact that at that period of life
the brain and nervous system are much more developed than any other
part of the organism.]

[Footnote 2: _Translator's Note_.--This statement is not quite
correct. The weight of the brain increases rapidly up to the seventh
year, more slowly between the sixteenth and the twentieth year, still
more slowly till between thirty and forty years of age, when it
attains its maximum. At each decennial period after this, it is
supposed to decrease in weight on the average, an ounce for every ten
years.]

This is why the years of childhood are like a long poem. For the
function of poetry, as of all art, is to grasp the _Idea_--in the
Platonic sense; in other words, to apprehend a particular object in
such a way as to perceive its essential nature, the characteristics
it has in common with all other objects of the same kind; so that
a single object appears as the representative of a class, and the
results of one experience hold good for a thousand.

It may be thought that my remarks are opposed to fact, and that the
child is never occupied with anything beyond the individual objects or
events which are presented to it from time to time, and then only in
so far as they interest and excite its will for the moment; but this
is not really the case. In those early years, life--in the full
meaning of the word, is something so new and fresh, and its sensations
are so keen and unblunted by repetition, that, in the midst of all its
pursuits and without any clear consciousness of what it is doing,
the child is always silently occupied in grasping the nature of life
itself,--in arriving at its fundamental character and general outline
by means of separate scenes and experiences; or, to use Spinoza's
phraseology, the child is learning to see the things and persons
about it _sub specie aeternitatis_,--as particular manifestations of
universal law.

The younger we are, then, the more does every individual object
represent for us the whole class to which it belongs; but as the years
increase, this becomes less and less the case. That is the reason why
youthful impressions are so different from those of old age. And that
it also why the slight knowledge and experience gained in childhood
and youth afterwards come to stand as the permanent rubric, or
heading, for all the knowledge acquired in later life,--those early
forms of knowledge passing into categories, as it were, under which
the results of subsequent experience are classified; though a clear
consciousness of what is being done, does not always attend upon the
process.

In this way the earliest years of a man's life lay the foundation of
his view of the world, whether it be shallow or deep; and although
this view may be extended and perfected later on, it is not materially
altered. It is an effect of this purely objective and therefore
poetical view of the world,--essential to the period of childhood
and promoted by the as yet undeveloped state of the volitional
energy--that, as children, we are concerned much more with the
acquisition of pure knowledge than with exercising the power of will.
Hence that grave, fixed look observable in so many children, of which
Raphael makes such a happy use in his depiction of cherubs, especially
in the picture of the _Sistine Madonna_. The years of childhood are
thus rendered so full of bliss that the memory of them is always
coupled with longing and regret.

While we thus eagerly apply ourselves to learning the outward aspect
of things, as the primitive method of understanding the objects about
us, education aims at instilling into us _ideas_. But ideas furnish no
information as to the real and essential nature of objects, which, as
the foundation and true content of all knowledge, can be reached only
by the process called _intuition_. This is a kind of knowledge which
can in no wise be instilled into us from without; we must arrive at it
by and for ourselves.

Hence a man's intellectual as well as his moral qualities proceed
from the depths of his own nature, and are not the result of external
influences; and no educational scheme--of Pestalozzi, or of any one
else--can turn a born simpleton into a man of sense. The thing is
impossible! He was born a simpleton, and a simpleton he will die.

It is the depth and intensity of this early intuitive knowledge of the
external world that explain why the experiences of childhood take such
a firm hold on the memory. When we were young, we were completely
absorbed in our immediate surroundings; there was nothing to distract
our attention from them; we looked upon the objects about us as though
they were the only ones of their kind, as though, indeed, nothing else
existed at all. Later on, when we come to find out how many things
there are in the world, this primitive state of mind vanishes, and
with it our patience.

I have said elsewhere[1] that the world, considered as _object_,--in
other words, as it is _presented_ to us objectively,--wears in
general a pleasing aspect; but that in the world, considered as
_subject_,--that is, in regard to its inner nature, which is
_will_,--pain and trouble predominate. I may be allowed to express the
matter, briefly, thus: _the world is glorious to look at, but dreadful
in reality_.

[Footnote 1: _Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung_, Bk. II. c. 31, p.
426-7 (4th Edit.), to which the reader is referred for a detailed
explanation of my meaning.]

Accordingly, we find that, in the years of childhood, the world is
much better known to us on its outer or objective side, namely, as the
presentation of will, than on the side of its inner nature, namely, as
the will itself. Since the objective side wears a pleasing aspect, and
the inner or subjective side, with its tale of horror, remains as yet
unknown, the youth, as his intelligence develops, takes all the forms
of beauty that he sees, in nature and in art, for so many objects of
blissful existence; they are so beautiful to the outward eye that, on
their inner side, they must, he thinks, be much more beautiful still.
So the world lies before him like another Eden; and this is the
Arcadia in which we are all born.

A little later, this state of mind gives birth to a thirst for real
life--the impulse to do and suffer--which drives a man forth into
the hurly-burly of the world. There he learns the other side of
existence--the inner side, the will, which is thwarted at every step.
Then comes the great period of disillusion, a period of very gradual
growth; but once it has fairly begun, a man will tell you that he has
got over all his false notions--_l'âge des illusions est passé_; and
yet the process is only beginning, and it goes on extending its sway
and applying more and more to the whole of life.

So it may be said that in childhood, life looks like the scenery in
a theatre, as you view it from a distance; and that in old age it is
like the same scenery when you come up quite close to it.

And, lastly, there is another circumstance that contributes to the
happiness of childhood. As spring commences, the young leaves on the
trees are similar in color and much the same in shape; and in the
first years of life we all resemble one another and harmonize very
well. But with puberty divergence begins; and, like the radii of a
circle, we go further and further apart.

The period of youth, which forms the remainder of this earlier half of
our existence--and how many advantages it has over the later half!--is
troubled and made miserable by the pursuit of happiness, as though
there were no doubt that it can be met with somewhere in life,--a hope
that always ends in failure and leads to discontent. An illusory
image of some vague future bliss--born of a dream and shaped by
fancy--floats before our eyes; and we search for the reality in
vain. So it is that the young man is generally dissatisfied with the
position in which he finds himself, whatever it may be; he ascribes
his disappointment solely to the state of things that meets him on
his first introduction to life, when he had expected something very
different; whereas it is only the vanity and wretchedness of human
life everywhere that he is now for the first time experiencing.

It would be a great advantage to a young man if his early training
could eradicate the idea that the world has a great deal to offer him.
But the usual result of education is to strengthen this delusion; and
our first ideas of life are generally taken from fiction rather than
from fact.

In the bright dawn of our youthful days, the poetry of life spreads
out a gorgeous vision before us, and we torture ourselves by longing
to see it realized. We might as well wish to grasp the rainbow! The
youth expects his career to be like an interesting romance; and there
lies the germ of that disappointment which I have been describing.[1]
What lends a charm to all these visions is just the fact that they are
visionary and not real, and that in contemplating them we are in the
sphere of pure knowledge, which is sufficient in itself and free from
the noise and struggle of life. To try and realize those visions is
to make them an object of _will_--a process which always involves
pain.[2]

[Footnote 1: Cf. loc. cit., p. 428.]

[Footnote 2: Let me refer the reader, if he is interested in the
subject, to the volume already cited, chapter 37.]

If the chief feature of the earlier half of life is a never-satisfied
longing after happiness, the later half is characterized by the dread
of misfortune. For, as we advance in years, it becomes in a greater or
less degree clear that all happiness is chimerical in its nature,
and that pain alone is real. Accordingly, in later years, we, or, at
least, the more prudent amongst us, are more intent upon eliminating
what is painful from our lives and making our position secure, than on
the pursuit of positive pleasure. I may observe, by the way, that in
old age, we are better able to prevent misfortunes from coming, and in
youth better able to bear them when they come.

In my young days, I was always pleased to hear a ring at my door: ah!
thought I, now for something pleasant. But in later life my feelings
on such occasions were rather akin to dismay than to pleasure: heaven
help me! thought I, what am I to do? A similar revulsion of feeling in
regard to the world of men takes place in all persons of any talent
or distinction. For that very reason they cannot be said properly to
belong to the world; in a greater or less degree, according to the
extent of their superiority, they stand alone. In their youth they
have a sense of being abandoned by the world; but later on, they feel
as though they had escaped it. The earlier feeling is an unpleasant
one, and rests upon ignorance; the second is pleasurable--for in the
meantime they have come to know what the world is.

The consequence of this is that, as compared with the earlier, the
later half of life, like the second part of a musical period, has less
of passionate longing and more restfulness about it. And why is this
the case Simply because, in youth, a man fancies that there is a
prodigious amount of happiness and pleasure to be had in the world,
only that it is difficult to come by it; whereas, when he becomes
old, he knows that there is nothing of the kind; he makes his mind
completely at ease on the matter, enjoys the present hour as well as
he can, and even takes a pleasure in trifles.

The chief result gained by experience of life is _clearness of view_.
This is what distinguishes the man of mature age, and makes the world
wear such a different aspect from that which it presented in his youth
or boyhood. It is only then that he sees things quite plain, and takes
them for that which they really are: while in earlier years he saw a
phantom-world, put together out of the whims and crotchets of his own
mind, inherited prejudice and strange delusion: the real world was
hidden from him, or the vision of it distorted. The first thing
that experience finds to do is to free us from the phantoms of the
brain--those false notions that have been put into us in youth.

To prevent their entrance at all would, of course, be the best form of
education, even though it were only negative in aim: but it would be a
task full of difficulty. At first the child's horizon would have to be
limited as much as possible, and yet within that limited sphere none
but clear and correct notions would have to be given; only after the
child had properly appreciated everything within it, might the sphere
be gradually enlarged; care being always taken that nothing was left
obscure, or half or wrongly understood. The consequence of this
training would be that the child's notions of men and things would
always be limited and simple in their character; but, on the other
hand, they would be clear and correct, and only need to be extended,
not to be rectified. The same line might be pursued on into the period
of youth. This method of education would lay special stress upon the
prohibition of novel reading; and the place of novels would be taken
by suitable biographical literature--the life of Franklin, for
instance, or Moritz' _Anton Reiser_.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--Moritz was a miscellaneous writer
of the last century (1757-93). His _Anton Reiser_, composed in the
form of a novel, is practically an autobiography.]

In our early days we fancy that the leading events in our life, and
the persons who are going to play an important part in it, will make
their entrance to the sound of drums and trumpets; but when, in old
age, we look back, we find that they all came in quite quietly,
slipped in, as it were, by the side-door, almost unnoticed.

From the point of view we have been taking up until now, life may be
compared to a piece of embroidery, of which, during the first half of
his time, a man gets a sight of the right side, and during the second
half, of the wrong. The wrong side is not so pretty as the right, but
it is more instructive; it shows the way in which the threads have
been worked together.

Intellectual superiority, even if it is of the highest kind, will not
secure for a man a preponderating place in conversation until after he
is forty years of age. For age and experience, though they can never
be a substitute for intellectual talent, may far outweigh it; and even
in a person of the meanest capacity, they give a certain counterpoise
to the power of an extremely intellectual man, so long as the latter
is young. Of course I allude here to personal superiority, not to the
place a man may gain by his works.

And on passing his fortieth year, any man of the slightest power of
mind--any man, that is, who has more than the sorry share of intellect
with which Nature has endowed five-sixths of mankind--will hardly fail
to show some trace of misanthropy. For, as is natural, he has by that
time inferred other people's character from an examination of his own;
with the result that he has been gradually disappointed to find that
in the qualities of the head or in those of the heart--and usually in
both--he reaches a level to which they do not attain; so he gladly
avoids having anything more to do with them. For it may be said, in
general, that every man will love or hate solitude--in other Words,
his own society--just in proportion as he is worth anything in
himself. Kant has some remarks upon this kind of misanthropy in his
_Critique of the Faculty of Judgment_.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Kritik der Urtheilskraft_, Part I, §29, Note ad fin.]

In a young man, it is a bad sign, as well from an intellectual as from
a moral point of view, if he is precocious in understanding the ways
of the world, and in adapting himself to its pursuits; if he at once
knows how to deal with men, and enters upon life, as it were, fully
prepared. It argues a vulgar nature. On the other hand, to be
surprised and astonished at the way people act, and to be clumsy and
cross-grained in having to do with them, indicates a character of the
nobler sort.

The cheerfulness and vivacity of youth are partly due to the fact
that, when we are ascending the hill of life, death is not visible: it
lies down at the bottom of the other side. But once we have crossed
the top of the hill, death comes in view--death--which, until then,
was known to us only by hearsay. This makes our spirits droop, for at
the same time we begin to feel that our vital powers are on the ebb.
A grave seriousness now takes the place of that early extravagance of
spirit; and the change is noticeable even in the expression of a man's
face. As long as we are young, people may tell us what they please! we
look upon life as endless and use our time recklessly; but the older
we become, the more we practice economy. For towards the close of
life, every day we live gives us the same kind of sensation as the
criminal experiences at every step on his way to be tried.

From the standpoint of youth, life seems to stretch away into an
endless future; from the standpoint of old age, to go back but a
little way into the past; so that, at the beginning, life presents us
with a picture in which the objects appear a great way off, as though
we had reversed our telescope; while in the end everything seems so
close. To see how short life is, a man must have grown old, that is to
say, he must have lived long.

On the other hand, as the years increase, things look smaller, one and
all; and Life, which had so firm and stable a base in the days of our
youth, now seems nothing but a rapid flight of moments, every one of
them illusory: we have come to see that the whole world is vanity!

Time itself seems to go at a much slower pace when we are young; so
that not only is the first quarter of life the happiest, it is also
the longest of all; it leaves more memories behind it. If a man were
put to it, he could tell you more out of the first quarter of his life
than out of two of the remaining periods. Nay, in the spring of
life, as in the spring of the year, the days reach a length that is
positively tiresome; but in the autumn, whether of the year or of
life, though they are short, they are more genial and uniform.

But why is it that to an old man his past life appears so short? For
this reason: his memory is short; and so he fancies that his life has
been short too. He no longer remembers the insignificant parts of it,
and much that was unpleasant is now forgotten; how little, then,
there is left! For, in general, a man's memory is as imperfect as his
intellect; and he must make a practice of reflecting upon the lessons
he has learned and the events he has experienced, if he does not want
them both to sink gradually into the gulf of oblivion. Now, we are
unaccustomed to reflect upon matters of no importance, or, as a rule,
upon things that we have found disagreeable, and yet that is necessary
if the memory of them is to be preserved. But the class of things that
may be called insignificant is continually receiving fresh additions:
much that wears an air of importance at first, gradually becomes of no
consequence at all from the fact of its frequent repetition; so that
in the end we actually lose count of the number of times it happens.
Hence we are better able to remember the events of our early than of
our later years. The longer we live, the fewer are the things that
we can call important or significant enough to deserve further
consideration, and by this alone can they be fixed in the memory; in
other words, they are forgotten as soon as they are past. Thus it is
that time runs on, leaving always fewer traces of its passage.

Further, if disagreeable things have happened to us, we do not care
to ruminate upon them, least of all when they touch our vanity, as is
usually the case; for few misfortunes fall upon us for which we can
be held entirely blameless. So people are very ready to forget many
things that are disagreeable, as well as many that are unimportant.

It is from this double cause that our memory is so short; and a man's
recollection of what has happened always becomes proportionately
shorter, the more things that have occupied him in life. The things
we did in years gone by, the events that happened long ago, are like
those objects on the coast which, to the seafarer on his outward
voyage, become smaller every minute, more unrecognizable and harder to
distinguish.

Again, it sometimes happens that memory and imagination will call up
some long past scene as vividly as if it had occurred only yesterday;
so that the event in question seems to stand very near to the present
time. The reason of this is that it is impossible to call up all the
intervening period in the same vivid way, as there is no one figure
pervading it which can be taken in at a glance; and besides, most of
the things that happened in that period are forgotten, and all that
remains of it is the general knowledge that we have lived through
it--a mere notion of abstract existence, not a direct vision of some
particular experience. It is this that causes some single event
of long ago to appear as though it took place but yesterday: the
intervening time vanishes, and the whole of life looks incredibly
short. Nay, there are occasional moments in old age when we can
scarcely believe that we are so advanced in years, or that the long
past lying behind us has had any real existence--a feeling which is
mainly due to the circumstance that the present always seems fixed and
immovable as we look at it. These and similar mental phenomena are
ultimately to be traced to the fact that it is not our nature in
itself, but only the outward presentation of it, that lies in time,
and that the present is the point of contact between the world as
subject and the world as object.[1]

[Footnote 1: _Translator's Note_.--By this remark Schopenhauer means
that _will_, which, as he argues, forms the inner reality underlying
all the phenomena of life and nature, is not in itself affected
by time; but that, on the other hand, time is necessary for the
objectification of the will, for the will as presented in the passing
phenomena of the world. Time is thus definable as the condition of
change, and the present time as the only point of contact between
reality and appearance.]

Again, why is it that in youth we can see no end to the years that
seem to lie before us? Because we are obliged to find room for all
the things we hope to attain in life. We cram the years so full of
projects that if we were to try and carry them all out, death would
come prematurely though we reached the age of Methuselah.

Another reason why life looks so long when we are young, is that we
are apt to measure its length by the few years we have already
lived. In those early years things are new to us, and so they appear
important; we dwell upon them after they have happened and often call
them to mind; and thus in youth life seems replete with incident, and
therefore of long duration.

Sometimes we credit ourselves with a longing to be in some distant
spot, whereas, in truth, we are only longing to have the time back
again which we spent there--days when we were younger and fresher than
we are now. In those moments Time mocks us by wearing the mask of
space; and if we travel to the spot, we can see how much we have been
deceived.

There are two ways of reaching a great age, both of which presuppose
a sound constitution as a _conditio sine quâ non_. They may be
illustrated by two lamps, one of which burns a long time with very
little oil, because it has a very thin wick; and the other just as
long, though it has a very thick one, because there is plenty of oil
to feed it. Here, the oil is the vital energy, and the difference in
the wick is the manifold way in which the vital energy is used.

Up to our thirty-sixth year, we may be compared, in respect of the way
in which we use our vital energy, to people who live on the interest
of their money: what they spend to-day, they have again to-morrow. But
from the age of thirty-six onwards, our position is like that of the
investor who begins to entrench upon his capital. At first he hardly
notices any difference at all, as the greater part of his expenses is
covered by the interest of his securities; and if the deficit is
but slight, he pays no attention to it. But the deficit goes on
increasing, until he awakes to the fact that it is becoming more
serious every day: his position becomes less and less secure, and he
feels himself growing poorer and poorer, while he has no expectation
of this drain upon his resources coming to an end. His fall from
wealth to poverty becomes faster every moment--like the fall of a
solid body in space, until at last he has absolutely nothing left.
A man is truly in a woeful plight if both the terms of this
comparison--his vital energy and his wealth--really begin to melt away
at one and the same time. It is the dread of this calamity that makes
love of possession increase with age.

On the other hand, at the beginning of life, in the years before we
attain majority, and for some little time afterwards--the state of our
vital energy puts us on a level with those who each year lay by a part
of their interest and add it to their capital: in other words, not
only does their interest come in regularly, but the capital is
constantly receiving additions. This happy condition of affairs is
sometimes brought about--with health as with money--under the watchful
care of some honest guardian. O happy youth, and sad old age!

Nevertheless, a man should economize his strength even when he is
young. Aristotle[1] observes that amongst those who were victors at
Olympia only two or three gained a prize at two different periods,
once in boyhood and then again when they came to be men; and the
reason of this was that the premature efforts which the training
involved, so completely exhausted their powers that they failed to
last on into manhood. As this is true of muscular, so it is still more
true of nervous energy, of which all intellectual achievements are the
manifestation. Hence, those infant prodigies--_ingenia praecoda_--the
fruit of a hot-house education, who surprise us by their cleverness as
children, afterwards turn out very ordinary folk. Nay, the manner in
which boys are forced into an early acquaintance with the ancient
tongues may, perhaps, be to blame for the dullness and lack of
judgment which distinguish so many learned persons.

[Footnote 1: _Politics_.]

I have said that almost every man's character seems to be specially
suited to some one period of life, so that on reaching it the man is
at his best. Some people are charming so long as they are young, and
afterwards there is nothing attractive about them; others are vigorous
and active in manhood, and then lose all the value they possess as
they advance in years; many appear to best advantage in old age, when
their character assumes a gentler tone, as becomes men who have seen
the world and take life easily. This is often the case with the
French.

This peculiarity must be due to the fact that the man's character
has something in it akin to the qualities of youth or manhood or old
age--something which accords with one or another of these periods of
life, or perhaps acts as a corrective to its special failings.

The mariner observes the progress he makes only by the way in which
objects on the coast fade away into the distance and apparently
decrease in size. In the same way a man becomes conscious that he is
advancing in years when he finds that people older than himself begin
to seem young to him.

It has already been remarked that the older a man becomes, the
fewer are the traces left in his mind by all that he sees, does or
experiences, and the cause of this has been explained. There is thus
a sense in which it may be said that it is only in youth that a man
lives with a full degree of consciousness, and that he is only half
alive when he is old. As the years advance, his consciousness of what
goes on about him dwindles, and the things of life hurry by without
making any impression upon him, just as none is made by a work of art
seen for the thousandth time. A man does what his hand finds to do,
and afterwards he does not know whether he has done it or not.

As life becomes more and more unconscious, the nearer it approaches
the point at which all consciousness ceases, the course of time
itself seems to increase in rapidity. In childhood all the things and
circumstances of life are novel; and that is sufficient to awake us to
the full consciousness of existence: hence, at that age, the day seems
of such immense length. The same thing happens when we are traveling:
one month seems longer then than four spent at home. Still, though
time seems to last longer when we are young or on a journey, the sense
of novelty does not prevent it from now and then in reality hanging
heavily upon our hands under both these circumstances, at any rate
more than is the case when we are old or staying at home. But the
intellect gradually becomes so rubbed down and blunted by long
habituation to such impressions that things have a constant tendency
to produce less and less impression upon us as they pass by; and this
makes time seem increasingly less important, and therefore shorter in
duration: the hours of the boy are longer than the days of the old
man. Accordingly, time goes faster and faster the longer we live,
like a ball rolling down a hill. Or, to take another example: as in
a revolving disc, the further a point lies from the centre, the more
rapid is its rate of progression, so it is in the wheel of life; the
further you stand from the beginning, the faster time moves for you.
Hence it may be said that as far as concerns the immediate sensation
that time makes upon our minds, the length of any given year is in
direct proportion to the number of times it will divide our whole
life: for instance, at the age of fifty the year appears to us only
one-tenth as long as it did at the age of five.

This variation in the rate at which time appears to move, exercises a
most decided influence upon the whole nature of our existence at
every period of it. First of all, it causes childhood--even though it
embrace only a span of fifteen years--to seem the longest period of
life, and therefore the richest in reminiscences. Next, it brings it
about that a man is apt to be bored just in proportion as he is young.
Consider, for instance, that constant need of occupation--whether it
is work or play--that is shown by children: if they come to an end
of both work and play, a terrible feeling of boredom ensues. Even in
youth people are by no means free from this tendency, and dread the
hours when they have nothing to do. As manhood approaches, boredom
disappears; and old men find the time too short when their days fly
past them like arrows from a bow. Of course, I must be understood to
speak of _men_, not of decrepit _brutes_. With this increased rapidity
of time, boredom mostly passes away as we advance in life; and as
the passions with all their attendant pain are then laid asleep, the
burden of life is, on the whole, appreciably lighter in later years
than in youth, provided, of course, that health remains. So it is that
the period immediately preceding the weakness and troubles of old age,
receives the name of a man's _best years_.

That may be a true appellation, in view of the comfortable feeling
which those years bring; but for all that the years of youth, when our
consciousness is lively and open to every sort of impression, have
this privilege--that then the seeds are sown and the buds come forth;
it is the springtime of the mind. Deep truths may be perceived, but
can never be excogitated--that is to say, the first knowledge of
them is immediate, called forth by some momentary impression. This
knowledge is of such a kind as to be attainable only when the
impressions are strong, lively and deep; and if we are to be
acquainted with deep truths, everything depends upon a proper use of
our early years. In later life, we may be better able to work upon
other people,--upon the world, because our natures are then finished
and rounded off, and no more a prey to fresh views; but then the
world is less able to work upon us. These are the years of action
and achievement; while youth is the time for forming fundamental
conceptions, and laying down the ground-work of thought.

In youth it is the outward aspect of things that most engages us;
while in age, thought or reflection is the predominating quality
of the mind. Hence, youth is the time for poetry, and age is more
inclined to philosophy. In practical affairs it is the same: a man
shapes his resolutions in youth more by the impression that the
outward world makes upon him; whereas, when he is old, it is thought
that determines his actions. This is partly to be explained by the
fact that it is only when a man is old that the results of outward
observation are present in sufficient numbers to allow of their being
classified according to the ideas they represent,--a process which in
its turn causes those ideas to be more fully understood in all their
bearings, and the exact value and amount of trust to be placed in
them, fixed and determined; while at the same time he has grown
accustomed to the impressions produced by the various phenomena
of life, and their effects on him are no longer what they were.
Contrarily, in youth, the impressions that things make, that is to
say, the outward aspects of life, are so overpoweringly strong,
especially in the case of people of lively and imaginative
disposition, that they view the world like a picture; and their chief
concern is the figure they cut in it, the appearance they present;
nay, they are unaware of the extent to which this is the case. It is
a quality of mind that shows itself--if in no other way--in that
personal vanity, and that love of fine clothes, which distinguish
young people.

There can be no doubt that the intellectual powers are most capable
of enduring great and sustained efforts in youth, up to the age of
thirty-five at latest; from which period their strength begins to
decline, though very gradually. Still, the later years of life, and
even old age itself, are not without their intellectual compensation.
It is only then that a man can be said to be really rich in experience
or in learning; he has then had time and opportunity enough to enable
him to see and think over life from all its sides; he has been able to
compare one thing with another, and to discover points of contact and
connecting links, so that only then are the true relations of things
rightly understood. Further, in old age there comes an increased depth
in the knowledge that was acquired in youth; a man has now many more
illustrations of any ideas he may have attained; things which he
thought he knew when he was young, he now knows in reality. And
besides, his range of knowledge is wider; and in whatever direction it
extends, it is thorough, and therefore formed into a consistent and
connected whole; whereas in youth knowledge is always defective and
fragmentary.

A complete and adequate notion of life can never be attained by any
one who does not reach old age; for it is only the old man who
sees life whole and knows its natural course; it is only he who is
acquainted--and this is most important--not only with its entrance,
like the rest of mankind, but with its exit too; so that he alone has
a full sense of its utter vanity; whilst the others never cease to
labor under the false notion that everything will come right in the
end.

On the other hand, there is more conceptive power in youth, and at
that time of life a man can make more out of the little that he knows.
In age, judgment, penetration and thoroughness predominate. Youth is
the time for amassing the material for a knowledge of the world that
shall be distinctive and peculiar,--for an original view of life, in
other words, the legacy that a man of genius leaves to his fellow-men;
it is, however, only in later years that he becomes master of his
material. Accordingly it will be found that, as a rule, a great writer
gives his best work to the world when he is about fifty years of age.
But though the tree of knowledge must reach its full height before it
can bear fruit, the roots of it lie in youth.

Every generation, no matter how paltry its character, thinks itself
much wiser than the one immediately preceding it, let alone those that
are more remote. It is just the same with the different periods in a
man's life; and yet often, in the one case no less than in the other,
it is a mistaken opinion. In the years of physical growth, when
our powers of mind and our stores of knowledge are receiving daily
additions, it becomes a habit for to-day to look down with contempt
upon yesterday. The habit strikes root, and remains even after the
intellectual powers have begun to decline,--when to-day should rather
look up with respect to yesterday. So it is that we often unduly
depreciate the achievements as well as the judgments of our youth.
This seems the place for making the general observation, that,
although in its main qualities a man's _intellect_ or _head_, as well
as his _character_ or _heart_, is innate, yet the former is by no
means so unalterable in its nature as the latter. The fact is that the
intellect is subject to very many transformations, which, as a rule,
do not fail to make their actual appearance; and this is so, partly
because the intellect has a deep foundation in the physique,
and partly because the material with which it deals is given in
experience. And so, from a physical point of view, we find that if a
man has any peculiar power, it first gradually increases in strength
until it reaches its acme, after which it enters upon a path of slow
decadence, until it ends in imbecility. But, on the other hand,
we must not lose sight of the fact that the material which gives
employment to a man's powers and keeps them in activity,--the
subject-matter of thought and knowledge, experience, intellectual
attainments, the practice of seeing to the bottom of things, and so a
perfect mental vision, form in themselves a mass which continues to
increase in size, until the time comes when weakness shows itself,
and the man's powers suddenly fail. The way in which these two
distinguishable elements combine in the same nature,--the one
absolutely unalterable, and the other subject to change in two
directions opposed to each other--explains the variety of mental
attitude and the dissimilarity of value which attach to a man at
different periods of life.

The same truth may be more broadly expressed by saying that the first
forty years of life furnish the text, while the remaining thirty
supply the commentary; and that without the commentary we are unable
to understand aright the true sense and coherence of the text,
together with the moral it contains and all the subtle application of
which it admits.

Towards the close of life, much the same thing happens as at the end
of a _bal masqué_--the masks are taken off. Then you can see who
the people really are, with whom you have come into contact in your
passage through the world. For by the end of life characters have come
out in their true light, actions have borne fruit, achievements have
been rightly appreciated, and all shams have fallen to pieces. For
this, Time was in every case requisite.

But the most curious fact is that it is also only towards the close
of life than a man really recognizes and understands his own true
self,--the aims and objects he has followed in life, more especially
the kind of relation in which he has stood to other people and to the
world. It will often happen that as a result of this knowledge, a man
will have to assign himself a lower place than he formerly thought
was his due. But there are exceptions to this rule; and it will
occasionally be the case that he will take a higher position than he
had before. This will be owing to the fact that he had no adequate
notion of the _baseness_ of the world, and that he set up a higher aim
for himself than was followed by the rest of mankind.

The progress of life shows a man the stuff of which he is made.

It is customary to call youth the happy, and age the sad part of life.
This would be true if it were the passions that made a man happy.
Youth is swayed to and fro by them; and they give a great deal of pain
and little pleasure. In age the passions cool and leave a man at rest,
and then forthwith his mind takes a contemplative tone; the intellect
is set free and attains the upper hand. And since, in itself,
intellect is beyond the range of pain, and man feels happy just in so
far as his intellect is the predominating part of him.

It need only be remembered that all pleasure is negative, and that
pain is positive in its nature, in order to see that the passions can
never be a source of happiness, and that age is not the less to be
envied on the ground that many pleasures are denied it. For every sort
of pleasure is never anything more than the quietive of some need or
longing; and that pleasure should come to an end as soon as the need
ceases, is no more a subject of complaint than that a man cannot go on
eating after he has had his dinner, or fall asleep again after a good
night's rest.

So far from youth being the happiest period of life, there is much
more truth in the remark made by Plato, at the beginning of the
_Republic_, that the prize should rather be given to old age, because
then at last a man is freed from the animal passion which has hitherto
never ceased to disquiet him. Nay, it may even be said that the
countless and manifold humors which have their source in this passion,
and the emotions that spring from it, produce a mild state of madness;
and this lasts as long as the man is subject to the spell of
the impulse--this evil spirit, as it were, of which there is no
riddance--so that he never really becomes a reasonable being until the
passion is extinguished.

There is no doubt that, in general, and apart from individual
circumstances and particular dispositions, youth is marked by a
certain melancholy and sadness, while genial sentiments attach to old
age; and the reason for this is nothing but the fact that the young
man is still under the service, nay, the forced labor, imposed by that
evil spirit, which scarcely ever leaves him a moment to himself. To
this source may be traced, directly or indirectly, almost all and
every ill that befalls or menaces mankind. The old man is genial and
cheerful because, after long lying in the bonds of passion, he can now
move about in freedom.

Still, it should not be forgotten that, when this passion is
extinguished, the true kernel of life is gone, and nothing remains but
the hollow shell; or, from another point of view, life then becomes
like a comedy, which, begun by real actors, is continued and brought
to an end by automata dressed in their clothes.

However that may be, youth is the period of unrest, and age of repose;
and from that very circumstance, the relative degree of pleasure
belonging to each may be inferred. The child stretches out its little
hands in the eager desire to seize all the pretty things that meet its
sight, charmed by the world because all its senses are still so young
and fresh. Much the same thing happens with the youth, and he displays
greater energy in his quest. He, too, is charmed by all the pretty
things and the many pleasing shapes that surround him; and forthwith
his imagination conjures up pleasures which the world can never
realize. So he is filled with an ardent desire for he knows not what
delights--robbing him of all rest and making happiness impossible.
But when old age is reached, all this is over and done with, partly
because the blood runs cooler and the senses are no longer so easily
allured; partly because experience has shown the true value of things
and the futility of pleasure, whereby illusion has been gradually
dispelled, and the strange fancies and prejudices which previously
concealed or distorted a free and true view of the world, have been
dissipated and put to flight; with the result that a man can now get
a juster and clearer view, and see things as they are, and also in a
measure attain more or less insight into the nullity of all things on
this earth.

It is this that gives almost every old man, no matter how ordinary his
faculties may be, a certain tincture of wisdom, which distinguishes
him from the young. But the chief result of all this change is the
peace of mind that ensues--a great element in happiness, and, in fact,
the condition and essence of it. While the young man fancies that
there is a vast amount of good things in the world, if he could only
come at them, the old man is steeped in the truth of the Preacher's
words, that _all things are vanity_--knowing that, however gilded the
shell, the nut is hollow.

In these later years, and not before, a man comes to a true
appreciation of Horace's maxim: _Nil admirari._ He is directly and
sincerely convinced of the vanity of everything and that all the
glories of the world are as nothing: his illusions are gone. He is
no more beset with the idea that there is any particular amount of
happiness anywhere, in the palace or in the cottage, any more than he
himself enjoys when he is free from bodily or mental pain. The worldly
distinctions of great and small, high and low, exist for him no
longer; and in this blissful state of mind the old man may look down
with a smile upon all false notions. He is completely undeceived, and
knows that whatever may be done to adorn human life and deck it out in
finery, its paltry character will soon show through the glitter of its
surroundings; and that, paint and be jewel it as one may, it remains
everywhere much the same,--an existence which has no true value except
in freedom from pain, and is never to be estimated by the presence of
pleasure, let alone, then, of display.[1]

[Footnote 1: Cf. Horace, _Epist_. I. 12, I-4.]

Disillusion is the chief characteristic of old age; for by that time
the fictions are gone which gave life its charm and spurred on the
mind to activity; the splendors of the world have been proved null and
vain; its pomp, grandeur and magnificence are faded. A man has then
found out that behind most of the things he wants, and most of the
pleasures he longs for, there is very little after all; and so he
comes by degrees to see that our existence is all empty and void. It
is only when he is seventy years old that he quite understands the
first words of the Preacher; and this again explains why it is that
old men are sometimes fretful and morose.

It is often said that the common lot of old age is disease and
weariness of life. Disease is by no means essential to old age;
especially where a really long span of years is to be attained; for
as life goes on, the conditions of health and disorder tend to
increase--_crescente vita, crescit sanitas et morbus_. And as far as
weariness or boredom is concerned, I have stated above why old age is
even less exposed to that form of evil than youth. Nor is boredom by
any means to be taken as a necessary accompaniment of that solitude,
which, for reasons that do not require to be explained, old age
certainly cannot escape; it is rather the fate that awaits those who
have never known any other pleasures but the gratification of the
senses and the delights of society--who have left their minds
unenlightened and their faculties unused. It is quite true that the
intellectual faculties decline with the approach of old age; but where
they were originally strong, there will always be enough left to
combat the onslaught of boredom. And then again, as I have said,
experience, knowledge, reflection, and skill in dealing with men,
combine to give an old man an increasingly accurate insight into the
ways of the world; his judgment becomes keen and he attains a coherent
view of life: his mental vision embraces a wider range. Constantly
finding new uses for his stores of knowledge and adding to them at
every opportunity, he maintains uninterrupted that inward process of
self-education, which gives employment and satisfaction to the mind,
and thus forms the due reward of all its efforts.

All this serves in some measure as a compensation for decreased
intellectual power. And besides, Time, as I have remarked, seems to go
much more quickly when we are advanced in years; and this is in itself
a preventive of boredom. There is no great harm in the fact that
a man's bodily strength decreases in old age, unless, indeed, he
requires it to make a living. To be poor when one is old, is a great
misfortune. If a man is secure from that, and retains his health, old
age may be a very passable time of life. Its chief necessity is to be
comfortable and well off; and, in consequence, money is then prized
more than ever, because it is a substitute for failing strength.
Deserted by Venus, the old man likes to turn to Bacchus to make him
merry. In the place of wanting to see things, to travel and learn,
comes the desire to speak and teach. It is a piece of good fortune if
the old man retains some of his love of study or of music or of the
theatre,--if, in general, he is still somewhat susceptible to the
things about him; as is, indeed, the case with some people to a very
late age. At that time of life, _what a man has in himself_ is of
greater advantage to him that ever it was before.

There can be no doubt that most people who have never been anything
but dull and stupid, become more and more of automata as they grow
old. They have always thought, said and done the same things as their
neighbors; and nothing that happens now can change their disposition,
or make them act otherwise. To talk to old people of this kind is like
writing on the sand; if you produce any impression at all, it is gone
almost immediately; old age is here nothing but the _caput mortuum_
of life--all that is essential to manhood is gone. There are cases
in which nature supplies a third set of teeth in old age, thereby
apparently demonstrating the fact that that period of life is a second
childhood.

It is certainly a very melancholy thing that all a man's faculties
tend to waste away as he grows old, and at a rate that increases
in rapidity: but still, this is a necessary, nay, a beneficial
arrangement, as otherwise death, for which it is a preparation, would
be too hard to bear. So the greatest boon that follows the attainment
of extreme old age is _euthanasia_,--an easy death, not ushered in by
disease, and free from all pain and struggle.[1] For let a man live as
long as he may, he is never conscious of any moment but the present,
one and indivisible; and in those late years the mind loses more every
day by sheer forgetfulness than ever it gains anew.

[Footnote 1: See _Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung_, Bk. II. ch. 41,
for a further description of this happy end to life.]

The main difference between youth and age will always be that youth
looks forward to life, and old age to death; and that while the one
has a short past and a long future before it, the case is just the
opposite with the other. It is quite true that when a man is old, to
die is the only thing that awaits him; while if he is young, he may
expect to live; and the question arises which of the two fates is the
more hazardous, and if life is not a matter which, on the whole, it is
better to have behind one than before? Does not the Preacher say:
_the day of death [is better] than the day of one's birth_.[1] It is
certainly a rash thing to wish for long life;[2] for as the Spanish
proverb has it, it means to see much evil,--_Quien larga vida vive
mucho mal vide_.

[Footnote 1: Ecclesiastes vii. 1.]

[Footnote 2: The life of man cannot, strictly speaking, be called
either _long_ or _short_, since it is the ultimate standard by which
duration of time in regard to all other things is measured.

In one of the Vedic _Upanishads (Oupnekhat_, II.) _the natural length_
of human life is put down at one hundred years. And I believe this to
be right. I have observed, as a matter of fact, that it is only people
who exceed the age of ninety who attain _euthanasia_,--who die, that
is to say, of no disease, apoplexy or convulsion, and pass away
without agony of any sort; nay, who sometimes even show no pallor, but
expire generally in a sitting attitude, and often after a meal,--or,
I may say, simply cease to live rather than die. To come to one's end
before the age of ninety, means to die of disease, in other words,
prematurely.

Now the Old Testament (Psalms xc. 10) puts the limit of human life at
seventy, and if it is very long, at eighty years; and what is more
noticeable still, Herodotus (i. 32 and iii. 22) says the same thing.
But this is wrong; and the error is due simply to a rough and
superficial estimate of the results of daily experience. For if the
natural length of life were from seventy to eighty years, people would
die, about that time, of mere old age. Now this is certainly not the
case. If they die then, they die, like younger people, _of disease_;
and disease is something abnormal. Therefore it is not natural to die
at that age. It is only when they are between ninety and a hundred
that people die of old age; die, I mean, without suffering from any
disease, or showing any special signs of their condition, such as a
struggle, death-rattle, convulsion, pallor,--the absence of all which
constitutes _euthanasia_. The natural length of human life is a
hundred years; and in assigning that limit the Upanishads are right
once more.]

A man's individual career is not, as Astrology wishes to make out, to
be predicted from observation of the planets; but the course of human
life in general, as far as the various periods of it are concerned,
may be likened to the succession of the planets: so that we may be
said to pass under the influence of each one of them in turn.

At ten, _Mercury_ is in the ascendant; and at that age, a youth, like
this planet, is characterized by extreme mobility within a narrow
sphere, where trifles have a great effect upon him; but under the
guidance of so crafty and eloquent a god, he easily makes great
progress. _Venus_ begins her sway during his twentieth year, and then
a man is wholly given up to the love of women. At thirty, _Mars_
comes to the front, and he is now all energy and strength,--daring,
pugnacious and arrogant.

When a man reaches the age of forty, he is under the rule of the
four _Asteroids_; that is to say, his life has gained something in
extension. He is frugal; in other words, by the help of _Ceres_, he
favors what is useful; he has his own hearth, by the influence of
_Vesta_; _Pallas_ has taught him that which is necessary for him to
know; and his wife--his _Juno_--rules as the mistress of his house.

But at the age of fifty, _Jupiter_ is the dominant influence. At that
period a man has outlived most of his contemporaries, and he can feel
himself superior to the generation about him. He is still in the full
enjoyment of his strength, and rich in experience and knowledge;
and if he has any power and position of his own, he is endowed with
authority over all who stand in his immediate surroundings. He is no
more inclined to receive orders from others; he wants to take command
himself. The work most suitable to him now is to guide and rule within
his own sphere. This is the point where Jupiter culminates, and where
the man of fifty years is at his best.

Then comes _Saturn_, at about the age of sixty, a weight as of _lead_,
dull and slow:--

  _But old folks, many feign as they were dead;
  Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead_.
Last of all, _Uranus_; or, as the saying is, a man goes to heaven.

I cannot find a place for _Neptune_, as this planet has been very
thoughtlessly named; because I may not call it as it should be
called--_Eros_. Otherwise I should point out how Beginning and End
meet together, and how closely and intimately Eros is connected with
Death: how Orcus, or Amenthes, as the Egyptians called him, is not
only the receiver but the giver of all things--[Greek: lambanon kai
didous]. Death is the great reservoir of Life. Everything comes from
Orcus; everything that is alive now was once there. Could we but
understand the great trick by which that is done, all would be clear!





End of Project Gutenberg's Counsels and Maxims, by Arthur Schopenhauer


================================================================================
[Studies in Pessimism (비관주의 연구)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Epic
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Epic

Author: Lascelles Abercrombie


        
Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #10716]
                Most recently updated: October 28, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10716

Credits: Produced by Garrett Alley and PG Distributed Proofreaders


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EPIC ***

The Epic: an Essay

By Lascelles Abercrombie



1914.



By the same Author:


Towards a Theory of Art
Speculative Dialogues
Four Short Plays
Thomas Hardy: A Critical Study
Principles of English Prosody




PREFACE

_As this essay is disposed to consider epic poetry as a species of
literature, and not as a department of sociology or archaeology or
ethnology, the reader will not find it anything material to the
discussion which may be typified in those very interesting works,
Gilbert Murray's "The Rise of the Greek Epic" and Andrew Lang's "The
World of Homer." The distinction between a literary and a scientific
attitude to Homer (and all other "authentic" epic) is, I think, finally
summed up in Mr. Mackail's "Lectures on Greek Poetry"; the following
pages, at any rate, assume that this is so. Theories about epic origins
were therefore indifferent to my purpose. Besides, I do not see the need
for any theories; I think it need only be said, of any epic poem
whatever, that it was composed by a man and transmitted by men. But this
is not to say that investigation of the "authentic" epic poet's_ milieu
_may not be extremely profitable; and for settling the preliminaries of
this essay, I owe a great deal to Mr. Chadwick's profoundly
interesting study, "The Heroic Age"; though I daresay Mr. Chadwick would
repudiate some of my conclusions. I must also acknowledge suggestions
taken from Mr. Macneile Dixon's learned and vigorous "English Epic and
Heroic Poetry"; and especially the assistance of Mr. John Clark's
"History of Epic Poetry." Mr. Clark's book is so thorough and so
adequate that my own would certainly have been superfluous, were it not
that I have taken a particular point of view which his method seems to
rule out--a point of view which seemed well worth taking. This is my
excuse, too, for considering only the most conspicuous instances of epic
poetry. They have been discussed often enough; but not often, so far as
I know, primarily as stages of one continuous artistic development_.




I.


BEGINNINGS

The invention of epic poetry corresponds with a definite and, in the
history of the world, often recurring state of society. That is to say,
epic poetry has been invented many times and independently; but, as the
needs which prompted the invention have been broadly similar, so the
invention itself has been. Most nations have passed through the same
sort of chemistry. Before their hot racial elements have been thoroughly
compounded, and thence have cooled into the stable convenience of
routine which is the material shape of civilization--before this has
firmly occurred, there has usually been what is called an "Heroic Age."
It is apt to be the hottest and most glowing stage of the process. So
much is commonplace. Exactly what causes the racial elements of a
nation, with all their varying properties, to flash suddenly (as it
seems) into the splendid incandescence of an Heroic Age, and thence to
shift again into a comparatively rigid and perhaps comparatively
lustreless civilization--this difficult matter has been very nicely
investigated of late, and to interesting, though not decided, result.
But I may not concern myself with this; nor even with the detailed
characteristics, alleged or ascertained, of the Heroic Age of nations.
It is enough for the purpose of this book that the name "Heroic Age" is
a good one for this stage of the business; it is obviously, and on the
whole rightly, descriptive. For the stage displays the first vigorous
expression, as the natural thing and without conspicuous restraint, of
private individuality. In savagery, thought, sentiment, religion and
social organization may be exceedingly complicated, full of the most
subtle and strange relationships; but they exist as complete and
determined _wholes_, each part absolutely bound up with the rest.
Analysis has never come near them. The savage is blinded to the glaring
incongruities of his tribal ideas not so much by habit or reverence; it
is simply that the mere possibility of such a thing as analysis has
never occurred to him. He thinks, he feels, he lives, all in a whole.
Each person is the tribe in little. This may make everyone an
astoundingly complex character; but it makes strong individuality
impossible in savagery, since everyone accepts the same elaborate
unanalysed whole of tribal existence. That existence, indeed, would find
in the assertion of private individuality a serious danger; and tribal
organization guards against this so efficiently that it is doubtless
impossible, so long as there is no interruption from outside. In some
obscure manner, however, savage existence has been constantly
interrupted; and it seems as if the long-repressed forces of
individuality then burst out into exaggerated vehemence; for the result
(if it is not slavery) is, that a people passes from its savage to its
heroic age, on its way to some permanence of civilization. It must
always have taken a good deal to break up the rigidity of savage
society. It might be the shock of enforced mixture with a totally alien
race, the two kinds of blood, full of independent vigour, compelled to
flow together;[1] or it might be the migration, due to economic stress,
from one tract of country to which the tribal existence was perfectly
adapted to another for which it was quite unsuited, with the added
necessity of conquering the peoples found in possession. Whatever the
cause may have been, the result is obvious: a sudden liberation, a
delighted expansion, of numerous private individualities.

But the various appearances of the Heroic Age cannot, perhaps, be
completely generalized. What has just been written will probably do for
the Heroic Age which produced Homer, and for that which produced the
_Nibelungenlied, Beowulf_, and the Northern Sagas. It may, therefore
stand as the typical case; since Homer and these Northern poems are what
most people have in their minds when they speak of "authentic" epic. But
decidedly Heroic Ages have occurred much later than the latest of these
cases; and they arose out of a state of society which cannot roundly be
called savagery. Europe, for instance, had its unmistakable Heroic Age
when it was fighting with the Moslem, whether that warfare was a cause
or merely an accompaniment. And the period which preceded it, the period
after the failure of Roman civilization, was sufficiently "dark" and
devoid of individuality, to make the sudden plenty of potent and
splendid individuals seem a phenomenon of the same sort as that which
has been roughly described; it can scarcely be doubted that the age
which is exhibited in the _Poem of the Cid_, the _Song of Roland_, and
the lays of the Crusaders (_la Chanson d'Antioche_, for instance), was
similar in all essentials to the age we find in Homer and the
_Nibelungenlied_. Servia, too, has its ballad-cycles of Christian and
Mahometan warfare, which suppose an age obviously heroic. But it hardly
falls in with our scheme; Servia, at this time, might have been expected
to have gone well past its Heroic Age. Either, then, it was somehow
unusually prolonged, or else the clash of the Ottoman war revived it.
The case of Servia is interesting in another way. The songs about the
battle of Kossovo describe Servian defeat--defeat so overwhelming that
poetry cannot possibly translate it, and does not attempt it, into
anything that looks like victory. Even the splendid courage of its hero
Milos, who counters an imputation of treachery by riding in full
daylight into the Ottoman camp and murdering the Sultan, even this
courage is rather near to desperation. The Marko cycle--Marko whose
betrayal of his country seems wiped out by his immense prowess--has in a
less degree this utter defeat of Servia as its background. But Servian
history before all this has many glories, which, one would think, would
serve the turn of heroic song better than appalling defeat and, indeed,
enslavement. Why is the latter celebrated and not the former? The reason
can only be this: heroic poetry depends on an heroic age, and an age is
heroic because of what it is, not because of what it does. Servia's
defeat by the armies of Amurath came at a time when its people was too
strongly possessed by the heroic spirit to avoid uttering itself in
poetry. And from this it appears, too, that when the heroic age sings,
it primarily sings of itself, even when that means singing of its own
humiliation.--One other exceptional kind of heroic age must just be
mentioned, in this professedly inadequate summary. It is the kind which
occurs quite locally and on a petty scale, with causes obscurer than
ever. The Border Ballads, for instance, and the Robin Hood Ballads,
clearly suppose a state of society which is nothing but a very
circumscribed and not very important heroic age. Here the households of
gentry take the place of courts, and the poetry in vogue there is
perhaps instantly taken up by the taverns; or perhaps this is a case in
which the heroes are so little removed from common folk that celebration
of individual prowess begins among the latter, not, as seems usually to
have happened, among the social equals of the heroes. But doubtless
there are infinite grades in the structure of the Heroic Age.

The note of the Heroic Age, then, is vehement private individuality
freely and greatly asserting itself. The assertion is not always what we
should call noble; but it is always forceful and unmistakable. There
would be, no doubt, some social and religious scheme to contain the
individual's self-assertion; but the latter, not the former, is the
thing that counts. It is not an age that lasts for very long as a rule;
and before there comes the state in which strong social organization and
strong private individuality are compatible--mutually helpful instead of
destroying one another, as they do, in opposite ways, in savagery and in
the Heroic Age--before the state called civilization can arrive, there
has commonly been a long passage of dark obscurity, which throws up into
exaggerated brightness the radiance of the Heroic Age. The balance of
private good and general welfare is at the bottom of civilized morals;
but the morals of the Heroic Age are founded on individuality, and on
nothing else. In Homer, for instance, it can be seen pretty clearly that
a "good" man is simply a man of imposing, active individuality[2]; a
"bad" man is an inefficient, undistinguished man--probably, too, like
Thersites, ugly. It is, in fact, an absolutely aristocratic age--an age
in which he who rules is thereby proven the "best." And from its nature
it must be an age very heartily engaged in something; usually fighting
whoever is near enough to be fought with, though in _Beowulf_ it seems
to be doing something more profitable to the civilization which is to
follow it--taming the fierceness of surrounding circumstance and man's
primitive kind. But in any case it has a good deal of leisure; and the
best way to prevent this from dragging heavily is (after feasting) to
glory in the things it has done; or perhaps in the things it would like
to have done. Hence heroic poetry. But exactly what heroic poetry was
in its origin, probably we shall never know. It would scarcely be
history, and it would scarcely be very ornate poetry. The first thing
required would be to translate the prowess of champions into good and
moving narrative; and this would be metrified, because so it becomes
both more exciting and more easily remembered. Each succeeding bard
would improve, according to his own notions, the material he received
from his teachers; the prowess of the great heroes would become more and
more astonishing, more and more calculated to keep awake the feasted
nobles who listened to the song. In an age when writing, if it exists at
all, is a rare and secret art, the mists of antiquity descend after a
very few generations. There is little chance of the songs of the bards
being checked by recorded actuality; for if anyone could write at all,
it would be the bards themselves, who would use the mystery or purposes
of their own trade. In quite a short time, oral tradition, in keeping of
the bards, whose business is to purvey wonders, makes the champions
perform easily, deeds which "the men of the present time" can only gape
at; and every bard takes over the stock of tradition, not from original
sources, but from the mingled fantasy and memory of the bard who came
just before him. So that when this tradition survives at all, it
survives in a form very different from what it was in the beginning. But
apparently we can mark out several stages in the fortunes of the
tradition. It is first of all court poetry, or perhaps baronial poetry;
and it may survive as that. From this stage it may pass into possession
of the common people, or at least into the possession of bards whose
clients are peasants and not nobles; from being court poetry it becomes
the poetry of cottages and taverns. It may survive as this. Finally, it
may be taken up again by the courts, and become poetry of much greater
sophistication and nicety than it was in either of the preceding stages.
But each stage leaves its sign on the tradition.

All this gives us what is conveniently called "epic material"; the
material out of which epic poetry might be made. But it does not give us
epic poetry. The world knows of a vast stock of epic material scattered
up and down the nations; sometimes its artistic value is as
extraordinary as its archaeological interest, but not always. Instances
are our own Border Ballads and Robin Hood Ballads; the Servian cycles of
the Battle of Kossovo and the prowess of Marko; the modern Greek songs
of the revolt against Turkey (the conditions of which seem to have been
similar to those which surrounded the growth of our riding ballads); the
fragments of Finnish legend which were pieced together into the
_Kalevala_; the Ossianic poetry; and perhaps some of the minor sagas
should be put in here. Then there are the glorious Welsh stories of
Arthur, Tristram, and the rest, and the not less glorious Irish stories
of Deirdre and Cuchulain; both of these noble masses of legend seem to
have only just missed the final shaping which turns epic material into
epic poetry. For epic material, it must be repeated, is not the same
thing as epic poetry. Epic material is fragmentary, scattered, loosely
related, sometimes contradictory, each piece of comparatively small
size, with no intention beyond hearty narrative. It is a heap of
excellent stones, admirably quarried out of a great rock-face of
stubborn experience. But for this to be worked into some great
structure of epic poetry, the Heroic Age must be capable of producing
individuality of much profounder nature than any of its fighting
champions. Or rather, we should simply say that the production of epic
poetry depends on the occurrence (always an accidental occurrence) of
creative genius. It is quite likely that what Homer had to work on was
nothing superior to the Arthurian legends. But Homer occurred; and the
tales of Troy and Odysseus became incomparable poetry.

An epic is not made by piecing together a set of heroic lays, adjusting
their discrepancies and making them into a continuous narrative. An epic
is not even a re-creation of old things; it is altogether a new
creation, a new creation in terms of old things. And what else is any
other poetry? The epic poet has behind him a tradition of matter and a
tradition of style; and that is what every other poet has behind him
too; only, for the epic poet, tradition is rather narrower, rather more
strictly compelling. This must not be lost sight of. It is what the
poet does with the tradition he falls in which is, artistically, the
important thing. He takes a mass of confused splendours, and he makes
them into something which they certainly were not before; something
which, as we can clearly see by comparing epic poetry with mere epic
material, the latter scarce hinted at. He makes this heap of matter into
a grand design; he forces it to obey a single presiding unity of
artistic purpose. Obviously, something much more potent is required for
this than a fine skill in narrative and poetic ornament. Unity is not
merely an external affair. There is only one thing which can master the
perplexed stuff of epic material into unity; and that is, an ability to
see in particular human experience some significant symbolism of man's
general destiny.

It is natural that, after the epic poet has arrived, the crude epic
material in which he worked should scarcely be heard of. It could only
be handed on by the minstrels themselves; and their audiences would not
be likely to listen comfortably to the old piecemeal songs after they
had heard the familiar events fall into the magnificent ordered pomp of
the genuine epic poet. The tradition, indeed, would start afresh with
him; but how the novel tradition fared as it grew old with his
successors, is difficult guesswork. We can tell, however, sometimes, in
what stage of the epic material's development the great unifying epic
poet occurred. Three roughly defined stages have been mentioned. Homer
perhaps came when the epic material was still in its first stage of
being court-poetry. Almost certainly this is when the poets of the
Crusading lays, of the _Song of Roland_, and the _Poem of the Cid_, set
to work. Hesiod is a clear instance of the poet who masters epic
material after it has passed into popular possession; and the
_Nibelungenlied_ is thought to be made out of matter that has passed
from the people back again to the courts.

Epic poetry, then, as distinct from mere epic material, is the concern
of this book. The intention is, to determine wherein epic poetry is a
definite species of literature, what it characteristically does for
conscious human life, and to find out whether this species and this
function have shown, and are likely to show, any development. It must be
admitted, that the great unifying poet who worked on the epic material
before him, did not always produce something which must come within the
scope of this intention. Hesiod has just been given as an instance of
such a poet; but his work is scarcely an epic.[3] The great sagas, too,
I must omit. They are epic enough in primary intention, but they are not
poetry; and I am among those who believe that there is a difference
between poetry and prose. If epic poetry is a definite species, the
sagas do not fall within it. But this will leave me more of the
"authentic" epic poetry than I can possibly deal with; and I shall have
to confine myself to its greatest examples. Before, however, proceeding
to consider epic poetry as a whole, as a constantly recurring form of
art, continually responding to the new needs of man's developing
consciousness, I must go, rapidly and generally, over the "literary
epic"; and especially I must question whether it is really justifiable
or profitable to divide epic poetry into the two contrasted departments
of "authentic" and "literary."

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: hos d' ote cheimarroi potamoi kat opesthi rheontes es
misgagkeian xumballeton obrimon udor krounon ek melalon koilaes entosthe
charadraes. _Iliad_, IV, 452.]

[Footnote 2: Etymologically, the "good" man is the "admirable" man. In
this sense, Homer's gods are certainly "good"; every epithet he gives
them--Joyous-Thunderer, Far-Darter, Cloud-Gatherer and the
rest--proclaims their unapproachable "goodness." If it had been said to
Homer, that his gods cannot be "good" because their behaviour is
consistently cynical, cruel, unscrupulous and scandalous, he would
simply think he had not heard aright: Zeus is an habitual liar, of
course, but what has that got to do with his "goodness"?--Only those who
would have Homer a kind of Salvationist need regret this. Just because
he could only make his gods "good" in this primitive style, he was able
to treat their discordant family in that vein of exquisite comedy which
is one of the most precious things in the world.]

[Footnote 3: Scarcely what _we_ call epic. "Epos" might include Hesiod
as well as epic material; "epopee" is the business that Homer started.]




II.


LITERARY EPIC

Epic poetry, then, was invented to supply the artistic demands of
society in a certain definite and recognizable state. Or rather, it was
the epic material which supplied that; the first epic poets gave their
age, as genius always does, something which the age had never thought of
asking for; which, nevertheless, when it was given, the age took good
hold of, and found that, after all, this, too, it had wanted without
knowing it. But as society went on towards civilization, the need for
epic grew less and less; and its preservation, if not accidental, was an
act of conscious aesthetic admiration rather than of unconscious
necessity. It was preserved somehow, however; and after other kinds of
literature had arisen as inevitably and naturally as epic, and had
become, in their turn, things of less instant necessity than they were,
it was found that, in the manner and purpose of epic poetry, something
was given which was not given elsewhere; something of extraordinary
value. Epic poetry would therefore be undertaken again; but now, of
course, deliberately. With several different kinds of poetry to choose
from, a man would decide that he would like best to be an epic poet, and
he would set out, in conscious determination, on an epic poem. The
result, good or bad, of such a determination is called "literary" epic.
The poems of Apollonius Rhodius, Virgil, Lucan, Camoens, Tasso and
Milton are "literary" epics. But such poetry as the _Odyssey_, the
_Iliad,_ _Beowulf_, the _Song of Roland_, and the _Nibelungenlied_,
poetry which seems an immediate response to some general and instant
need in its surrounding community--such poetry is "authentic" epic.

A great deal has been made of this distinction; it has almost been taken
to divide epic poetry into two species. And, as the names commonly given
to the two supposed species suggest, there is some notion that
"literary" epic must be in a way inferior to "authentic" epic. The
superstition of antiquity has something to do with this; but the
presence of Homer among the "authentic" epics has probably still more to
do with it. For Homer is the poet who is usually chosen to stand for
"authentic" epic; and, by a facile association of ideas, the conspicuous
characteristics of Homer seem to be the marks of "authentic" epic as a
species. It is, of course, quite true, that, for sustained grandeur and
splendour, no poet can be put beside Homer except Dante and Milton; but
it is also quite clear that in Homer, as in Dante, and Milton, such
conspicuous characteristics are simply the marks of peculiar poetic
genius. If we leave Homer out, and consider poetic greatness only (the
only important thing to consider), there is no "authentic" epic which
can stand against _Paradise Lost_ or the _Aeneid_. Then there is the
curious modern feeling--which is sometimes but dressed up by erroneous
aesthetic theory (the worship of a quite national "lyricism," for
instance) but which is really nothing but a sign of covert
barbarism--that lengthy poetic composition is somehow undesirable; and
Homer is thought to have had a better excuse for composing a long poem
than Milton.

But doubtless the real reason for the hard division of epic poetry into
two classes, and for the presumed inferiority of "literary" to
"authentic," lies in the application of that curiosity among false
ideas, the belief in a "folk-spirit." This notion that such a thing as a
"folk-spirit" can create art, and that the art which it does create must
be somehow better than other art, is, I suppose, the offspring of
democratic ideas in politics. The chief objection to it is that there
never has been and never can be anything in actuality corresponding to
the "folk-spirit" which this notion supposes. Poetry is the work of
poets, not of peoples or communities; artistic creation can never be
anything but the production of an individual mind. We may, if we like,
think that poetry would be more "natural" if it were composed by the
folk as the folk, and not by persons peculiarly endowed; and to think so
is doubtless agreeable to the notion that the folk is more important
than the individual. But there is nothing gained by thinking in this
way, except a very illusory kind of pleasure; since it is impossible
that the folk should ever be a poet. This indisputable axiom has been
ignored more in theories about ballads--about epic material--than in
theories about the epics themselves. But the belief in a real
folk-origin for ballads, untenable though it be in a little examination,
has had a decided effect on the common opinion of the authentic epics.
In the first place, a poem constructed out of ballads composed, somehow
or other, by the folk, ought to be more "natural" than a work of
deliberate art--a "literary" epic; that is to say, these Rousseau-ish
notions will admire it for being further from civilization and nearer to
the noble savage; civilization being held, by some mysterious argument,
to be deficient in "naturalness." In the second place, this belief has
made it credible that the plain corruption of authentic epic by oral
transmission, or very limited transmission through script, might be the
sign of multiple authorship; for if you believe that a whole folk can
compose a ballad, you may easily believe that a dozen poets can compose
an epic.

But all this rests on simple ignoring of the nature of poetic
composition. The folk-origin of ballads and the multiple authorship of
epics are heresies worse than the futilities of the Baconians; at any
rate, they are based on the same resolute omission, and build on it a
wilder fantasy. They omit to consider what poetry is. Those who think
Bacon wrote _Hamlet_, and those who think several poets wrote the
_Iliad_, can make out a deal of ingenious evidence for their doctrines.
But it is all useless, because the first assumption in each case is
unthinkable. It is psychologically impossible that the mind of Bacon
should have produced _Hamlet_; but the impossibility is even more
clamant when it comes to supposing that several poets, not in
collaboration, but in haphazard succession, could produce a poem of vast
sweeping unity and superbly consistent splendour of style. So far as
mere authorship goes, then, we cannot make any real difference between
"authentic" and "literary" epic. We cannot say that, while this is
written by an individual genius, that is the work of a community.
Individual genius, of whatever quality, is responsible for both. The
folk, however, cannot be ruled out. Genius does the work; but the folk
is the condition in which genius does it. And here we may find a genuine
difference between "literary" and "authentic"; not so much in the nature
of the condition as in its closeness and insistence.

The kind of folk-spirit behind the poet is, indeed, different in the
_Iliad_ and _Beowulf_ and the _Song of Roland_ from what it is in Milton
and Tasso and Virgil. But there is also as much difference here between
the members of each class as between the two classes themselves. You
cannot read much of _Beowulf_ with Homer in your mind, without becoming
conscious that the difference in individual genius is by no means the
whole difference. Both poets maintain a similar ideal in life; but they
maintain it within conditions altogether unlike. The folk-spirit behind
_Beowulf_ is cloudy and tumultuous, finding grandeur in storm and gloom
and mere mass--in the misty _lack_ of shape. Behind Homer it is, on the
contrary, radiant and, however vehement, always delighting in measure,
finding grandeur in brightness and clarity and shining outline. So,
again, we may very easily see how Tasso's poetry implies the Italy of
his time, and Milton's the England of his time. But where Homer and
Beowulf together differ from Tasso and Milton is in the way the
surrounding folk-spirit contains the poet's mind. It would be a very
idle piece of work, to choose between the potency of Homer's genius and
of Milton's; but it is clear that the immediate circumstance of the
poet's life presses much more insistently on the _Iliad_ and the
_Odyssey_ than on _Paradise Lost_. It is the difference between the
contracted, precise, but vigorous tradition of an heroic age, and the
diffused, eclectic, complicated culture of a civilization. And if it may
be said that the insistence of racial circumstance in Homer gives him a
greater intensity of cordial, human inspiration, it must also be said
that the larger, less exacting conditions of Milton's mental life allow
his art to go into greater scope and more subtle complexity of
significance. Great epic poetry will always frankly accept the social
conditions within which it is composed; but the conditions contract and
intensify the conduct of the poem, or allow it to dilate and absorb
larger matter, according as the narrow primitive torrents of man's
spirit broaden into the greater but slower volume of civilized life. The
change is neither desirable nor undesirable; it is merely inevitable. It
means that epic poetry has kept up with the development of human life.

It is because of all this that we have heard a good deal about the
"authentic" epic getting "closer to its subject" than "literary" epic.
It seems, on the face of it, very improbable that there should be any
real difference here. No great poetry, of whatever kind, is conceivable
unless the subject has become integrated with the poet's mind and mood.
Milton is as close to his subject, Virgil to his, as Homer to Achilles
or the Saxon poet to Beowulf. What is really meant can be nothing but
the greater insistence of racial tradition in the "authentic" epics. The
subject of the _Iliad_ is the fighting of heroes, with all its
implications and consequences; the subject of the _Odyssey_ is adventure
and its opposite, the longing for safety and home; in _Beowulf_ it is
kingship--the ability to show man how to conquer the monstrous forces of
his world; and so on. Such were the subjects which an imperious racial
tradition pressed on the early epic poet, who delighted to be so
governed. These were the matters which his people could understand, of
which they could easily perceive the significance. For him, then, there
could be no other matters than these, or the like of these. But it is
not in such matters that a poet living in a time of less primitive and
more expanded consciousness would find the highest importance. For a
Roman, the chief matter for an epic poem would be Roman civilization;
for a Puritan, it would be the relations of God and man. When,
therefore, we consider how close to his subject an epic poet is, we must
be careful to be quite clear what his subject is. And if he has gone
beyond the immediate experiences of primitive society, we need not
expect him to be as close as the early poets were to the fury of battle
and the agony of wounds and the desolation of widows; or to the
sensation of exploring beyond the familiar regions; or to the
marsh-fiends and fire-drakes into which primitive imagination naturally
translated the terrible unknown powers of the world. We need not, in a
word, expect the "literary" epic to compete with the "authentic" epic;
for the fact is, that the purpose of epic poetry, and therefore the
nature of its subject, must continually develop. It is quite true that
the later epics take over, to a very great extent, the methods and
manners of the earlier poems; just as architecture hands on the style of
wooden structure to an age that builds in stone, and again imposes the
manners of stone construction on an age that builds in concrete and
steel. But, in the case of epic at any rate, this is not merely the
inertia of artistic convention. With the development of epic intention,
and the subsequent choosing of themes larger and subtler than what
common experience is wont to deal in, a certain duplicity becomes
inevitable. The real intention of the _Aeneid_, and the real intention
of _Paradise Lost_, are not easily brought into vivid apprehension. The
natural thing to do, then, would be to use the familiar substance of
early epic, but to use it as a convenient and pleasant solvent for the
novel intention. It is what has been done in all the great "literary"
epics. But hasty criticism, finding that where they resembled Homer
they seemed not so close to their matter, has taken this as a pervading
and unfortunate characteristic. It has not perceived that what in Homer
was the main business of the epic, has become in later epic a device.
Having so altered, it has naturally lost in significance; but in the
greatest instances of later epic, that for which the device was used has
been as profoundly absorbed into the poet's being as Homer's matter was
into his being. It may be noted, too, that a corresponding change has
also taken place in the opposite direction. As Homer's chief substance
becomes a device in later epic, so a device of Homer's becomes in later
epic the chief substance. Homer's supernatural machinery may be reckoned
as a device--a device to heighten the general style and action of his
poems; the _significance_ of Homer must be found among his heroes, not
among his gods. But with Milton, it has become necessary to entrust to
the supernatural action the whole aim and purport of the poem.

On the whole, then, there is no reason why "literary" epic should not be
as close to its subject as "authentic" epic; there is every reason why
both kinds should be equally close. But in testing whether they actually
are equally close, we have to remember that in the later epic it has
become necessary to use the ostensible subject as a vehicle for the real
subject. And who, with any active sympathy for poetry, can say that
Milton felt his theme with less intensity than Homer? Milton is not so
close to his fighting angels as Homer is to his fighting men; but the
war in heaven is an incident in Milton's figurative expression of
something that has become altogether himself--the mystery of individual
existence in universal existence, and the accompanying mystery of sin,
of individual will inexplicably allowed to tamper with the divinely
universal will. Milton, of course, in closeness to his subject and in
everything else, stands as supreme above the other poets of literary
epic as Homer does above the poets of authentic epic. But what is true
of Milton is true, in less degree, of the others. If there is any good
in them, it is primarily because they have got very close to their
subjects: that is required not only for epic, but for all poetry.
Coleridge, in a famous estimate put twenty years for the shortest period
in which an epic could be composed; and of this, ten years were to be
for preparation. He meant that not less than ten years would do for the
poet to fill all his being with the theme; and nothing else will serve,
It is well known how Milton brooded over his subject, how Virgil
lingered over his, how Camoen. carried the _Luisads_ round the world
with him, with what furious intensity Tasso gave himself to writing
_Jerusalem Delivered_. We may suppose, perhaps, that the poets of
"authentic" epic had a somewhat easier task. There was no need for them
to be "long choosing and beginning late." The pressure of racial
tradition would see that they chose the right sort of subject; would
see, too, that they lived right in the heart of their subject. For the
poet of "literary" epic, however, it is his own consciousness that must
select the kind of theme which will fulfil the epic intention for his
own day; it is his own determination and studious endurance that will
draw the theme into the secrets of his being. If he is not capable of
getting close to his subject, we should not for that reason call his
work "literary" epic. It would put him in the class of Milton, the most
literary of all poets. We must simply call his stuff bad epic. There is
plenty of it. Southey is the great instance. Southey would decide to
write an epic about Spain, or India, or Arabia, or America. Next he
would read up, in several languages, about his proposed subject; that
would take him perhaps a year. Then he would versify as much strange
information as he could remember; that might take a few months. The
result is deadly; and because he was never anywhere near his subject. It
is for the same reason that the unspeakable labours of Blackmore, Glover
and Wilkie, and Voltaire's ridiculous _Henriade_, have gone to pile up
the rubbish-heaps of literature.

So far, supposed differences between "authentic" and "literary" epic
have resolved themselves into little more than signs of development in
epic intention; the change has not been found to produce enough artistic
difference between early and later epic to warrant anything like a
division into two distinct species. The epic, whether "literary" or
"authentic," is a single form of art; but it is a form capable of
adapting itself to the altering requirements of prevalent consciousness.
In addition, however, to differences in general conception, there are
certain mechanical differences which should be just noticed. The first
epics were intended for recitation; the literary epic is meant to be
read. It is more difficult to keep the attention of hearers than of
readers. This in itself would be enough to rule out themes remote from
common experience, supposing any such were to suggest themselves to the
primitive epic poet. Perhaps, indeed, we should not be far wrong if we
saw a chief reason for the pressure of surrounding tradition on the
early epic in this very fact, that it is poetry meant for recitation.
Traditional matter must be glorified, since it would be easier to listen
to the re-creation of familiar stories than to quite new and unexpected
things; the listeners, we must remember, needed poetry chiefly as the
re-creation of tired hours. Traditional manner would be equally
difficult to avoid; for it is a tradition that plainly embodies the
requirements, fixed by experience, of _recited_ poetry. Those features
of it which make for tedium when it is read--repetition, stock epithets,
set phrases for given situations--are the very things best suited, with
their recurring well-known syllables, to fix the attention of listeners
more firmly, or to stir it when it drowses; at the least they provide a
sort of recognizable scaffolding for the events, and it is remarkable
how easily the progress of events may be missed when poetry is
declaimed. Indeed, if the primitive epic poet could avoid some of the
anxieties peculiar to the composition of literary epic, he had others to
make up for it. He had to study closely the delicate science of holding
auricular attention when once he had got it; and probably he would have
some difficulty in getting it at all. The really great poet challenges
it, like Homer, with some tremendous, irresistible opening; and in this
respect the magnificent prelude to _Beowulf_ may almost be put beside
Homer. But lesser poets have another way. That prolixity at the
beginning of many primitive epics, their wordy deliberation in getting
under way, is probably intentional. The _Song of Roland_, for instance,
begins with a long series of exceedingly dull stanzas; to a reader, the
preliminaries of the story seem insufferably drawn out. But by the time
the reciter had got through this unimportant dreariness, no doubt his
audience had settled down to listen. The _Chanson d'Antioche_ contains
perhaps the most illuminating admission of this difficulty. In the first
"Chant," the first section opens:[4]

  Seigneurs, faites silence; et que tout bruit cesse,
  Si vous voulez entendre une glorieuse chanson.
  Aucun jongleur ne vous en dira une meilleure.

Then some vaguely prelusive lines. But the audience is clearly not quite
ready yet, for the second section begins:

  Barons, écoutez-moi, et cessez vos querelles!
  Je vous dirai une très-belle chanson.

And after some further prelude, the section ends:

  Ici commence la chanson où il y a tant à apprendre.

The "Chanson" does, indeed, make some show of beginning in the third
section, but it still moves with a cautious and prelusive air, as if
anxious not to launch out too soon. And this was evidently prudent, for
when the fourth section opens, direct exhortation to the audience has
again become necessary:

  Maintenant, seigneurs, écoutez ce que dit l'Écriture.

And once more in the fifth section:

  Barons, écoutez un excellent couplet.

In the sixth, the jongleur is getting desperate:

  Seigneurs, pour l'amour de Dieu, faites silence, écoutez-moi,
  Pour qu'en partant de ce monde vous entriez dans un meilleur;

but after this exclamation he has his way, though the story proper is
still a good way off. Perhaps not all of these hortatory stanzas were
commonly used; any or all of them could certainly be omitted without
damaging the poem. But they were there to be used, according to the
judgment of the jongleur and the temper of his audience, and their
presence in the poem is very suggestive of the special difficulties in
the art of rhapsodic poetry.

But the gravest difficulty, and perhaps the most important, in poetry
meant solely for recitation, is the difficulty of achieving verbal
beauty, or rather of making verbal beauty tell. Vigorous but controlled
imagination, formative power, insight into the significance of
things--these are qualities which a poet must eminently possess; but
these are qualities which may also be eminently possessed by men who
cannot claim the title of poet. The real differentia of the poet is his
command over the secret magic of words. Others may have as delighted a
sense of this magic, but it is only the poet who can master it and do
what he likes with it. And next to the invention of speaking itself, the
most important invention for the poet has been the invention of writing
and reading; for this has added immensely to the scope of his mastery
over words. No poet will ever take the written word as a substitute for
the spoken word; he knows that it is on the spoken word, and the spoken
word only, that his art is founded. But he trusts his reader to do as he
himself does--to receive written words always as the code of spoken
words. To do so has wonderfully enlarged his technical opportunities;
for apprehension is quicker and finer through the eye than through the
ear. After the invention of reading, even poetry designed primarily for
declamation (like drama or lyric) has depths and subtleties of art which
were not possible for the primitive poet. Accordingly we find that, on
the whole, in comparison with "literary" epic, the texture of
"authentic" epic is flat and dull. The story may be superb, and its
management may be superb; but the words in which the story lives do not
come near the grandeur of Milton, or the exquisiteness of Virgil, or the
deliciousness of Tasso. Indeed, if we are to say what is the real
difference between _Beowulf_ and _Paradise Lost_, we must simply say
that _Beowulf_ is not such good poetry. There is, of course, one
tremendous exception; Homer is the one poet of authentic epic who had
sufficient genius to make unfailingly, nobly beautiful poetry within the
strict and hard conditions of purely auricular art. Compare Homer's
ambrosial glory with the descent tap-water of Hesiod; compare his
continuous burnished gleam of wrought metal with the sparse grains that
lie in the sandy diction of all the "authentic" epics of the other
nations. And, by all ancient accounts, the other early Greek epics would
not fare much better in the comparison. Homer's singularity in this
respect is overwhelming; but it is frequently forgotten, and especially
by those who think to help in the Homeric question by comparing him with
other "authentic" epics. Supposing (we can only just suppose it) a case
were made out for the growth rather than the individual authorship of
some "authentic" epic other than Homer; it could never have any bearing
on the question of Homeric authorship, because no early epic is
comparable with the _poetry_ of Homer. Nothing, indeed, is comparable
with the poetry of Homer, except poetry for whose individual authorship
history unmistakably vouches.

So we cannot say that Homer was not as deliberate a craftsman in words
as Milton himself. The scope of his craft was more restricted, as his
repetitions and stock epithets show; he was restricted by the fact that
he composed for recitation, and the auricular appreciation of diction is
limited, the nature of poetry obeying, in the main, the nature of those
for whom it is composed. But this is just a case in which genius
transcends technical scope. The effects Homer produced with his methods
were as great as any effects produced by later and more elaborate
methods, after poetry began to be read as well as heard. But neither
must we say that the other poets of "authentic" epic were not deliberate
craftsmen in words. Poets will always get as much beauty out of words as
they can. The fact that so often in the early epics a magnificent
subject is told, on the whole, in a lumpish and tedious diction, is not
to be explained by any contempt for careful art, as though it were a
thing unworthy of such heroic singers; it is simply to be explained by
lack of such genius as is capable of transcending the severe limitations
of auricular poetry. And we may well believe that only the rarest and
most potent kind of genius could transcend such limitations.

In summary, then, we find certain conceptual differences and certain
mechanical differences between "authentic" and "literary" epic. But
these are not such as to enable us to say that there is, artistically,
any real difference between the two kinds. Rather, the differences
exhibit the changes we might expect in an art that has kept up with
consciousness developing, and civilization becoming more intricate.
"Literary" epic is as close to its subject as "authentic"; but, as a
general rule, "authentic" epic, in response to its surrounding needs,
has a simple and concrete subject, and the closeness of the poet to this
is therefore more obvious than in "literary" epic, which (again in
response to surrounding needs) has been driven to take for subject some
great abstract idea and display this in a concrete but only ostensible
subject. Then in craftsmanship, the two kinds of epic are equally
deliberate, equally concerned with careful art; but "literary" epic has
been able to take such advantage of the habit of reading that, with the
single exception of Homer, it has achieved a diction much more
answerable to the greatness of epic matter than the "authentic" poems.
We may, then, in a general survey, regard epic poetry as being in all
ages essentially the same kind of art, fulfilling always a similar,
though constantly developing, intention. Whatever sort of society he
lives in, whether he be surrounded by illiterate heroism or placid
culture, the epic poet has a definite function to perform. We see him
accepting, and with his genius transfiguring, the general circumstance
of his time; we see him symbolizing, in some appropriate form, whatever
sense of the significance of life he feels acting as the accepted
unconscious metaphysic of his age. To do this, he takes some great story
which has been absorbed into the prevailing consciousness of his people.
As a rule, though not quite invariably, the story will be of things
which are, or seem, so far back in the past, that anything may credibly
happen in it; so imagination has its freedom, and so significance is
displayed. But quite invariably, the materials of the story will have an
unmistakable air of actuality; that is, they come profoundly out of
human experience, whether they declare legendary heroism, as in Homer
and Virgil, or myth, as in _Beowulf_ and _Paradise Lost_, or actual
history, as in Lucan and Camoens and Tasso. And he sets out this story
and its significance in poetry as lofty and as elaborate as he can
compass. That, roughly, is what we see the epic poets doing, whether
they be "literary" or "authentic"; and if this can be agreed on, we
should now have come tolerably close to a definition of epic poetry.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 4: From the version of the Marquise de Sainte-Aulaire.]




III.


THE NATURE OF EPIC

Rigid definitions in literature are, however, dangerous. At bottom, it
is what we feel, not what we think, that makes us put certain poems
together and apart from others; and feelings cannot be defined, but only
related. If we define a poem, we say what we think about it; and that
may not sufficiently imply the essential thing the poem does for us.
Hence the definition is liable either to be too strict, or to admit work
which does not properly satisfy the criterion of feeling. It seems
probable that, in the last resort, classification in literature rests on
that least tangible, least definable matter, style; for style is the
sign of the poem's spirit, and it is the spirit that we feel. If we can
get some notion of how those poems, which we call epic, agree with one
another in style, it is likely we shall be as close as may be to a
definition of epic. I use the word "style," of course, in its largest
sense--manner of conception as well as manner of composition.

An easy way to define epic, though not a very profitable way, would be
to say simply, that an epic is a poem which produces feelings similar to
those produced by _Paradise Lost_ or the _Iliad_, _Beowulf_ or the _Song
of Roland_. Indeed, you might include all the epics of Europe in this
definition without losing your breath; for the epic poet is the rarest
kind of artist. And while it is not a simple matter to say off-hand what
it is that is common to all these poems, there seems to be general
acknowledgment that they are clearly separable from other kinds of
poetry; and this although the word epic has been rather badly abused.
For instance, _The Faery Queene_ and _La Divina Commedia_ have been
called epic poems; but I do not think that anyone could fail to admit,
on a little pressure, that the experience of reading _The Faery Queene_
or _La Divina Commedia_ is not in the least like the experience of
reading _Paradise Lost_ or the _Iliad_. But as a poem may have lyrical
qualities without being a lyric, so a poem may have epical qualities
without being an epic. In all the poems which the world has agreed to
call epics, there is a story told, and well told. But Dante's poem
attempts no story at all, and Spenser's, though it attempts several,
does not tell them well--it scarcely attempts to make the reader believe
in them, being much more concerned with the decoration and the
implication of its fables than with the fables themselves. What epic
quality, detached from epic proper, do these poems possess, then, apart
from the mere fact that they take up a great many pages? It is simply a
question of their style--the style of their conception and the style of
their writing; the whole style of their imagination, in fact. They take
us into a region in which nothing happens that is not deeply
significant; a dominant, noticeably symbolic, purpose presides over each
poem, moulds it greatly and informs it throughout.

This takes us some little way towards deciding the nature of epic. It
must be a story, and the story must be told well and greatly; and,
whether in the story itself or in the telling of it, significance must
be implied. Does that mean that the epic must be allegorical? Many have
thought so; even Homer has been accused of constructing allegories. But
this is only a crude way of emphasizing the significance of epic; and
there is a vast deal of difference between a significant story and an
allegorical story. Reality of substance is a thing on which epic poetry
must always be able to rely. Not only because Spenser does not tell his
stories very well, but even more because their substance (not, of
course, their meaning) is deliciously and deliberately unreal, _The
Faery Queene_ is outside the strict sense of the word epic. Allegory
requires material ingeniously manipulated and fantastic; what is more
important, it requires material invented by the poet himself. That is a
long way from the solid reality of material which epic requires. Not
manipulation, but imaginative transfiguration of material; not
invention, but selection of existing material appropriate to his genius,
and complete absorption of it into his being; that is how the epic poet
works. Allegory is a beautiful way of inculcating and asserting some
special significance in life; but epic has a severer task, and a more
impressive one. It has not to say, Life in the world _ought_ to mean
this or that; it has to show life unmistakably _being_ significant. It
does not gloss or interpret the fact of life, but re-creates it and
charges the fact itself with the poet's own sense of ultimate values.
This will be less precise than the definite assertions of allegory; but
for that reason it will be more deeply felt. The values will be
emotional and spiritual rather than intellectual. And they will be the
poet's own only because he has made them part of his being; in him
(though he probably does not know it) they will be representative of the
best and most characteristic life of his time. That does not mean that
the epic poet's image of life's significance is of merely contemporary
or transient importance. No stage through which the general
consciousness of men has gone can ever be outgrown by men; whatever
happens afterwards does not displace it, but includes it. We could not
do without _Paradise Lost_ nowadays; but neither can we do without the
_Iliad_. It would not, perhaps, be far from the truth, if it were even
said that the significance of _Paradise Lost_ cannot be properly
understood unless the significance of the _Iliad_ be understood.

The prime material of the epic poet, then, must be real and not
invented. But when the story of the poem is safely concerned with some
reality, he can, of course, graft on this as much appropriate invention
as he pleases; it will be one of his ways of elaborating his main,
unifying purpose--and to call it "unifying" is to assume that, however
brilliant his surrounding invention may be, the purpose will always be
firmly implicit in the central subject. Some of the early epics manage
to do without any conspicuous added invention designed to extend what
the main subject intends; but such nobly simple, forthright narrative as
_Beowulf_ and the _Song of Roland_ would not do for a purpose slightly
more subtle than what the makers of these ringing poems had in mind. The
reality of the central subject is, of course, to be understood broadly.
It means that the story must be founded deep in the general experience
of men. A decisive campaign is not, for the epic poet, any more real
than a legend full of human truth. All that the name of Caesar suggests
is extremely important for mankind; so is all that the name of Satan
suggests: Satan, in this sense, is as real as Caesar. And, as far as
reality is concerned, there is nothing to choose between the Christians
taking Jerusalem and the Greeks taking Troy; nor between Odysseus
sailing into fairyland and Vasco da Gama sailing round the world. It is
certainly possible that a poet might devise a story of such a kind that
we could easily take it as something which might have been a real human
experience. But that is not enough for the epic poet. He needs something
which everyone knows about, something which indisputably, and
admittedly, _has been_ a human experience; and even Grendel, the fiend
of the marshes, was, we can clearly see, for the poet of _Beowulf_ a
figure profoundly and generally accepted as not only true but real;
what, indeed, can be more real for poetry than a devouring fiend which
lives in pestilent fens? And the reason why epic poetry so imperiously
demands reality of subject is clear; it is because such poetry has
symbolically to re-create the actual fact and the actual particulars of
human existence in terms of a general significance--the reader must feel
that life itself has submitted to plastic imagination. No fiction will
ever have the air, so necessary for this epic symbolism, not merely of
representing, but of unmistakably _being_, human experience. This might
suggest that history would be the thing for an epic poet; and so it
would be, if history were superior to legend in poetic reality. But,
simply as substance, there is nothing to choose between them; while
history has the obvious disadvantage of being commonly too strict in the
manner of its events to allow of creative freedom. Its details will
probably be so well known, that any modification of them will draw more
attention to discrepancy with the records than to achievement thereby of
poetic purpose. And yet modification, or at least suppression and
exaggeration, of the details of history will certainly be necessary. Not
to declare what happened, and the results of what happened, is the
object of an epic; but to accept all this as the mere material in which
a single artistic purpose, a unique, vital symbolism may be shaped. And
if legend, after passing for innumerable years through popular
imagination, still requires to be shaped at the hands of the epic poet,
how much more must the crude events of history require this! For it is
not in events as they happen, however notably, that man may see symbols
of vital destiny, but in events as they are transformed by plastic
imagination.

Yet it has been possible to use history as the material of great epic
poetry; Camoens and Tasso did this--the chief subject of the _Lusiads_
is even contemporary history. But evidently success in these cases was
due to the exceptional and fortunate fact that the fixed notorieties of
history were combined with a strange and mysterious geography. The
remoteness and, one might say, the romantic possibilities of the places
into which Camoens and Tasso were led by their themes, enable
imagination to deal pretty freely with history. But in a little more
than ten years after Camoens glorified Portugal in an historical epic,
Don Alonso de Ercilla tried to do the same for Spain. He puts his action
far enough from home: the Spaniards are conquering Chili. But the world
has grown smaller and more familiar in the interval: the astonishing
things that could easily happen in the seas of Madagascar cannot now
conveniently happen in Chili. The _Araucana_ is versified history, not
epic. That is to say, the action has no deeper significance than any
other actual warfare; it has not been, and could not have been, shaped
to any symbolic purpose. Long before Tasso and Camoens and Ercilla, two
Scotchmen had attempted to put patriotism into epic form; Barbour had
written his _Bruce_ and Blind Harry his _Wallace_. But what with the
nearness of their events, and what with the rusticity of their authors,
these tolerable, ambling poems are quite unable to get the better of the
hardness of history. Probably the boldest attempt to make epic of
well-known, documented history is Lucan's _Pharsalia_. It is a brilliant
performance, and a deliberate effort to carry on the development of
epic. At the very least it has enriched the thought of humanity with
some imperishable lines. But it is true, what the great critic said of
it: the _Pharsalia_ partakes more of the nature of oratory than of
poetry. It means that Lucan, in choosing history, chose something which
he had to declaim about, something which, at best, he could
imaginatively realize; but not something which he could imaginatively
re-create. It is quite different with poems like the _Song of Roland_.
They are composed in, or are drawn immediately out of, an heroic age; an
age, that is to say, when the idea of history has not arisen, when
anything that happens turns inevitably, and in a surprisingly short
time, into legend. Thus, an unimportant, probably unpunished, attack by
Basque mountaineers on the Emperor's rear-guard has become, in the _Song
of Roland_, a great infamy of Saracenic treachery, which must be greatly
avenged.

Such, in a broad description, is the nature of epic poetry. To define it
with any narrower nicety would probably be rash. We have not been
discovering what an epic poem ought to be, but roughly examining what
similarity of quality there is in all those poems which we feel,
strictly attending to the emotional experience of reading them, can be
classed together and, for convenience, termed epic. But it is not much
good having a name for this species of poetry if it is given as well to
poems of quite a different nature. It is not much good agreeing to call
by the name of epic such poems as the _Iliad_ and the _Odyssey_,
_Beowulf_ and the _Song of Roland_, _Paradise Lost_ and _Gerusalemme
Liberata_, if epic is also to be the title for _The Faery Queene_ and
_La Divina Commedia_, _The Idylls of the King_ and _The Ring and the
Book_. But I believe most of the importance in the meaning of the word
epic, when it is reasonably used, will be found in what is written
above. Apart from the specific form of epic, it shares much of its
ultimate intention with the greatest kind of drama (though not with all
drama). And just as drama, whatever grandeur of purpose it may attempt,
must be a good play, so epic must be a good story. It will tell its tale
both largely and intensely, and the diction will be carried on the
volume of a powerful, flowing metre. To distinguish, however, between
merely narrative poetry, and poetry which goes beyond being mere
narrative into the being of epic, must often be left to feeling which
can scarcely be precisely analysed. A curious instance of the
difficulty in exactly defining epic (but not in exactly deciding what is
epic) may be found in the work of William Morris. Morris left two long
narrative poems, _The Life and Death of Jason_, and _The Story of Sigurd
the Volsung_.

I do not think anyone need hesitate to put _Sigurd_ among the epics; but
I do not think anyone who will scrupulously compare the experience of
reading _Jason_ with the experience of reading _Sigurd_, can help
agreeing that _Jason_ should be kept out of the epics. There is nothing
to choose between the subjects of the two poems. For an Englishman,
Greek mythology means as much as the mythology of the North. And I
should say that the bright, exact diction and the modest metre of
_Jason_ are more interesting and attractive than the diction, often
monotonous and vague, and the metre, often clumsily vehement, of
_Sigurd_. Yet for all that it is the style of _Sigurd_ that puts it with
the epics and apart from _Jason_; for style goes beyond metre and
diction, beyond execution, into conception. The whole imagination of
_Sigurd_ is incomparably larger than that of _Jason_. In _Sigurd_, you
feel that the fashioning grasp of imagination has not only seized on the
show of things, and not only on the physical or moral unity of things,
but has somehow brought into the midst of all this, and has kneaded into
the texture of it all, something of the ultimate and metaphysical
significance of life. You scarcely feel that in _Jason_.

Yes, epic poetry must be an affair of evident largeness. It was well
said, that "the praise of an epic poem is to feign a person exceeding
Nature." "Feign" here means to imagine; and imagine does not mean to
invent. But, like most of the numerous epigrams that have been made
about epic poetry, the remark does not describe the nature of epic, but
rather one of the conspicuous signs that that nature is fulfilling
itself. A poem which is, in some sort, a summation for its time of the
values of life, will inevitably concern itself with at least one figure,
and probably with several, in whom the whole virtue, and perhaps also
the whole failure, of living seems superhumanly concentrated. A story
weighted with the epic purpose could not proceed at all, unless it were
expressed in persons big enough to support it. The subject, then, as the
epic poet uses it, will obviously be an important one. Whether, apart
from the way the poet uses it, the subject ought to be an important one,
would not start a very profitable discussion. Homer has been praised for
making, in the _Iliad_, a first-rate poem out of a second-rate subject.
It is a neat saying; but it seems unlikely that anything really
second-rate should turn into first-rate epic. I imagine Homer would have
been considerably surprised, if anyone had told him that the vast train
of tragic events caused by the gross and insupportable insult put by
Agamemnon, the mean mind in authority, on Achilles, the typical
hero--that this noble and profoundly human theme was a second-rate
subject. At any rate, the subject must be of capital importance in its
treatment. It must symbolize--not as a particular and separable
assertion, but at large and generally--some great aspect of vital
destiny, without losing the air of recording some accepted reality of
human experience, and without failing to be a good story; and the
pressure of high purpose will inform diction and metre, as far, at
least, as the poet's verbal art will let it.

The usual attempts at stricter definition of epic than anything this
chapter contains, are either, in spite of what they try for, so vague
that they would admit almost any long stretch of narrative poetry; or
else they are based on the accidents or devices of epic art; and in that
case they are apt to exclude work which is essentially epic because
something inessential is lacking. It has, for instance, been seriously
debated, whether an epic should not contain a catalogue of heroes. Other
things, which epics have been required to contain, besides much that is
not worth mentioning,[5] are a descent into hell and some supernatural
machinery. Both of these are obviously devices for enlarging the scope
of the action. The notion of a visit to the ghosts has fascinated many
poets, and Dante elaborated this Homeric device into the main scheme of
the greatest of non-epical poems, as Milton elaborated the other
Homeric device into the main scheme of the greatest of literary epics.
But a visit to the ghosts is, of course, like games or single combat or
a set debate, merely an incident which may or may not be useful.
Supernatural machinery, however, is worth some short discussion here,
though it must be alluded to further in the sequel. The first and
obvious thing to remark is, that an unquestionably epic effect can be
given without any supernatural machinery at all. The poet of _Beowulf_
has no need of it, for instance. A Christian redactor has worked over
the poem, with more piety than skill; he can always be detected, and his
clumsy little interjections have nothing to do with the general tenour
of the poem. The human world ends off, as it were, precipitously; and
beyond there is an endless, impracticable abyss in which dwells the
secret governance of things, an unknowable and implacable
fate--"Wyrd"--neither malign nor benevolent, but simply inscrutable. The
peculiar cast of noble and desolate courage which this bleak conception
gives to the poem is perhaps unique among the epics.

But very few epic poets have ventured to do without supernatural
machinery of some sort. And it is plain that it must greatly assist the
epic purpose to surround the action with immortals who are not only
interested spectators of the event, but are deeply implicated in it;
nothing could more certainly liberate, or at least more appropriately
decorate, the significant force of the subject. We may leave Milton out,
for there can be no question about _Paradise Lost_ here; the
significance of the subject is not only liberated by, it entirely exists
in, the supernatural machinery. But with the other epic poets, we should
certainly expect them to ask us for our belief in their immortals. That,
however, is just what they seem curiously careless of doing. The
immortals are there, they are the occasion of splendid poetry; they do
what they are intended to do--they declare, namely, by their speech and
their action, the importance to the world of what is going on in the
poem. Only--there is no obligation to believe in them; and will not that
mean, no obligation to believe in their concern for the subject, and all
that that implies? Homer begins this paradox. Think of that lovely and
exquisitely mischievous passage in the _Iliad_ called _The Cheating of
Zeus_. The salvationist school of commentators calls this an
interpolation; but the spirit of it is implicit throughout the whole of
Homer's dealing with the gods; whenever, at least, he deals with them at
length, and not merely incidentally. Not to accept that spirit is not to
accept Homer. The manner of describing the Olympian family at the end of
the first book is quite continuous throughout, and simply reaches its
climax in the fourteenth book. Nobody ever believed in Homer's gods, as
he must believe in Hektor and Achilles. (Puritans like Xenophanes were
annoyed not with the gods for being as Homer described them, but with
Homer for describing them as he did.) Virgil is more decorous; but can
we imagine Virgil praying, or anybody praying, to the gods of the
_Aeneid_? The supernatural machinery of Camoens and Tasso is frankly
absurd; they are not only careless of credibility, but of sanity. Lucan
tried to do without gods; but his witchcraft engages belief even more
faintly than the mingled Paganism and Christianity of Camoens, and
merely shows how strongly the most rationalistic of epic poets felt the
value of some imaginary relaxation in the limits of human existence. Is
it, then, only as such a relaxation that supernatural machinery is
valuable? Or only as a superlative kind of ornament? It is surely more
than that. In spite of the fact that we are not seriously asked to
believe in it, it does beautifully and strikingly crystallize the poet's
determination to show us things that go past the reach of common
knowledge. But by putting it, whether instinctively or deliberately, on
a lower plane of credibility than the main action, the poet obeys his
deepest and gravest necessity: the necessity of keeping his poem
emphatically an affair of recognizable _human_ events. It is of man, and
man's purpose in the world, that the epic poet has to sing; not of the
purpose of gods. The gods must only illustrate man's destiny; and they
must be kept within the bounds of beautiful illustration. But it
requires a finer genius than most epic poets have possessed, to keep
supernatural machinery just sufficiently fanciful without missing its
function. Perhaps only Homer and Virgil have done that perfectly.
Milton's revolutionary development marks a crisis in the general process
of epic so important, that it can only be discussed when that process is
considered, in the following chapter, as a whole.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 5: Such as similes and episodes. It is as if a man were to
say, the essential thing about a bridge is that it should be painted.]




IV.


THE EPIC SERIES

By the general process of epic poetry, I mean the way this form of art
has constantly responded to the profound needs of the society in which
it was made. But the development of human society does not go straight
forward; and the epic process will therefore be a recurring process, the
series a recurring series--though not in exact repetition. Thus, the
Homeric poems, the _Argonautica_, the _Aeneid_, the _Pharsalia_, and the
later Latin epics, form one series: the _Aeneid_ would be the climax of
the series, which thence declines, were it not that the whole originates
with the incomparable genius of Homer--a fact which makes it seem to
decline from start to finish. Then the process begins again, and again
fulfils itself, in the series which goes from _Beowulf_, the _Song of
Roland_, and the _Nibelungenlied_, through Camoens and Tasso up to
Milton. And in this case Milton is plainly the climax. There is nothing
like _Paradise Lost_ in the preceding poems, and epic poetry has done
nothing since but decline from that towering glory.

But it will be convenient not to make too much of chronology, in a
general account of epic development. It has already appeared that the
duties of all "authentic" epic are broadly the same, and the poems of
this kind, though two thousand years may separate their occurrence, may
be properly brought together as varieties of one sub-species. "Literary"
epic differs much more in the specific purpose of its art, as civilized
societies differ much more than heroic, and also as the looser _milieu_
of a civilization allows a less strictly traditional exercise of
personal genius than an heroic age. Still, it does not require any
manipulation to combine the "literary" epics from both series into a
single process. Indeed, if we take Homer, Virgil and Milton as the
outstanding events in the whole progress of epic poetry, and group the
less important poems appropriately round these three names, we shall not
be far from the _ideal truth_ of epic development. We might say, then,
that Homer begins the whole business of epic, imperishably fixes its
type and, in a way that can never be questioned, declares its artistic
purpose; Virgil perfects the type; and Milton perfects the purpose.
Three such poets are not, heaven knows, summed up in a phrase; I mean
merely to indicate how they are related one to another in the general
scheme of epic poetry. For discriminating their merits, deciding their
comparative eminence, I have no inclination; and fortunately it does not
come within the requirements of this essay. Indeed, I think the reader
will easily excuse me, if I touch very slightly on the poetic manner, in
the common and narrow sense, of the poets whom I shall have to mention;
since these qualities have been so often and sometimes so admirably
dealt with. It is at the broader aspects of artistic purpose that I wish
to look.

"From Homer," said Goethe, "I learn every day more clearly, that in our
life here above ground we have, properly speaking, to enact Hell." It is
rather a startling sentence at first. That poetry which, for us, in
Thoreau's excellent words, "lies in the east of literature," scarcely
suggests, in the usual opinion of it, Hell. We are tempted to think of
Homer as the most fortunate of poets. It seems as if he had but to open
his mouth and speak, to create divine poetry; and it does not lessen our
sense of his good fortune when, on looking a little closer, we see that
this is really the result of an unerring and unfailing art, an
extraordinarily skilful technique. He had it entirely at his command;
and he exercised it in a language in which, though it may be singularly
artificial and conventional, we can still feel the wonder of its
sensuous beauty and the splendour of its expressive power. It is a
language that seems alive with eagerness to respond to imagination. Open
Homer anywhere, and the casual grandeur of his untranslatable language
appears; such lines as:

    amphi de naees
  smerdaleon konabaesan ausanton hup' Achaion.[6]

That, you might say, is Homer at his ease; when he exerts himself you
get a miracle like:

    su den strophalingi koniaes
  keiso megas megalosti, lelasmenos hipposunaon.[7]

It seems the art of one who walked through the world of things endowed
with the senses of a god, and able, with that perfection of effort that
looks as if it were effortless, to fashion his experience into
incorruptible song; whether it be the dance of flies round a byre at
milking-time, or a forest-fire on the mountains at night. The shape and
clamour of waves breaking on the beach in a storm is as irresistibly
recorded by Homer as the gleaming flowers which earth put forth to be
the bed of Zeus and Hera in Gargaros, when a golden cloud was their
coverlet, and Sleep sat on a pine tree near by in the likeness of a
murmuring night-jar. It is an art so balanced, that when it tells us,
with no special emphasis, how the Trojans came on with a din like the
clangour of a flock of cranes, but the Achaians came on in silence, the
temper of the two hosts is discriminated for the whole poem; or, in the
supreme instance, when it tells us how the old men looked at Helen and
said, "No wonder the young men fight for her!" then Helen's beauty must
be accepted by the faith of all the world. The particulars of such
poetry could be enumerated for pages; and this is the poetry which is
filled, more than any other literature, in the _Iliad_ with the nobility
of men and women, in the _Odyssey_ with the light of natural magic. And
think of those gods of Homer's; he is the one poet who has been able to
make the dark terrors of religion beautiful, harmless and quietly
entertaining. It is easy to read this poetry and simply _enjoy_ it; it
is easy to say, the man whose spirit held this poetry must have been
divinely happy. But this is the poetry whence Goethe learnt that the
function of man is "to enact Hell."

Goethe is profoundly right; though possibly he puts it in a way to which
Homer himself might have demurred. For the phrase inevitably has its
point in the word "Hell"; Homer, we may suppose, would have preferred
the point to come in the word "enact." In any case, the details of
Christian eschatology must not engage us much in interpreting Goethe's
epigram. There is truth in it, not simply because the two poems take
place in a theatre of calamity; not simply, for instance, because of the
beloved Hektor's terrible agony of death, and the woes of Andromache and
Priam. Such things are the partial, incidental expressions of the whole
artistic purpose. Still less is it because of a strain of latent
savagery in, at any rate, the _Iliad_; as when the sage and reverend
Nestor urges that not one of the Greeks should go home until he has lain
with the wife of a slaughtered Trojan, or as in the tremendous words of
the oath: "Whoever first offend against this oath, may their brains be
poured out on the ground like this wine, their own and their children's,
and may their wives be made subject to strangers." All that is one of
the accidental qualities of Homer. But the force of the word "enact" in
Goethe's epigram will certainly come home to us when we think of those
famous speeches in which courage is unforgettably declared--such
speeches as that of Sarpedon to Glaukos, or of Glaukos to Diomedes, or
of Hektor at his parting with Andromache. What these speeches mean,
however, in the whole artistic purpose of Homer, will assuredly be
missed if they are _detached_ for consideration; especially we shall
miss the deep significance of the fact that in all of these speeches the
substantial thought falls, as it were, into two clauses. Courage is in
the one clause, a deliberate facing of death; but something equally
important is in the other. Is it honour? The Homeric hero makes a great
deal of honour; but it is honour paid to himself, living; what he wants
above everything is to be admired--"always to be the best"; that is what
true heroism is. But he is to go where he knows death will strike at
him; and he does not make much of honour after death; for him, the
meanest man living is better than a dead hero. Death ends everything, as
far as he is concerned, honour and all; his courage looks for no reward
hereafter. No; but _since_ ten thousand fates of death are always
instant round us; _since_ the generations of men are of no more account
than leaves of a tree; _since_ Troy and all its people will soon be
destroyed--he will stand in death's way. Sarpedon emphasizes this with
its converse: There would be no need of daring and fighting, he says,
of "man-ennobling battle," if we could be for ever ageless and
deathless. That is the heroic age; any other would say, If only we could
not be killed, how pleasant to run what might have been risks! For the
hero, that would simply not be worth while. Does he find them pleasant,
then, just because they are risky? Not quite; that, again, is to detach
part of the meaning from the whole. If anywhere, we shall, perhaps, find
the whole meaning of Homer most clearly indicated in such words as those
given (without any enforcement) to Achilles and Thetis near the
beginning of the _Iliad_, as if to sound the pitch of Homer's poetry:

  mêter, hepi m hetekes ge minynthadion per heonta,
  timên per moi hophellen Olympios engyalixai
  Zeus hypsibremetês.[8]
       *       *       *       *       *
  timêson moi yion hos hôkymorôtatos hallon
  heplet'.[9]

Minunthadion--hôkymorôtatos: those are the imporportant words;
key-words, they might be called. If we really understand these lines, if
we see in them what it is that Agamemnon's insult has deprived Achilles
of--the sign and acknowledgment of his fellows' admiration while he is
still living among them, the one thing which makes a hero's life worth
living, which enables him to enact his Hell--we shall scarcely complain
that the _Iliad_ is composed on a second-rate subject. The significance
of the poem is not in the incidents surrounding the "Achilleis"; the
whole significance is centred in the Wrath of Achilles, and thence made
to impregnate every part.

Life is short; we must make the best of it. How trite that sounds! But
it is not trite at all really. It seems difficult, sometimes, to believe
that there was a time when sentiments now become habitual, sentiments
that imply not only the original imperative of conduct, but the original
metaphysic of living, were by no means altogether habitual. It is
difficult to imagine backwards into the time when self-consciousness was
still so fresh from its emergence out of the mere tribal consciousness
of savagery, that it must not only accept the fact, but first intensely
_realize_, that man is hôkymorôtatos--a thing of swiftest doom. And it
was for men who were able, and forced, to do that, that the _Iliad_ and
the _Odyssey_ and the other early epics were composed. But life is not
only short; it is, in itself, _valueless_. "As the generation of leaves,
so is the generation of men." The life of man matters to nobody but
himself. It happens incidentally in universal destiny; but beyond just
happening it has no function. No function, of course, except for man
himself. If man is to find any value in life it is he himself that must
create the value. For the sense of the ultimate uselessness of life, of
the blankness of imperturbable darkness that surrounds it, Goethe's word
"Hell" is not too shocking. But no one has properly lived who has not
felt this Hell; and we may easily believe that in an heroic age, the
intensity of this feeling was the secret of the intensity of living. For
where will the primitive instinct of man, where will the hero, find the
chance of creating a value for life? In danger, and in the courage that
welcomes danger. That not only evaluates life; it derives the value from
the very fact that forces man to create value--the fact of his swift and
instant doom--hôkymorôtatos once more; it makes this dreadful fact
_enjoyable_. And so, with courage as the value of life, and man thence
delightedly accepting whatever can be made of his passage, the doom of
life is not simply suffered; man enacts his own life; he has mastered
it.

We need not say that this is the lesson of Homer. And all this, barely
stated, is a very different matter from what it is when it is poetically
symbolized in the vast and shapely substance of the _Iliad_ and the
_Odyssey_. It is quite possible, of course, to appreciate, pleasantly
and externally, the _Iliad_ with its pressure of thronging life and its
daring unity, and the _Odyssey_ with its serener life and its superb
construction, though much more sectional unity. But we do not appreciate
what Homer did for his time, and is still doing for all the world, we do
not appreciate the spirit of his music, unless we see the warfare and
the adventure as symbols of the primary courage of life; and there is
more in those words than seems when they are baldly written. And it is
not his morals, but Homer's art that does that for us. And what Homer's
art does supremely, the other early epics do in their way too. Their way
is not to be compared with Homer's way. They are very much nearer than
he is to the mere epic material--to the moderate accomplishment of the
primitive ballad. Apart from their greatness, and often successful
greatness, of intention, perhaps the only one that has an answerable
greatness in the detail of its technique is _Beowulf_. That is not on
account of its "kennings"--the strange device by which early popular
poetry (Hesiod is another instance) tries to liberate and master the
magic of words. A good deal has been made of these "kennings"; but it
does not take us far towards great poetry, to have the sea called
"whale-road" or "swan-road" or "gannet's-bath"; though we are getting
nearer to it when the sun is called "candle of the firmament" or
"heaven's gem." On the whole, the poem is composed in an elaborate,
ambitious diction which is not properly governed. Alliteration proves a
somewhat dangerous principle; it seems mainly responsible for the way
the poet makes his sentences by piling up clauses, like shooting a load
of stones out of a cart. You cannot always make out exactly what he
means; and it is doubtful whether he always had a clearly-thought
meaning. Most of the subsidiary matter is foisted in with monstrous
clumsiness. Yet _Beowulf_ has what we do not find, out of Homer, in the
other early epics. It has occasionally an unforgettable grandeur of
phrasing. And it has other and perhaps deeper poetic qualities. When the
warriors are waiting in the haunted hall for the coming of the
marsh-fiend Grendel, they fall into untroubled sleep; and the poet adds,
with Homeric restraint: "Not one of them thought that he should thence
be ever seeking his loved home again, his people or free city, where he
was nurtured." The opening is magnificent, one of the noblest things
that have been done in language. There is some wonderful grim landscape
in the poem; towards the middle there is a great speech on deterioration
through prosperity, a piece of sustained intensity that reads like an
Aeschylean chorus; and there is some admirable fighting, especially the
fight with Grendel in the hall, and with Grendel's mother under the
waters, while Beowulf's companions anxiously watch the troubled surface
of the mere. The fact that the action of the poem is chiefly made of
single combat with supernatural creatures and that there is not tapestry
figured with radiant gods drawn between the life of men and the ultimate
darkness, gives a peculiar and notable character to the way Beowulf
symbolizes the primary courage of life. One would like to think, with
some enthusiasts, that this great poem, composed in a language totally
unintelligible to the huge majority of Englishmen--further from English
than Latin is from Italian--and perhaps not even composed in England,
certainly not concerned either with England or Englishmen, might
nevertheless be called an English epic.

But of course the early epics do not, any of them, merely repeat the
significance of Homer in another form. They might do that, if poetry had
to inculcate a moral, as some have supposed. But however nicely we may
analyse it, we shall never find in poetry a significance which is really
detachable, and expressible in another way. The significance _is_ the
poetry. What _Beowulf_ or the _Iliad_ or the _Odyssey_ means is simply
what it is in its whole nature; we can but roughly indicate it. And as
poetry is never the same, so its significance is never quite the same.
Courage as the first necessary value of life is most naively and simply
expressed, perhaps, in the _Poem of the Cid_; but even here the
expression is, as in all art, unique, and chiefly because it is
contrived through solidly imagined characters. There is splendid
characterization, too, in the _Song of Roland_, together with a fine
sense of poetic form; not fine enough, however, to avoid a prodigious
deal of conventional gag. The battling is lavish, but always exciting;
and in, at least, that section which describes how the dying Oliver,
blinded by weariness and wounds, mistakes Roland for a pagan and feebly
smites him with his sword, there is real and piercing pathos. But for
all his sense of character, the poet has very little discretion in his
admiration of his heroes. Christianity, in these two poems, has less
effect than one might think. The conspicuous value of life is still the
original value, courage; but elaboration and refinement of this begin
to appear, especially in the _Song of Roland_, as passionately conscious
patriotism and loyalty. The chief contribution of the _Nibelungenlied_
to the main process of epic poetry is _plot_ in narrative; a
contribution, that is, to the manner rather than to the content of epic
symbolism. There is something that can be called plot in Homer; but with
him, as in all other early epics, it is of no great account compared
with the straightforward linking of incidents into a direct chain of
narrative. The story of the _Nibelungenlied_, however, is not a chain
but a web. Events and the influence of characters are woven closely and
intricately together into one tragic pattern; and this requires not only
characterization, but also the adding to the characters of persistent
and dominant motives.

Epic poetry exhibits life in some great symbolic attitude. It cannot
strictly be said to symbolize life itself, but always some manner of
life. But life as courage--the turning of the dark, hard condition of
life into something which can be exulted in--this, which is the deep
significance of the art of the first epics, is the absolutely necessary
foundation for any subsequent valuation of life; Man can achieve nothing
until he has first achieved courage. And this, much more than any
inheritance of manner, is what makes all the writers of deliberate or
"literary" epic imply the existence of Homer. If Homer had not done his
work, they could not have done theirs. But "literary" epics are as
necessary as Homer. We cannot go on with courage as the solitary
valuation of life. We must have the foundation, but we must also have
the superstructure. Speaking comparatively, it may be said that the
function of Homeric epic has been to create imperishable symbolism for
the actual courageous consciousness of life, but the duty of "literary"
epic has been to develop this function, answerably to the development of
life itself, into symbolism of some conscious _idea_ of life--something
at once more formalized and more subtilized than the primary virtue of
courage. The Greeks, however, were too much overshadowed by the
greatness of Homer to do much towards this. The _Argonautica_, the
half-hearted epic of Apollonius Rhodius, is the only attempt that need
concern us. It is not a poem that can be read straight through; it is
only enjoyable in moments--moments of charming, minute observation, like
the description of a sunbeam thrown quivering on the wall from a basin
of water "which has just been poured out," lines not only charming in
themselves, but finely used as a simile for Medea's agitated heart; or
moments of romantic fantasy, as when the Argonauts see the eagle flying
towards Prometheus, and then hear the Titan's agonized cry. But it is
not in such passages that what Apollonius did for epic abides. A great
deal of his third book is a real contribution to the main process, to
epic content as well as to epic manner. To the manner of epic he added
analytic psychology. No one will ever imagine character more deeply or
more firmly than Homer did in, say, Achilles; but Apollonius was the man
who showed how epic as well as drama may use the nice minutiae of
psychological imagination. Through Virgil, this contribution to epic
manner has pervaded subsequent literature. Apollonius, too, in his
fumbling way, as though he did not quite know what he was doing, has yet
done something very important for the development of epic significance.
Love has been nothing but a subordinate incident, almost one might say
an ornament, in the early epics; in Apollonius, though working through a
deal of gross and lumbering mythological machinery, love becomes for the
first time one of the primary values of life. The love of Jason and
Medea is the vital symbolism of the _Argonautica_.

But it is Virgil who really begins the development of epic art. He took
over from Apollonius love as part of the epic symbolism of life, and
delicate psychology as part of the epic method. And, like Apollonius, he
used these novelties chiefly in the person of a heroine. But in Virgil
they belong to an incomparably greater art; and it is through Virgil
that they have become necessities of the epic tradition. More than this,
however, was required of him. The epic poet collaborates with the spirit
of his time in the composition of his work. That is, if he is
successful; the time may refuse to work with him, but he may not refuse
to work with his time. Virgil not only implies, he often clearly states,
the original epic values of life, the Homeric values; as in the famous:

  Stat sua cuique dies; breve et inreparabile tempus
  Omnibus est vitae: sed famam extendere factis,
  Hoc virtutis opus.[10]

But to write a poem chiefly to symbolize this simple, heroic metaphysic
would scarcely have done for Virgil; it would certainly not have done
for his time. It was eminently a time of social organization, one might
perhaps say of social consciousness. After Sylla and Marius and Caesar,
life as an affair of sheer individualism would not very strongly appeal
to a thoughtful Roman. Accordingly, as has so often been remarked, the
_Aeneid_ celebrates the Roman Empire. A political idea does not seem a
very likely subject for a kind of poetry which must declare greatly the
fundamentals of living; not even when it is a political idea unequalled
in the world, the idea of the Roman Empire. Had Virgil been a _good
Roman_, the _Aeneid_ might have been what no doubt Augustus, and Rome
generally, desired, a political epic. But Virgil was not a good Roman;
there was something in him that was not Roman at all. It was this
strange incalculable element in him that seems for ever making him
accomplish something he had not thought of; it was surely this that made
him, unintentionally it may be, use the idea of the Roman Empire as a
vehicle for a much profounder valuation of life. We must remember here
the Virgil of the Fourth Eclogue--that extraordinary, impassioned poem
in which he dreams of man attaining to some perfection of living. It is
still this Virgil, though saddened and resigned, who writes the
_Aeneid_. Man creating his own destiny, man, however wearied with the
long task of resistance, achieving some conscious community of
aspiration, and dreaming of the perfection of himself: the poet whose
lovely and noble art makes us a great symbol of _that_, is assuredly
carrying on the work of Homer. This was the development in epic
intention required to make epic poetry answer to the widening needs of
civilization.

But even more important, in the whole process of epic, than what
Virgil's art does, is the way it does it. And this in spite of the fact
which everyone has noticed, that Virgil does not compare with Homer as a
poet of seafaring and warfaring. He is not, indeed, very interested in
either; and it is unfortunate that, in managing the story of Aeneas (in
itself an excellent medium for his symbolic purpose) he felt himself
compelled to try for some likeness to the _Odyssey_ and the _Iliad_--to
do by art married to study what the poet of the _Odyssey_ and the
_Iliad_ had done by art married to intuitive experience. But his failure
in this does not matter much in comparison with his technical success
otherwise. Virgil showed how poetry may be made deliberately adequate to
the epic purpose. That does not mean that Virgil is more artistic than
Homer. Homer's redundance, wholesale repetition of lines, and stock
epithets cannot be altogether dismissed as "faults"; they are
characteristics of a wonderfully accomplished and efficient technique.
But epic poetry cannot be written as Homer composed it; whereas it must
be written something as Virgil wrote it; yes, if epic poetry is to be
_written_, Virgil must show how that is to be done. The superb Virgilian
economy is the thing for an epic poet now; the concision, the
scrupulousness, the loading of every word with something appreciable of
the whole significance. After the _Aeneid_, the epic style must be of
this fashion:

  Ibant ovscuri sola sub nocte per umbram
  Perque domos Ditis vacuas et inania regna:
  Quale per incertam lunam sub luce maligna
  Est iter in silvis, ubi caelum condidit umbra
  Jupiter, et rebus nox abstulit atra colorem.[11]

Lucan is much more of a Roman than Virgil; and the _Pharsalia_, so far
as it is not an historical epic, is a political one; the idea of
political liberty is at the bottom of it. That is not an unworthy theme;
and Lucan evidently felt the necessity for development in epic. But he
made the mistake, characteristically Roman, of thinking history more
real than legend; and, trying to lead epic in this direction,
supernatural machinery would inevitably go too. That, perhaps, was
fortunate, for it enabled Lucan safely to introduce one of his great and
memorable lines:

  Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quodcunque moveris;[12]

which would certainly explode any supernatural machinery that could be
invented. The _Pharsalia_ could not be anything more than an interesting
but unsuccessful attempt; it was not on these lines that epic poetry was
to develop. Lucan died at an age when most poets have done nothing very
remarkable; that he already had achieved a poem like the _Pharsalia_,
would make us think he might have gone to incredible heights, were it
not that the mistake of the _Pharsalia_ seems to belong incurably to his
temperament.

Lucan's determined stoicism may, philosophically, be more consistent
than the dubious stoicism of Virgil. But Virgil knew that, in epic,
supernatural imagination is better than consistency. It was an important
step when he made Jupiter, though a personal god, a power to which no
limits are assigned; when he also made the other divinities but shadows,
or, at most, functions, of Jupiter. This answers to his conviction that
spirit universally and singly pervades matter; but, what is more, it
answers to the needs of epic development. When we come to Tasso and
Camoens, we seem to have gone backward in this respect; we seem to come
upon poetry in which supernatural machinery is in a state of chronic
insubordination. But that, too, was perhaps necessary. In comparison
with the _Aeneid, Gerusalemme Liberata_ and _Os Lusiadas_ lack
intellectual control and spiritual depth; but in comparison with the
Roman, the two modern poems thrill with a new passion of life, a new
wine of life, heady, as it seems, with new significance--a significance
as yet only felt, not understood. Both Tasso and Camoens clearly join on
to the main epic tradition: Tasso derives chiefly from the _Aeneid_ and
the _Iliad_, Camoens from the _Aeneid_ and the _Odyssey_. Tasso is
perhaps more Virgilian than Camoens; the plastic power of his
imagination is more assured. But the advantage Camoens has over Tasso
seems to repeat the advantage Homer has over Virgil; the ostensible
subject of the _Lusiads_ glows with the truth of experience. But the
real subject is behind these splendid voyagings, just as the real
subject of Tasso is behind the battles of Christian and Saracen; and in
both poets the inmost theme is broadly the same. It is the consciousness
of modern Europe. _Jerusalem Delivered_ and the _Lusiads_ are drenched
with the spirit of the Renaissance; and that is chiefly responsible for
their lovely poetry. But they reach out towards the new Europe that was
then just beginning. Europe making common cause against the peoples that
are not Europe; Europe carrying her domination round the world--is that
what Tasso and Camoens ultimately mean? It would be too hard and too
narrow a matter by itself to make these poems what they are. No; it is
not the action of Europe, but the spirit of European consciousness, that
gave Tasso and Camoens their deepest inspiration. But what European
consciousness really is, these poets rather vaguely suggest than master
into clear and irresistible expression, into the supreme symbolism of
perfectly adequate art. They still took European consciousness as an
affair of geography and race rather than simply as a triumphant stage in
the general progress of man's knowledge of himself. Their time imposed a
duty on them; that they clearly understood. But they did not clearly
understand what the duty was; partly, no doubt, because they were both
strongly influenced by mediaeval religion. And so it is atmosphere, in
Tasso and Camoens, that counts much more than substance; both poets seem
perpetually thrilled by something they cannot express--the _non so che_
of Tasso. And what chiefly gives this sense of quivering, uncertain
significance to their poetry is the increase of freedom and decrease of
control in the supernatural. Supernaturalism was emphasized, because
they instinctively felt that this was the means epic poetry must use to
accomplish its new duties; it was disorderly, because they did not quite
know what use these duties required. Tasso and Camoens, for all the
splendour and loveliness of their work, leave epic poetry, as it were,
consciously dissatisfied--knowing that its future must achieve some
significance larger and deeper than anything it had yet done, and
knowing that this must be done somehow through imagined supernaturalism.
It waited nearly a hundred years for the poet who understood exactly
what was to be done and exactly how to do it.

In _Paradise Lost_, the development of epic poetry culminates, as far as
it has yet gone. The essential inspiration of the poem implies a
particular sense of human existence which has not yet definitely
appeared in the epic series, but which the process of life in Europe
made it absolutely necessary that epic poetry should symbolize. In
Milton, the poet arose who was supremely adequate to the greatest task
laid on epic poetry since its beginning with Homer; Milton's task was
perhaps even more exacting than that original one. "His work is not the
greatest of heroic poems, only because it is not the first." The epigram
might just as reasonably have been the other way round. But nothing
would be more unprofitable than a discussion in which Homer and Milton
compete for supremacy of genius. Our business here is quite otherwise.

With the partial exception of Tasso and Camoens, all epic poetry before
Milton is some symbolism of man's sense of his own will. It is simply
this in Homer; and the succeeding poets developed this intention but
remained well within it. Not even Virgil, with his metaphysic of
individual merged into social will--not even Virgil went outside it. In
fact, it is a sort of _monism_ of consciousness that inspires all
pre-Miltonic epic. But in Milton, it has become a _dualism_. Before him,
the primary impulse of epic is an impassioned sense of man's nature
_being contained_--by his destiny: _his_ only because he is in it and
belongs to it, as we say "_my_ country." With Milton, this has
necessarily become not only a sense of man's rigorously contained
nature, but equally a sense of that which contains man--in fact,
simultaneously a sense of individual will and of universal necessity.
The single sense of these two irreconcilables is what Milton's poetry
has to symbolize. Could they be reconciled, the two elements in man's
modern consciousness of existence would form a monism. But this
consciousness is a dualism; its elements are absolutely opposed.
_Paradise Lost_ is inspired by intense consciousness of the eternal
contradiction between the general, unlimited, irresistible will of
universal destiny, and defined individual will existing within this, and
inexplicably capable of acting on it, even against it. Or, if that seems
too much of an antinomy to some philosophies (and it is perhaps possible
to make it look more apparent than real), the dualism can be unavoidably
declared by putting it entirely in terms of consciousness: destiny
creating within itself an existence which stands against and apart from
destiny by being _conscious_ of it. In Milton's poetry the spirit of man
is equally conscious of its own limited reality and of the unlimited
reality of that which contains him and drives him with its motion--of
his own will striving in the midst of destiny: destiny irresistible, yet
his will unmastered.

This is not to examine the development of epic poetry by looking at that
which is not _poetry_. In this kind of art, more perhaps than in any
other, we must ignore the wilful theories of those who would set
boundaries to the meaning of the word poetry. In such a poem as
Milton's, whatever is in it is its poetry; the poetry of _Paradise Lost_
is just--_Paradise Lost_! Its pomp of divine syllables and glorious
images is no more the poetry of Milton than the idea of man which he
expressed. But the general manner of an art is for ever similar; it is
its inspiration that is for ever changing. We need never expect words
and metre to do more than they do here:

          they, fondly thinking to allay
  Their appetite with gust, instead of fruit
  Chewed bitter ashes, which the offended taste
  With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayed,
  Hunger and thirst constraining; drugged as oft,
  With hatefullest disrelish writhed their jaws,
  With soot and cinders filled;

or more than they do here:

    What though the field be lost?
  All is not lost; the unconquerable will,
  And study of revenge, immortal hate,
  And courage never to submit or yield,
  And what is else not to be overcome.

But what Homer's words, and perhaps what Virgil's words, set out to do,
they do just as marvellously. There is no sure way of comparison here.
How words do their work in poetry, and how we appreciate the way they do
it--this seems to involve the obscurest processes of the mind: analysis
can but fumble at it. But we can compare inspiration--the nature of the
inmost urgent motive of poetry. And it is not irrelevant to add (it
seems to me mere fact), that Milton had the greatest motive that has
ever ruled a poet.

For the vehicle of this motive, a fable of purely human action would
obviously not suffice. What Milton has to express is, of course,
altogether human; destiny is an entirely human conception. But he has to
express not simply the sense of human existence occurring in destiny;
that brings in destiny only mediately, through that which is destined.
He has to express the sense of destiny immediately, at the same time as
he expresses its opponent, the destined will of man. Destiny will appear
in poetry as an omnipotent God; Virgil had already prepared poetry for
that. But the action at large must clearly consist now, and for the
first time, overwhelmingly of supernatural imagination. Milton has been
foolishly blamed for making his supernaturalism too human. But nothing
can come into poetry that is not shaped and recognizable; how else but
in anthropomorphism could destiny, or (its poetic equivalent) deity,
exist in _Paradise Lost_?

We may see what a change has come over epic poetry, if we compare this
supernatural imagination of Milton's with the supernatural machinery of
any previous epic poet. Virgil is the most scrupulous in this respect;
and towards the inevitable change, which Milton completed and perfected
from Camoens and Tasso, Virgil took a great step in making Jupiter
professedly almighty. But compare Virgil's "Tantaene animis celestibus
irae?" with Milton's "Evil, be thou my good!" It is the difference
between an accidental device and essential substance. That, in order to
symbolize in epic form--that is to say, in _narrative_ form--the
dualistic sense of destiny and the destined, and both immediately
--Milton had to dissolve his human action completely in a
supernatural action, is the sign not merely of a development, but of a
re-creation, of epic art.

It has been said that Satan is the hero of _Paradise Lost_. The offence
which the remark has caused is due, no doubt, to injudicious use of the
word "hero." It is surely the simple fact that if _Paradise Lost_ exists
for any one figure, that is Satan; just as the _Iliad_ exists for
Achilles, and the _Odyssey_ for Odysseus. It is in the figure of Satan
that the imperishable significance of _Paradise Lost_ is centred; his
vast unyielding agony symbolizes the profound antinomy of modern
consciousness. And if this is what he is in significance it is worth
noting what he is in technique. He is the blending of the poem's human
plane with its supernatural plane. The epic hero has always represented
humanity by being superhuman; in Satan he has grown into the
supernatural. He does not thereby cease to symbolize human existence;
but he is thereby able to symbolize simultaneously the sense of its
irreconcilable condition, of the universal destiny that contains it. Out
of Satan's colossal figure, the single urgency of inspiration, which
this dualistic consciousness of existence makes, radiates through all
the regions of Milton's vast and rigorous imagination. "Milton," says
Landor, "even Milton rankt with living men!"

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 6: 'And all round the ships echoed terribly to the shouting
Achaians.']

[Footnote 7:
  'When in a dusty whirlwind thou didst lie,
    Thy valour lost, forgot thy chivalry.'--OGILBY.
(The version leaves out megas megalosti.)
]

[Footnote 8: 'Mother, since thou didst bear me to be so short-lived,
Olympian Zeus that thunders from on high should especially have bestowed
honour on me.']

[Footnote 9: 'Honour my son for me, for the swiftest doom of all is
his.']

[Footnote 10: "For everyone his own day is appointed; for all men the
period of life is short and not to be recalled: but to spread glory by
deeds, that is what valour can do."]

[Footnote 11:
  "They wer' amid the shadows by night in loneliness obscure
  Walking forth i' the void and vasty dominyon of Ades;
  As by an uncertain moonray secretly illumin'd
  One goeth in the forest, when heav'n is gloomily clouded,
  And black night hath robb'd the colours and beauty from all things."
--ROBERT BRIDGES.
]

[Footnote 12: "All that is known, all that is felt, is God."]




V.


AFTER MILTON

And after Milton, what is to happen? First, briefly, for a few instances
of what has happened. We may leave out experiments in religious
sentiment like Klopstock's _Messiah_. We must leave out also poems which
have something of the look of epic at first glance, but have nothing of
the scope of epic intention; such as Scott's longer poems. These might
resemble the "lays" out of which some people imagine "authentic" epic to
have been made. But the lays are not the epic. Scott's poems have not
the depth nor the definiteness of symbolic intention--what is sometimes
called the epic unity--and this is what we can always discover in any
poetry which gives us the peculiar experience we must associate with the
word epic, if it is to have any precision of meaning. What applies to
Scott, will apply still more to Byron's poems; Byron is one of the
greatest of modern poets, but that does not make him an epic poet. We
must keep our minds on epic intention. Shelley's _Revolt of Islam_ has
something of it, but too vaguely and too fantastically; the generality
of human experience had little to do with this glittering poem. Keats's
_Hyperion_ is wonderful; but it does not go far enough to let us form
any judgment of it appropriate to the present purpose.[13] Our search
will not take us far before we notice something very remarkable; poems
which look superficially like epic turn out to have scarce anything of
real epic intention; whereas epic intention is apt to appear in poems
that do not look like epic at all. In fact, it seems as if epic manner
and epic content were trying for a divorce. If this be so, the
traditional epic manner will scarcely survive the separation. Epic
content, however, may very well be looking out for a match with a new
manner; though so far it does not seem to have found an altogether
satisfactory partner.

But there are one or two poems in which the old union seems still happy.
Most noteworthy is Goethe's _Hermann und Dorothea_. You may say that it
does not much matter whether such poetry should be called epic or, as
some hold, idyllic. But it is interesting to note, first, that the poem
is deliberately written with epic style and epic intention; and, second,
that, though singularly beautiful, it makes no attempt to add anything
to epic development. It is interesting, too, to see epic poetry trying
to get away from its heroes, and trying to use material the poetic
importance of which seems to depend solely on the treatment, not on
itself. This was a natural and, for some things, a laudable reaction.
But it inevitably meant that epic must renounce the triumphs which
Milton had won for it. William Morris saw no reason for abandoning
either the heroes or anything else of the epic tradition. The chief
personages of _Sigurd the Volsung_ are admittedly more than human, the
events frankly marvellous. The poem is an impressive one, and in one way
or another fulfils all the main qualifications of epic. But perhaps no
great poem ever had so many faults. These have nothing to do with its
management of supernaturalism; those who object to this simply show
ignorance of the fundamental necessities of epic poetry. The first book
is magnificent; everything that epic narrative should be; but after this
the poem grows long-winded, and that is the last thing epic poetry
should be. It is written with a running pen; so long as the verse keeps
going on, Morris seems satisfied, though it is very often going on
about unimportant things, and in an uninteresting manner. After the
first book, indeed, as far as Morris's epic manner is concerned, Virgil
and Milton might never have lived. It attempts to be the grand manner by
means of vagueness. In an altogether extraordinary way, the poem slurs
over the crucial incidents (as in the inept lines describing the death
of Fafnir, and those, equally hollow, describing the death of
Guttorm--two noble opportunities simply not perceived) and tirelessly
expatiates on the mere surroundings of the story. Yet there is no
attempt to make anything there credible: Morris seems to have mixed up
the effects of epic with the effects of a fairy-tale. The poem lacks
intellect; it has no clear-cut thought. And it lacks sensuous images; it
is full of the sentiment, not of the sense of things, which is the wrong
way round. Hence the protracted conversations are as a rule amazingly
windy and pointless, as the protracted descriptions are amazingly
useless and tedious. And the superhuman virtues of the characters are
not shown in the poem so much as energetically asserted. It says much
for the genius of Morris that _Sigurd the Volsung_, with all these
faults, is not to be condemned; that, on the contrary, to read it is
rather a great than a tiresome experience; and not only because the
faults are relieved, here and there, by exquisite beauties and
dignities, indeed by incomparable lines, but because the poem as a whole
does, as it goes on, accumulate an immense pressure of significance. All
the great epics of the world have, however, perfectly clearly a
significance in close relation with the spirit of their time; the
intense desire to symbolize the consciousness of man as far as it has
attained, is what vitally inspires an epic poet, and the ardour of this
infects his whole style. Morris, in this sense, was not vitally
inspired. _Sigurd the Volsung_ is a kind of set exercise in epic poetry.
It is great, but it is not _needed_. It is, in fact, an attempt to write
epic poetry as it might have been written, and to make epic poetry mean
what it might have meant, in the days when the tale of Sigurd and the
Niblungs was newly come among men's minds. Mr. Doughty, in his
surprising poem _The Dawn in Britain_, also seems trying to compose an
epic exercise, rather than to be obeying a vital necessity of
inspiration. For all that, it is a great poem, full of irresistible
vision and memorable diction. But it is written in a revolutionary
syntax, which, like most revolutions of this kind, achieves nothing
beyond the fact of being revolutionary; and Mr. Doughty often uses the
unexpected effects of his queer syntax instead of the unexpected effects
of poetry, which makes the poem even longer psychologically than it is
physically. Lander's _Gebir_ has much that can truly be called epic in
it; and it has learned the lessons in manner which Virgil and Milton so
nobly taught. It has perhaps learned them too well; never were
concision, and the loading of each word with heavy duties, so thoroughly
practised. The action is so compressed that it is difficult to make out
exactly what is going on; we no sooner realize that an incident has
begun than we find ourselves in the midst of another. Apart from these
idiosyncrasies, the poetry of _Gebir_ is a curious mixture of splendour
and commonplace. If fiction could ever be wholly, and not only
partially, epic, it would be in _Gebir_.

In all these poems, we see an epic intention still combined with a
recognizably epic manner. But what is quite evident is, that in all of
them there is no attempt to carry on the development of epic, to take up
its symbolic power where Milton left it. On the contrary, this seems to
be deliberately avoided. For any tentative advance on Miltonic
significance, even for any real acceptance of it, we must go to poetry
which tries to put epic intention into a new form. Some obvious
peculiarities of epic style are sufficiently definite to be detachable.
Since Theocritus, a perverse kind of pleasure has often been obtained by
putting some of the peculiarities of epic--peculiarities really required
by a very long poem--into the compass of a very short poem. An epic
idyll cannot, of course, contain any considerable epic intention; it is
wrought out of the mere shell of epic, and avoids any semblance of epic
scope. But by devising somehow a connected sequence of idylls, something
of epic scope can be acquired again. As Hugo says, in his preface to _La
Legende des Siècles_: "Comme dans une mosaïque, chaque pierre a sa
couleur et sa forme propre; l'ensemble donne une figure. La figure de ce
livre," he goes on, "c'est l'homme." To get an epic design or _figure_
through a sequence of small idylls need not be the result of mere
technical curiosity. It may be a valuable method for the future of epic.
Tennyson attempted this method in _Idylls of the King_; not, as is now
usually admitted, with any great success. The sequence is admirable for
sheer craftsmanship, for astonishing craftsmanship; but it did not
manage to effect anything like a conspicuous symbolism. You have but to
think of _Paradise Lost_ to see what _Idylls of the King_ lacks. Victor
Hugo, however, did better in _La Legende des Siècles_. "La figure, c'est
l'homme"; there, at any rate, is the intention of epic symbolism. And,
however pretentious the poem may be, it undoubtedly does make a
passionate effort to develop the significance which Milton had achieved;
chiefly to enlarge the scope of this significance.[14] Browning's _The
Ring and the Book_ also uses this notion of an idyllic sequence; but
without any semblance of epic purpose, purely for the exhibition of
human character.

It has already been remarked that the ultimate significance of great
drama is the same as that of epic. Since the vital epic purpose--the
kind of epic purpose which answers to the spirit of the time--is
evidently looking for some new form to inhabit, it is not surprising,
then, that it should have occasionally tried on dramatic form. And,
unquestionably, for great poetic symbolism of the depths of modern
consciousness, for such symbolism as Milton's, we must go to two such
invasions of epic purpose into dramatic manner--to Goethe's _Faust_ and
Hardy's _The Dynasts_. But dramatic significance and epic significance
have been admitted to be broadly the same; to take but one instance,
Aeschylus's Prometheus is closely related to Milton's Satan (though I
think Prometheus really represents a monism of consciousness--that which
is destined--as Satan represents a dualism--at once the destined and the
destiny). How then can we speak of epic purpose invading drama? Surely
in this way. Drama seeks to present its significance with narrowed
intensity, but epic in a large dilatation: the one contracts, the other
expatiates. When, therefore, we find drama setting out its significance
in such a way as to become epically dilated, we may say that dramatic
has grown into epic purpose. Or, even more positively, we may say that
epic has taken over drama and adapted it to its peculiar needs. In any
case, with one exception to be mentioned presently, it is only in
_Faust_ and _The Dynasts_ that we find any great development of Miltonic
significance. These are the poems that give us immense and shapely
symbols of the spirit of man, conscious not only of the sense of his
own destined being, but also of some sense of that which destines. In
fact, these two are the poems that develop and elaborate, in their own
way, the Miltonic significance, as all the epics in between Homer and
Milton develop and elaborate Homeric significance. And yet, in spite of
_Faust_ and _The Dynasts_, it may be doubted whether the union of epic
and drama is likely to be permanent. The peculiar effects which epic
intention, in whatever manner, must aim at, seem to be as much hindered
as helped by dramatic form; and possibly it is because the detail is
necessarily too much enforced for the broad perfection of epic effect.

The real truth seems to be, that there is an inevitable and profound
difficulty in carrying on the Miltonic significance in anything like a
story. Regular epic having reached its climax in _Paradise Lost_, the
epic purpose must find some other way of going on. Hugo saw this, when
he strung his huge epic sequence together not on a connected story but
on a single idea: "la figure, c'est l'homme." If we are to have, as we
must have, direct symbolism of the way man is conscious of his being
nowadays, which means direct symbolism both of man's spirit and of the
(philosophical) opponent of this, the universal fate of things--if we
are to have all this, it is hard to see how any story can be adequate to
such symbolic requirements, unless it is a story which moves in some
large region of imagined supernaturalism. And it seems questionable
whether we have enough _formal_ "belief" nowadays to allow of such a
story appearing as solid and as vividly credible as epic poetry needs.
It is a decided disadvantage, from the purely epic point of view, that
those admirable "Intelligences" in Hardy's _The Dynasts_ are so
obviously abstract ideas disguised. The supernaturalism of epic, however
incredible it may be in the poem, must be worked up out of the material
of some generally accepted belief. I think it would be agreed, that what
was possible for Milton would scarcely be possible to-day; and even more
impossible would be the naïveté of Homer and the quite different but
equally impracticable naïveté of Tasso and Camoens. The conclusion seems
to be, that the epic purpose will have to abandon the necessity of
telling a story.

Hugo's way may prove to be the right one. But there may be another; and
what has happened in the past may suggest what may happen in the future.
Epic poetry in the regular epic form has before now seemed unlikely. It
seemed unlikely after the Alexandrians had made such poor attempts at
standing upright under the immensity of Homer; it seemed so, until,
after several efforts, Latin poetry became triumphantly epic in Virgil.
And again, when the mystical prestige of Virgil was domineering
everything, regular epic seemed unlikely; until, after the doubtful
attempts of Boiardo and Ariosto, Tasso arrived. But in each case, while
the occurrence of regular epic was seeming so improbable, it
nevertheless happened that poetry was written which was certainly
nothing like epic in form, but which was strongly charged with a
profound pressure of purpose closely akin to epic purpose; and _De Rerum
Natura_ and _La Divina Commedia_ are very suggestive to speculation now.
Of course, the fact that, in both these cases, regular epic did
eventually occur, must warn us that in artistic development anything may
happen; but it does seem as if there were a deeper improbability for
the occurrence of regular epic now than in the times just before Virgil
and Tasso--of regular epic, that is, inspired by some vital import, not
simply, like _Sigurd the Volsung_, by archaeological import. Lucretius is
a good deal more suggestive than Dante; for Dante's form is too exactly
suited to his own peculiar genius and his own peculiar time to be
adaptable. But the method of Lucretius is eminently adaptable. That
amazing image of the sublime mind of Lucretius is exactly the kind of
lofty symbolism that the continuation of epic purpose now seems to
require--a subjective symbolism. I believe Wordsworth felt this, when he
planned his great symbolic poem, and partly executed it in _The Prelude_
and _The Excursion_: for there, more profoundly than anywhere out of
Milton himself, Milton's spiritual legacy is employed. It may be, then,
that Lucretius and Wordsworth will preside over the change from
objective to subjective symbolism which Milton has, perhaps, made
necessary for the continued development of the epic purpose: after
Milton, it seems likely that there is nothing more to be done with
objective epic. But Hugo's method, of a connected sequence of separate
poems, instead of one continuous poem, may come in here. The
determination to keep up a continuous form brought both Lucretius and
Wordsworth at times perilously near to the odious state of didactic
poetry; it was at least responsible for some tedium. Epic poetry will
certainly never be didactic. What we may imagine--who knows how vainly
imagine?--is, then, a sequence of odes expressing, in the image of some
fortunate and lofty mind, as much of the spiritual significance which
the epic purpose must continue from Milton, as is possible, in the style
of Lucretius and Wordsworth, for subjective symbolism. A pregnant
experiment towards something like this has already been seen--in George
Meredith's magnificent set of _Odes in Contribution to the Song of the
French History_. The subject is ostensibly concrete; but France in her
agonies and triumphs has been personified into a superb symbol of
Meredith's own reading of human fate. The series builds up a decidedly
epic significance, and its manner is extraordinarily suggestive of a new
epic method. Nevertheless, something more Lucretian in central
imagination, something less bound to concrete and particular event,
seems required for the complete development of epic purpose.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 13: In the greatest poetry, all the elements of human nature
are burning in a single flame. The artifice of criticism is to detect
what peculiar radiance each element contributes to the whole light; but
this no more affects the singleness of the compounded energy in poetry
than the spectroscopic examination of fire affects the single nature of
actual flame. For the purposes of this book, it has been necessary to
look chiefly at the contribution of intellect to epic poetry; for it is
in that contribution that the development of poetry, so far as there is
any development at all, really consists. This being so, it might be
thought that Keats could hardly have done anything for the real progress
of epic. But Keats's apparent (it is only apparent) rejection of
intellect in his poetry was the result of youthful theory; his letters
show that, in fact, intellect was a thing unusually vigorous in his
nature. If the Keats of the letters be added to the Keats of the poems,
a personality appears that seems more likely than any of his
contemporaries, or than anyone who has come after him, for the work of
carrying Miltonic epic forward without forsaking Miltonic form.]

[Footnote 14: For all I know, Hugo may never have read Milton; judging
by some silly remarks of his, I should hope not. But Hugo could feel the
things in the spirit of man that Milton felt; not only because they were
still there, but because the secret influence of Milton has intensified
the consciousness of them in thousands who think they know nothing of
_Paradise Lost_. Modern literary history will not be properly understood
until it is realized that Milton is one of the dominating minds of
Europe, whether Europe know it or not. There are scarcely half a dozen
figures that can be compared with Milton for irresistible
influence--quite apart from his unapproachable supremacy in the
technique of poetry. When Addison remarked that _Paradise Lost_ is
universally and perpetually interesting, he said what is not to be
questioned; though he did not perceive the real reason for his
assertion. Darwin no more injured the significance of _Paradise Lost_
than air-planes have injured Homer.]


================================================================================
[On Human Nature (인간의 본성에 관하여)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Extant Odes of Pindar
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Extant Odes of Pindar

Author: Pindar

Translator: Ernest Myers


        
Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #10717]
                Most recently updated: October 28, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/10717

Credits: Produced by Ted Garvin, Jayam Subramanian and PG Distributed Proofreaders


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EXTANT ODES OF PINDAR ***

THE EXTANT

ODES OF PINDAR

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH

with

INTRODUCTION AND SHORT NOTES

BY

ERNEST MYERS, M.A.

_Sometime Fellow of Wadham College, Oxford_


1904

_First edition printed 1874._

_Reprinted (with corrections) 1884, 1888, 1892, 1895, 1899, 1904_

  SON OF THE LIGHTNING, FAIR AND FIERY STAR,
  STRONG-WINGED IMPERIAL PINDAR, VOICE DIVINE,
  LET THESE DEEP DRAUGHTS OF THY ENCHANTED WINE
  LIFT ME WITH THEE IN SOARINGS HIGH AND FAR
  PROUDER THAN PEGASEAN, OR THE CAR
  WHEREIN APOLLO RAPT THE HUNTRESS MAID.
  SO LET ME RANGE MINE HOUR, TOO SOON TO FADE
  INTO STRANGE PRESENCE OF THE THINGS THAT ARE.
  YET KNOW THAT EVEN AMID THIS JARRING NOISE
  OF HATES, LOVES, CREEDS, TOGETHER HEAPED AND HURLED,
  SOME ECHO FAINT OF GRACE AND GRANDEUR STIRS
  FROM THY SWEET HELLAS, HOME OF NOBLE JOYS.
  FIRST FRUIT AND BEST OF ALL OUR WESTERN WORLD;
  WHATE'ER WE HOLD OF BEAUTY, HALF IS HERS.




INTRODUCTION.


Probably no poet of importance equal or approaching to that of Pindar
finds so few and so infrequent readers. The causes are not far to
seek: in the first and most obvious place comes the great difficulty
of his language, in the second the frequent obscurity of his thought,
resulting mainly from his exceeding allusiveness and his abrupt
transitions, and in the third place that amount of monotony which must
of necessity attach to a series of poems provided for a succession of
similar occasions.

It is as an attempt towards obviating the first of these hindrances
to the study of Pindar, the difficulty of his language, that this
translation is of course especially intended. To whom and in what
cases are translations of poets useful? To a perfect scholar in the
original tongue they are superfluous, to one wholly ignorant of it
they are apt to be (unless here and there to a Keats) meaningless,
flat, and puzzling. There remains the third class of those who have a
certain amount of knowledge of a language, but not enough to
enable them to read unassisted its more difficult books without an
expenditure of time and trouble which is virtually prohibitive. It
is to this class that a translation ought, it would seem, chiefly to
address itself. An intelligent person of cultivated literary taste,
and able to read the easier books in an acquired language, will feel
himself indebted to a hand which unlocks for him the inner chambers
of a temple in whose outer courts he had already delighted to wander.
Without therefore saying that the merely 'English reader' may never
derive pleasure and instruction from a translation of a foreign poet,
for to this rule our current version of the Hebrew psalmists and
prophets furnish one marked exception at least--still, it is probably
to what may be called the half-learned class that the translator must
preeminently look to find an audience.

The other causes of Pindar's unpopularity to which reference was made
above, the obscurity of his thought and the monotony of his subjects,
will in great measure disappear by means of attentive study of the
poems themselves, and of other sources from which may be gathered an
understanding of the region of thought and feeling in which they move.
In proportion to our familiarity not only with Hellenic mythology and
history, but with Hellenic life and habits of thought generally, will
be our readiness and facility in seizing the drift and import of what
Pindar says, in divining what has passed through his mind: and in his
case perhaps even more than in the case of other poets, this facility
will increase indefinitely with our increasing acquaintance with his
works and with the light thrown on each part of them by the rest[1].

The monotony of the odes, though to some extent unquestionably and
unavoidably real, is to some extent also superficial and in appearance
only. The family of the victor, or his country, some incident of his
past, some possibility of his future life, suggest in each case some
different legendary matter, some different way of treating it, some
different application of it, general or particular, or both. Out
of such resources Pindar is inexhaustible in building up in subtly
varying forms the splendid structure of his song.

Yet doubtless the drawbacks in reading Pindar, though they may be
largely reduced, will always in some degree exist: we shall always
wish that he was easier to construe, that his allusions to things
unfamiliar and sometimes undiscoverable to us were less frequent, that
family pride had not made it customary for him to spend so many lines
on an enumeration of prizes won elsewhere and at other times by the
victor of the occasion or by his kin. Such drawbacks can only fall
into insignificance when eclipsed by consideration of the far more
than counterbalancing attractions of the poems, of their unique and
surpassing interest, poetical, historical, and moral.


Of Pindar as a poet it is hard indeed to speak adequately, and
almost as hard to speak briefly, for a discussion of his poetical
characteristics once begun may wander far before even a small part
has been said of what might be. To say that to his poetry in supreme
degree belong the qualities of force, of vividness, often of
impressive weight, of a lofty style, seeming to be the expression of
a like personality, of a mastery of rhythm and metre and imaginative
diction, of a profoundly Hellenic spirit modified by an unmistakable
individuality, above all of a certain sweep and swiftness as of the
flight of an eagle's wing--to say all this would be to suggest some of
the most obvious features of these triumphal odes; and each of these
qualities, and many more requiring exacter delineation, might be
illustrated with numberless instances which even in the faint image
of a translation would furnish ample testimony[2]. But as this
introduction is intended for those who purpose reading Pindar's
poetry, or at any rate the present translation of it, for themselves,
I will leave it to them to discover for themselves the qualities which
have given Pindar his high place among poets, and will pass on to
suggest briefly his claims to interest us by reason of his place in
the history of human action and human thought.

We know very little of Pindar's life. He was born in or about the year
B.C. 522, at the village of Kynoskephalai near Thebes. He was thus a
citizen of Thebes and seems to have always had his home there. But he
travelled among other states, many of which have been glorified by his
art. For his praise of Athens, 'bulwark of Hellas,' the city which at
Artemision 'laid the foundation of freedom,' the Thebans are said to
have fined him; but the generous Athenians paid the fine, made him
their Proxenos, and erected his statue at the public cost. For the
magnificent Sicilian princes, Hieron of Syracuse and Theron of
Akragas, not unlike the Medici in the position they held, Pindar wrote
five of the longest of his extant odes, and probably visited them in
Sicily. But he would not quit his home to be an ornament of their
courts. When asked why he did not, like Simonides, accept the
invitations of these potentates to make his home with them, he
answered that he had chosen to live his own life, and not to be the
property of another. He died at the age of 79, that is, probably, in
the year 443, twelve years before the Peloponnesian war began. Legend
said that he died in the theatre of Argos, in the arms of Theoxenos,
the boy in whose honour he wrote a Skolion of which an immortal
fragment remains to us. Other myths gathered round his name. It was
said that once when in childhood he had fallen asleep by the way 'a
bee had settled on his lips and gathered honey,' and again that
'he saw in a dream that his mouth was filled with honey and the
honeycomb;' that Pan himself learnt a poem of his and rejoiced to sing
it on the mountains; that finally, while he awaited an answer from
the oracle of Ammon, whence he had enquired what was best for man,
Persephone appeared to him in his sleep and said that she only of the
gods had had no hymn from him, but that he should make her one shortly
when he had come to her; and that he died within ten days of the
vision.

Two several conquerors of Thebes, Pausanias of Sparta and Alexander of
Macedon,

  'bade spare
  The house of Pindarus, when temple and tower
  Went to the ground.'

At Delphi they kept with reverence his iron chair, and the priest of
Apollo cried nightly as he closed the temple, 'Let Pindar the poet go
in unto the supper of the god.'

Thus Pindar was contemporary with an age of Greek history which
justifies the assertion of his consummate interest for the student of
Hellenic life in its prime. It was impossible that a man of his
genius and temperament should have lived through these times without
representing to us with breadth and intensity the spirit that was in
them, and there are several points in Pindar's circumstances which
make his relation to his age peculiarly interesting. We may look on
him as in some points supplementary to the great Athenian dramatists,
whose works are doubtless far the most valuable literary legacy of the
time. Perhaps however the surpassing brilliance of Athenian literature
and history has made us somewhat prone to forget the importance of
non-Athenian elements in the complex whole of Hellenic life and
thought. Athens was the eye of Hellas, nay, she had at Marathon and
Salamis made good her claim to be called the saving arm, but there
were other members not to be forgotten if we would picture to
ourselves the national body in its completeness.

Pindar was a Boeotian, of a country not rich in literary or indeed any
kind of intellectual eminence, yet by no means to be ignored in an
estimate of the Hellenic race. Politically indeed it only rises into
pre-eminence under Epameinondas; before and afterwards Boeotian
policy under the domination of Thebes is seldom either beneficent or
glorious: it must be remembered, however, that the gallant Plataeans
also were Boeotians. The people of Boeotia seem to have had generally
an easy, rather sensually inclined nature, which accorded with their
rich country and absence of nautical and commercial enterprise and
excitement, but in their best men this disposition remains only in the
form of a genial simplicity. Pelopidas in political, and Plutarch and
Pausanias in literary history, will be allowed to be instances of
this. That the poetry which penetrated Hellenic life was not wanting
in Boeotia we have proof enough in the existence of the Sacred Band,
that goodly fellowship of friends which seems to have united what
Hallam has called the three strongest motives to enthusiastic action
that have appeared in history, patriotism, chivalric honour, and
religion. Nor is there any nobler figure in history than that of
Epameinondas.

One fact indeed there is which must always make the thought of
Pindar's Theban citizenship painful to us, and that is the shameful
part taken by Thebes in the Persian war, when compulsion of her
exposed situation, and oligarchical cabal within her walls, drew her
into unholy alliance with the barbarian invader. Had it been otherwise
how passionately pure would Pindar's joy have uttered itself when the
'stone of Tantalos' that hung over the head of Hellas was smitten into
dust in that greatest crisis of the fortunes of humanity. He exults
nobly as it is, he does all honour to Athens, 'bulwark of Hellas,' but
the shame of his own city, his 'mother' Thebes, must have caused him a
pang as bitter as a great soul has ever borne.

For his very calling of song-writer to all Hellenic states without
discrimination, especially when the songs he had to write were of the
class which we still possess, triumphal odes for victories in those
great games which drew to them all men of Hellenic blood at the feet
of common deities, and which with each recurring festival could even
hush the clamour of war in an imperious Truce of God--such a calling
and such associations must have cherished in him the passion for
Panhellenic brotherhood and unanimity, even had there not been much
else both within and without him to join to the same generous end. It
was the time when Panhellenic feeling was probably stronger than ever
before or after. Before, the states had been occupied in building
up their own polities independently; the Hellenic activity had been
dispersing itself centrifugally among the trans-marine colonies,
and those of Italy and Sicily seemed at one time to make it doubtful
whether the nucleus of civilization were to be there or in the
mother-country. But by the time of the Persian war the best energies
of the race had concentrated themselves between the Aegean and Ionian
seas; and the supreme danger of the war had bound the states together
against the common enemy and taught them to forget smaller differences
in the great strife between Hellene and barbarian. Yet again when that
supreme danger was past the old quarrels arose anew more deadly and
more complicated: instead of a Persian there was a Peloponnesian war,
and the Peloponnesian war in its latter stages came, by virtue of the
political principles involved, to partake much of the character of
a civil war. But the time of Pindar, of Aeschylus, of Sophocles, of
Pheidias, of Polygnotos, was that happy interval when Hellas had
beaten off the barbarian from her throat and had not yet murdered
herself. And Pindar's imagination and generosity were both kindled by
the moment; there was no room in his mind for border squabbles, for
commercial jealousies, for oligarchic or democratic envy: these things
were overridden by a sentiment of nationality wanting indeed in
many circumstances which modern nationalities deem essential to the
existence of such sentiment, and many of which are really essential to
its permanence--yet a sentiment which no other nation ever before or
since can have possessed in the peculiar lustre which it then wore in
Hellas; for no other nation has ever before or since known what it was
to stand alone immeasurably advanced at the head of the civilization
of the world.

Pindar was of a noble family, of the house of the Aigeidai, and it is
probable that his kinsmen, or some of them, may have taken the side of
oligarchy in the often recurring dissensions at Thebes, but of this
we know nothing certain. He himself seems to have taken no part in
politics. When he speaks on the subject in his odes it is not with the
voice of a partisan. An ochlocracy is hateful to him, but if he shows
himself an 'aristocrat' it is in the literal and etymological meaning
of the word. Doubtless if Pindar had been asked where the best
servants of the state in public life were most likely to be found he
would have answered that it would be among those ancient families in
whose veins ran the blood of gods and demigods, who had spent blood
and money for the city's honour, championing her in war or in the
mimic strife of the games, who had honourable traditions to be guided
by and an honourable name to lose or save. These things were seldom
undervalued by Hellenic feeling: even in Athens, after it was already
the headquarters of the democratic principle, the noble and wealthy
families obtained, not probably without wisdom of their own in loyally
accepting a democratic position, as fair a place and prospects as
anywhere in Hellas. But that, when the noble nature, the [Greek:
aretae], which traditions of nobility ought to have secured, was
lacking, then wealth and birth were still entitled to power, this
was a doctrine repugnant utterly to Pindar's mind: nor would his
indignation slumber when he saw the rich and highborn, however gifted,
forgetting at any time that their power was a trust for the community
and using it for their own selfish profit. An 'aristocrat' after
Pindar's mind would assuredly have a far keener eye to his duties
than to his rights, would consider indeed that in his larger share of
duties lay his infinitely most precious right.

But he 'loved that beauty should go beautifully;' personal excellence
of some kind was in his eyes essential; but on this he would fain
shed outward radiance and majesty. His imagination rejoiced in
splendour--splendour of stately palace--halls where the columns were
of marble and the entablature of wrought gold, splendour of temples of
gods where the sculptor's waxing art had brought the very deities to
dwell with man, splendour of the white-pillared cities that glittered
across the Aegean and Sicilian seas, splendour of the holy Panhellenic
games, of whirlwind chariots and the fiery grace of thoroughbreds,
of the naked shapely limbs of the athlete man and boy. On this
characteristic of Pindar it is needless to dwell, for there are not
many odes of those remaining which do not impress it on our minds.

And it is more with him than a mere manner in poetical style. The
same defect which we feel more or less present in all poets of
antiquity--least of all perhaps in Virgil and Sophokles, but even in
them somewhat--a certain want of widely sympathetic tenderness, this
is unquestionably present in Pindar. What of this quality may have
found expression in his lost poems, especially the Dirges, we can
scarcely guess, but in his triumphal odes it hardly appears at all,
unless in the touches of tender gracefulness into which he softens
when speaking of the young. And we find this want in him mainly
because objects of pity, such as especially elicit that quality of
tenderness, are never or seldom present to Pindar's mind. He sees evil
only in the shape of some moral baseness, falsehood, envy, arrogance,
and the like, to be scathed in passing by the good man's scorn, or
else in the shape of a dark mystery of pain, to be endured by those on
whom it causelessly falls in a proud though undefiant silence. It was
not for him, as for the great tragedians, to 'purge the mind by pity
and fear,' for those passions had scarcely a place in his own mind or
in the minds of those of whom he in his high phantasy would fain have
had the world consist. And as in this point somewhat, so still more in
others, does Pindar remind us, even more than might have been expected
in a contemporary, of Aeschylus. The latter by virtue of his Athenian
nurture as well as of his own greater natural gifts reveals to us
a greater number of thoughts, and those more advanced and more
interesting than we find in Pindar, but the similarity in moral temper
and tone is very striking, as also is the way in which we see this
temper acting on their beliefs. Both hold strongly, as is the wont
of powerful minds in an age of stability as opposed to an age of
transition, to the traditions and beliefs on which the society around
them rests, but both modify these traditions and beliefs according
to the light which arises in them, and which is as much moral as
intellectual light. In so doing they are indeed in harmony with the
best instincts of the society around them, but they lead and guide
such instincts and give them shape and definiteness. In the Oresteän
trilogy of Aeschylus we have an ever-memorable assertion of the
supreme claims of human morality to human allegiance, of the eternal
truth that humanity can know no object of reverence and worship except
itself idealised, its own virtues victorious over its own vices, and
existing in the greatest perfection which it can at any given time
conceive. Somewhat the same lesson as that of the Oresteia is taught
later, with more of sweetness and harmony, but not with more force,
in the Oedipus Coloneus of Sophokles. And in Pindar we see the same
tendencies inchoate. Like Aeschylus he does by implication subordinate
to morality both politics and religion. He ignores or flatly denies
tales that bring discredit on the gods; he will only bow down to them
when they have the virtues he respects in man. Yet he, like Aeschylus
and Sophokles, does so bow down, sincerely and without hesitation, and
that poets of their temper could do so was well indeed for poetry.
By rare and happy fortune they were inspired at once by the rich and
varied presences of mythology, 'the fair humanities of old religion,'
and also by the highest aspirations of an age of moral and
intellectual advance. We do not of course always, or even often, find
the moral principles clearly and consciously expressed or consistently
supported, but we cannot but feel that they are present in the shape
of instincts, and those instincts pervading and architectonic.

And if we allow so much of ethical enlightenment to these great
spokesmen of the Hellenic people, we cannot deny something of like
honour to the race among whom they were reared. Let us apportion our
debt of gratitude to our forerunners as it is justly due. There would
seem to be much of fallacy and of the injustice of a shallow judgment
in the contrast as popularly drawn between 'Hellenism' and 'Hebraism,'
according to which the former is spoken of as exclusively proclaiming
to the world the value of Beauty, the latter the value of
Righteousness. In this there is surely much injustice done to Hellas.
Because she taught the one, she did not therefore leave the other
untaught. It may have been for a short time, as her other greatness
was for a short time, though its effects are eternal, but for that
short time the national life, of Athens at any rate, is at least as
full of high moral feeling as that of any other people in the world.
Will not the names of Solon, of Aristeides, of Kallikratidas, of
Epameinondas, of Timoleon and many more, remind us that life could be
to the Hellene something of deeper moral import than a brilliant game,
or a garden of vivid and sweet sights and sounds where Beauty and
Knowledge entered, but Goodness was forgotten and shut out? For it
is not merely that these men, and very many more endowed with ample
portion of their spirit, were produced and reared among the race; they
were honoured and valued in a way that surely postulated the existence
of high ethical feeling in their countrymen. And even when the days
of unselfish statesmen and magnanimous cities were over, there were
philosophers whose schools were not the less filled because they
claimed a high place for righteousness in human life. To Solon and
Aristeides succeeded Socrates and Plato, to Epameinondas and Timoleon
succeeded Zeno and Epictetus. That the morality of the Hellenes was
complete on all sides, it would of course be irrational to maintain.
They had not, for instance, any more than the Hebrews, or any other
nation of antiquity, learnt to abhor slavery, though probably it
existed in a milder form at Athens than anywhere else in the old or
new world: they were more implacable in revenge and laxer in sexual
indulgence than the Christian ethics would allow in theory, though not
perhaps much more so than Christendom has shown itself in practice.
And though undoubtedly the greatest single impulse ever given to
morality came from Palestine, yet the ground which nurtured the seeds
of Christianity was as much Hellenic as Hebrew. It would be impossible
here to enter on an exhaustive comparison of the ethical capacities of
the two races, but before we pronounce hastily for the superiority of
the Hebrew there are surely some difficulties to surmount. We may
well ask, for example, Would Hellas ever have accepted as her chief
national hero such a man as David a man who in his life is conspicuous
by his crimes not less than by his brilliant gifts, and who dies with
the words of blood and perfidy on his lips, charging his son with the
last slaughterous satisfaction of his hate which he had sworn before
his God to forego? And though the great Hebrew prophets teach often
a far loftier morality than this, they cannot have been nearly so
representative of the feeling of this nation as were Aeschylus and
Sophocles and Pindar of the feeling of theirs. The Hebrews of the
prophets' age 'slew the prophets,' and left it to the slayers'
descendants to 'build their sepulchres,' and at the same time to
show their inherited character still more unmistakeably by once more
slaying the last prophet and the greatest.[3]

In truth in the literature, the art, the life generally of Hellas in
her prime, the moral interest whenever it appears, and that is not
seldom, claims for itself the grave and preponderant attention which
it must claim if it is to appear with fit dignity. But it is not
thrust forward unseasonably or in exaggeration, nor is it placed in a
false opposition to the interests of the aesthetic instincts, which
after all shade into the moral more imperceptibly than might be
generally allowed. There must be a moral side to all societies, and
the Hellenic society, the choicest that the world has seen, the
completest, that is, at once in sensibilities and in energies, could
not but show the excellence of its sensibilities in receiving moral
impressions, the excellence of its energies in achieving moral
conduct.

This, however, is no place to discuss at length questions in the
history of ethics. Yet it must be remembered that in the ancient world
departments of thought, and the affairs of men generally, were far
less specialized than in modern times. If the philosophy of Hellas be
the most explicit witness to her ethical development, her poetry
is the most eloquent. And scarcely at any time, scarcely even in
Aristotle, did Hellenic philosophy in any department lose most
significant traces of its poetical ancestry. But enough here if I have
succeeded in pointing out that in the great poet with whom we are
concerned there is an ethical as well as a poetical and historical
interest, supplying one more reason against neglect of his legacy of
song.

Yet indeed even now there remains a further question which to the
mind of any one who at present labours in this field of classical
scholarship must recur persistently if not depressingly, and on which
it is natural if not necessary to say a few words. If the selection
of Pindar in particular as a Greek poet with claims to be further
popularized among Englishmen may be defended, there is still a more
general count to which all who make endeavours to attract or retain
attention to Greek literature will in these times be called upon to
plead by voices which command respect. To such pleas this is not the
place to give large room, or to discriminate in detail between the
reasonable and unreasonable elements in the attacks on a system of
education in which a preeminent position is allotted to the literature
of antiquity. While fully admitting that much time and labour are
still wasted in efforts to plant the study of ancient and especially
of Greek literature in uncongenial soil, while admitting also most
fully the claims, and the still imperfect recognition of the claims,
of physical science to a rank among the foremost in modern education,
I should yet be abundantly willing that this attempt to help in
facilitating the study of a Greek author should be looked on as
implying adhesion to the protest still sometimes raised, that in
the higher parts of a liberal education no study can claim a more
important place than the study of the history and the literature of
Hellas. The interest which belongs to these is far wider and
deeper than any mere literary interest. To the human mind the most
interesting of phenomena are and ought to be the phenomena of the
human mind, and this granted, can there be any knowledge more
desirable than the knowledge of the most vigorous and sensitive and in
some ways also the most fruitful action of human minds that the world
has known hitherto?

But again, we are told that the age we seek thus toilsomely to
illustrate and realize is too remote to justify the attempt, that our
civilisation is of too different a type from the Hellenic, and that a
gulf of three-and-twenty centuries is too much for our sight to strain
across. But is not the Hellenic life at least less remote now to
Western Europe than it has ever been since the Northern invasions?
Though the separation in time widens does not the separation in
thought decrease? Is not one civilisation more like another than it
can be to any barbarism? And shall not this same Physical Science
herself by accustoming us to look on men in large masses at once, and
on the development of humanity as a process of infinite duration, as
a sectional growth included in universal evolution--Science, in whose
eyes a thousand years are as a watch in the night--shall she not
thereby quicken our sympathies with the most gifted race that has
appeared in our short human history, and arouse the same feeling
toward it as a family may cherish toward the memory of their best and
choicest, who has died young?

Only let us take heed that such regret shall make us not more but
less unworthy of those noble forerunners. One symptom of the renewed
influence of antiquity on the modern world is doubtless and has been
from time to time since the Revival of Letters a tendency to selfish
and somewhat sickly theories so-called of life, where sensibility
degenerates through self-consciousness into affectation, and
efforts to appreciate fully the delightfulness of life and art are
overstrained into a wearisome literary voluptuousness, where duty has
already disappeared and the human sympathies on which duty is based
scarcely linger in a faint aesthetic form, soon to leave the would-be
exquisiteness to putrefy into the vulgarity of egoism. Such tendencies
have less in common with the Hellenic prime than with the court of
Leo the Tenth, though even that had perhaps an advantage over them as
being in some ways a more real thing. But that the Hellenic prime with
all its exquisite sensibility was deficient in recognition of a high
ideal of duty can never be believed among those who have studied it
candidly and attentively; I have endeavoured above to suggest that in
this point, take it all in all, it yields to no age or race. It would
indeed be a mistaken following of those noble servants of humanity
to draw from their memories an argument for selfish isolation or for
despair of the commonwealth of man. He who has drunk deeply of that
divine well and gazed long at the fair vision of what then was, will,
if his nature be capable of true sympathy with the various elements
of that wonderful age, turn again without bitterness to the confused
modern world, saddened but not paralysed by the comparison, grieving,
but with no querulous grief, for the certainty that those days are
done.

1874.



PREFATORY NOTE.

The few notes appended to this translation are not intended to supply
the place of such reference to Dictionaries of Mythology, Antiquities
and Geography, as is needful to the student of Pindar who is not
already somewhat accomplished in knowledge of the customs, history
and legendary traditions of Hellas. And although it may reasonably be
supposed that the chief of these will be already known to most readers
of Pindar, yet so profusely allusive is this poet that to understand
his allusions will very often require knowledge which would not have
been derived from a study of the more commonly read Hellenic writers.

Nor have I attempted to trace in detail the connection of the parts
in each ode which binds them into one harmonious whole with many
meanings--a connection so consummately contrived where we can trace it
that we may suppose it no less exquisite where we cannot. Study
and thought will generally suggest explanations, though these will
sometimes approve themselves differently to different minds. Too often
we must acknowledge, as elsewhere in ancient literature, that the key
is lost beyond all certain hope of recovery.

Still less have I attempted to discuss questions of critical
scholarship. Sometimes where there are more than one plausible reading
I have signified which I adopt; once only (Ol. 2. 56.) I have ventured
on an emendation of my own. For the most part I have, as was natural,
followed the text of Böckh and Dissen.

In the spelling of names I remain in that inconsistency which at
present attaches to most modern writers who deal with them. Olympus,
Athens, Corinth, Syracuse, and the like are naturalized among us by
long familiarity; it seems at present at least pedantic to change
them. In the case of other less familiar names I have concurred with
the desire, which seems in the main a reasonable one, that the names
of Hellenic persons and places should be reproduced, as far as
possible, without Latin mediation.

Of the Fragments I have translated six of the longest and most
interesting. They are 289 in all, but the greater part are not longer
than a line or two, and very many even shorter.

The odes are unequal in poetical merit, and many readers may not
unreasonably wish to have those pointed out which, in the judgement of
one acquainted with all, are among the best worth reading; though of
course the choice of individual readers will not always be the same.
To those therefore who would wish to begin with a selection, the
following may be recommended as at any rate among those of preeminent
merit: Pyth. 4, 9, 1, 10, 3; Ol. 7, 6, 2, 3, 13, 8, 1; Nem. 5, 10;
Isthm. 2, 7; all the Fragments translated.

In the arrangement of the odes I have adhered to the traditional
order. I should much have liked to place them in what must always be
the most interesting and rational arrangement of a poet's works,
that is, in chronological order. This would have been approximately
possible, as we know the dates of the greater part of them. But
convenience of reference and of comparison with the Greek text seems
to supply a balance of reasons on the other side. Subjoined however is
a list of the odes in their probable chronological order so far as it
can be obtained.

  Pythian    10-------------B.C. 502.
        "           6-------------    "   494.
        "         12-------------    "   494 or 490.
        "           7-------------    "   490.
        "           3-------------    "   486 or 482.
  Olympian 10 } ----------     "   484.
            "     11 } ----------     "   484.
  Isthmian    5
  Nemean     5
  Isthmian    7 ------------     "  480.
  Isthmian    3
  Pythian      8--------------   "  478.
         "          9--------------   "  478.
         "        11--------------   "  478.
         "          2--------------   "  477.
  Olympian 14--------------   "  476.
         "       }-----------------    "  476.
         "       }-----------------    "  476.
  Pythian      1
  Nemean     1---------------  "  473.
  Olympian   1---------------  " 472.
         "         12--------------  "  472.
  Nemean      9
  Isthmian     2
  Olympian    6--------------  "  468.
  Pythian       4 }-------------  "  466.
          "          5 }
  Olympian    7--------------  "  464.
          "        13--------------  "  464.
  Nemean      7
          "          3
          "          4
          "          6
          "          8
  Olympian    9--------------  "  456.
  Isthmian     6
  Olympian    4 }------------   "  452.
          "          5 }

The Olympic games were held once in four years, in honour of Zeus. The
prize was a wreath of wild olive.

The Pythian games were held once in four years, in honour of Apollo.
The prize was a wreath of bay.

The Nemean games were held once in two years, in honour of Zeus. The
prize was a wreath of wild parsley.

The Isthmian games were held once in two years, in honour of Poseidon.
The prize was a wreath of wild parsley or of pine.


[Footnote 1: The importance and interest to a student in Hellenic
literature of a collateral study of whatever remains to us of Hellenic
plastic art--statues, vases, gems, and coins--can hardly be too
strongly insisted on.]

[Footnote 2: In Mr. J.A. Symonds' 'Studies of the Greek Poets' there
is an essay on Pindar which dwells with much appreciative eloquence
upon the poets literary characteristics.]

[Footnote 3: In thus touching on the obligations of our morality to
the Hebrew and to the Hellene respectively, I have insisted more
exclusively on the weak points of the former than I should have done
in a fuller discussion of the subject: here I am merely concerned to
question in passing what seems to be a popular one-sided estimate.]

       *       *       *       *       *



OLYMPIAN ODES.


I.

FOR HIERON OF SYRACUSE,

WINNER IN THE HORSE-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

This ode seems to owe its position at the head of Pindar's extant
works to Aristophanes the grammarian, who placed it there on account
of its being specially occupied with the glorification of the Olympic
games in comparison with others, and with the story of Pelops, who was
their founder.

Hieron won this race B.C. 472, while at the height of his power at
Syracuse. Probably the ode was sung at Syracuse, perhaps, as has been
suggested, at a banquet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Best is Water of all, and Gold as a flaming fire in the night shineth
eminent amid lordly wealth; but if of prizes in the games thou art
fain, O my soul, to tell, then, as for no bright star more quickening
than the sun must thou search in the void firmament by day, so neither
shall we find any games greater than the Olympic whereof to utter our
voice: for hence cometh the glorious hymn and entereth into the minds
of the skilled in song, so that they celebrate the son[1] of Kronos,
when to the rich and happy hearth of Hieron they are come; for he
wieldeth the sceptre of justice in Sicily of many flocks, culling the
choice fruits of all kinds of excellence: and with the flower of music
is he made splendid, even such strains as we sing blithely at the
table of a friend.

Take from the peg the Dorian lute, if in any wise the glory of
Pherenikos[2] at Pisa hath swayed thy soul unto glad thoughts, when by
the banks of Alpheos he ran, and gave his body ungoaded in the
course, and brought victory to his master, the Syracusans' king, who
delighteth in horses.

Bright is his fame in Lydian Pelops' colony[3], inhabited of a goodly
race, whose founder mighty earth-enfolding Poseidon loved, what time
from the vessel of purifying[4] Klotho took him with the bright ivory
furnishment of his shoulder.

Verily many things are wondrous, and haply tales decked out with
cunning fables beyond the truth make false men's speech concerning
them. For Charis[5], who maketh all sweet things for mortal men, by
lending honour unto such maketh oft the unbelievable thing to be
believed; but the days that follow after are the wisest witnesses.

Meet is it for a man that concerning gods he speak honourably; for the
reproach is less. Of thee, son of Tantalos, I will speak contrariwise
to them who have gone before me, and I will tell how when thy father
had bidden thee to that most seemly feast at his beloved Sipylos,
repaying to the gods their banquet, then did he of the Bright
Trident[6], his heart vanquished by love, snatch thee and bear thee
behind his golden steeds to the house of august Zeus in the highest,
whither again on a like errand came Ganymede in the after time.

But when thou hadst vanished, and the men who sought thee long brought
thee not to thy mother, some one of the envious neighbours said
secretly that over water heated to boiling they had hewn asunder with
a knife thy limbs, and at the tables had shared among them and eaten
sodden fragments of thy flesh. But to me it is impossible to call one
of the blessed gods cannibal; I keep aloof; in telling ill tales is
often little gain.

Now if any man ever had honour of the guardians of Olympus, Tantalos
was that man; but his high fortune he could not digest, and by excess
thereof won him an overwhelming woe, in that the Father hath hung
above him a mighty stone that he would fain ward from his head, and
therewithal he is fallen from joy.

This hopeless life of endless misery he endureth with other three[7],
for that he stole from the immortals and gave to his fellows at
a feast the nectar and ambrosia, whereby the gods had made him
incorruptible. But if a man thinketh that in doing aught he shall be
hidden from God, he erreth.

Therefore also the immortals sent back again his son to be once more
counted with the short-lived race of men. And he when toward the bloom
of his sweet youth the down began to shade his darkening cheek, took
counsel with himself speedily to take to him for his wife the noble
Hippodameia from her Pisan father's hand.

And he came and stood upon the margin of the hoary sea, alone in the
darkness of the night, and called aloud on the deep-voiced Wielder of
the Trident; and he appeared unto him nigh at his foot.

Then he said unto him: 'Lo now, O Poseidon, if the kind gifts of the
Cyprian goddess are anywise pleasant in thine eyes, restrain Oinomaos'
bronze spear, and send me unto Elis upon a chariot exceeding swift,
and give the victory to my hands. Thirteen lovers already hath
Oinomaos slain, and still delayeth to give his daughter in marriage.
Now a great peril alloweth not of a coward: and forasmuch as men must
die, wherefore should one sit vainly in the dark through a dull and
nameless age, and without lot in noble deeds? Not so, but I will dare
this strife: do thou give the issue I desire.'

Thus spake he, nor were his words in vain: for the god made him a
glorious gift of a golden car and winged untiring steeds: so he
overcame Oinomaos and won the maiden for his bride.

And he begat six sons, chieftains, whose thoughts were ever of brave
deeds: and now hath he part in honour of blood-offerings in his grave
beside Alpheos' stream, and hath a frequented tomb, whereto many
strangers resort: and from afar off he beholdeth the glory of the
Olympian games in the courses called of Pelops, where is striving
of swift feet and of strong bodies brave to labour; but he that
overcometh hath for the sake of those games a sweet tranquillity
throughout his life for evermore.

Now the good that cometh of to-day is ever sovereign unto every man.
My part it is to crown Hieron with an equestrian strain in Aeolian
mood: and sure am I that no host among men that now are shall I ever
glorify in sounding labyrinths of song more learned in the learning of
honour and withal with more might to work thereto. A god hath guard
over thy hopes, O Hieron, and taketh care for them with a peculiar
care: and if he fail thee not, I trust that I shall again proclaim in
song a sweeter glory yet, and find thereto in words a ready way, when
to the fair-shining hill of Kronos I am come. Her strongest-wingëd
dart my Muse hath yet in store.

Of many kinds is the greatness of men; but the highest is to be
achieved by kings. Look not thou for more than this. May it be thine
to walk loftily all thy life, and mine to be the friend of winners in
the games, winning honour for my art among Hellenes everywhere.


[Footnote 1: The Olympic games were sacred to Zeus.]

[Footnote 2: The horse that won this race for Hieron.]

[Footnote 3: Peloponnesos.]

[Footnote 4: I. e. immediately on his birth, for among the Fates
Klotho was peculiarly concerned with the beginning of man's life.
Pindar refuses to accept the legend which made Pelops' ivory shoulder
a substitute for his fleshly one eaten at Tantalos' table by the gods;
for thus the gods would have been guilty of an infamous act.]

[Footnote 5: Goddess of Grace or Beauty. Often there are three
Charites or Graces. Pindar means here that men are prone to believe
an untrue tale for the sake of the beauty of the form in which it is
presented, but that such tales will not stand the test of time.]

[Footnote 6: Poseidon.]

[Footnote 7: Sisyphos, Ixion, and Tityos.]



II.

FOR THERON OF AKRAGAS,

WINNER IN THE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Theron's ancestors the Emmenidai migrated from Rhodes to Sicily and
  first colonized Gela and then Akragas (the Latin Agrigentum and
  Italian Girgenti). His chariot won this victory B.C. 476.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lords of the lute[1], my songs, what god, what hero, or what man, are
we to celebrate?[2] Verily of Zeus is Pisa the abode, of Herakles the
Olympian feast was founded from the chief spoils of war, and Theron's
name must we proclaim for his victory with the four-horse-car, a
righteous and god-fearing host, the stay of Akragas, of famous sires
the flower, a saviour of the state.

They after long toils bravely borne took by a river's side a sacred
dwelling place, and became the eye of Sicily, and a life of good luck
clave to them, bringing them wealth and honour to crown their inborn
worth.

O son of Kronos and of Rhea, lord of Olympus' seat, and of the chief
of games and of Alpheos' ford, for joy in these my songs guard ever
graciously their native fields for their sons that shall come after
them.

Now of deeds done whether they be right or wrong not even Time the
father of all can make undone the accomplishment, yet with happy
fortune forgetfulness may come. For by high delights an alien pain is
quelled and dieth, when the decree of God sendeth happiness to grow
aloft and widely.

And this word is true concerning Kadmos' fair-throned daughters, whose
calamities were great, yet their sore grief fell before greater
good. Amid the Olympians long-haired Semele still liveth, albeit she
perished in the thunder's roar, and Pallas cherisheth her ever, and
Father Zeus exceedingly, and her son, the ivy-bearing god. And in the
sea too they say that to Ino, among the sea-maids of Nereus, life
incorruptible hath been ordained for evermore.

Ay but to mortals the day of death is certain never, neither at what
time we shall see in calm the end of one of the Sun's children, the
Days, with good thitherto unfailing; now this way and now that run
currents bringing joys or toils to men.

Thus destiny which from their fathers holdeth the happy fortune of
this race[3], together with prosperity heaven-sent bringeth ever at
some other time better reverse: from the day when Laïos was slain by
his destined son[4] who met him on the road and made fulfilment of the
oracle spoken of old at Pytho. Then swift Erinys when she saw it slew
by each other's hand his war-like sons: yet after that Polyneikes fell
Thersander[5] lived after him and won honour in the Second Strife[6]
and in the fights of war, a saviour scion to the Adrastid house.

From him they have beginning of their race: meet is it that
Ainesidamos receive our hymn of triumph, on the lyre. For at Olympia
he himself received a prize and at Pytho, and at the Isthmus to his
brother of no less a lot did kindred Graces bring crowns for the
twelve rounds of the four-horse chariot-race.

Victory setteth free the essayer from the struggle's griefs, yea and
the wealth that a noble nature hath made glorious bringeth power for
this and that, putting into the heart of man a deep and eager mood, a
star far seen, a light wherein a man shall trust if but[7] the holder
thereof knoweth the things that shall be, how that of all who die the
guilty souls pay penalty, for all the sins sinned in this realm
of Zeus One judgeth under earth, pronouncing sentence by unloved
constraint.

But evenly ever in sunlight night and day an unlaborious life the good
receive, neither with violent hand vex they the earth nor the waters
of the sea, in that new world; but with the honoured of the gods,
whosoever had pleasure in keeping of oaths, they possess a tearless
life: but the other part suffer pain too dire to look upon.

Then whosoever have been of good courage to the abiding steadfast
thrice on either side of death and have refrained their souls from
all iniquity, travel the road of Zeus unto the tower of Kronos: there
round the islands of the blest the Ocean-breezes blow, and golden
flowers are glowing, some from the land on trees of splendour, and
some the water feedeth, with wreaths whereof they entwine their hands:
so ordereth Rhadamanthos' just decree, whom at his own right hand hath
ever the father Kronos, husband of Rhea, throned above all worlds[8].

Peleus and Kadmos are counted of that company; and the mother of
Achilles, when her prayer had moved the heart of Zeus, bare thither
her son, even him who overthrew Hector, Troy's unbending invincible
pillar, even him who gave Kyknos to death and the Ethiop son[9] of the
Morning.

Many swift arrows have I beneath my bended arm within my quiver,
arrows that have a voice for the wise, but for the multitude they need
interpreters. His art is true who of his nature hath knowledge; they
who have but learnt, strong in the multitude of words, are but as
crows that chatter vain things in strife against the divine bird of
Zeus.

Come bend thy bow on the mark, O my soul--at whom again are we to
launch our shafts of honour from a friendly mind? At Akragas will I
take aim, and will proclaim and swear it with a mind of truth, that
for a hundred years no city hath brought forth a man of mind more
prone to well-doing towards friends or of more liberal mood than
Theron.

Yet praise is overtaken of distaste, wherewith is no justice, but from
covetous men it cometh, and is fain to babble against and darken the
good man's noble deeds.

The sea-sand none hath numbered; and the joys that Theron hath given
to others--who shall declare the tale thereof?


[Footnote 1: In Hellenic music the accompaniment was deemed
subordinate to the words.]

[Footnote 2: Here are three questions and three answers.]

[Footnote 3: The Emmenidai.]

[Footnote 4: Oedipus.]

[Footnote 5: Son of Polyneikes. Theron traced his descent from him.]

[Footnote 6: The War of the Epigonoi against Thebes.]

[Footnote 7: Reading [Greek: ei ge min echon]. The old readings were
[Greek: ei de min echon] and [Greek: ei de min echei; eu de min echon]
has also been suggested; but of these three none seems to me to be at
all satisfactory. In the reading I suggest the change is very slight,
and it makes good sense.]

[Footnote 8: For Pindar's ideas as to a future life see especially
the fragments of his Dirges which remain to us. He seems to have been
influenced by Pythagoreanism.]

[Footnote 9: Memnon.]



III.

FOR THERON OF AKRAGAS,

WINNER IN THE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

This ode celebrates the same victory as the preceeding one. It was
sung at the feast of the Theoxenia, given by Theron in the name of
the Dioskouroi (Kastor and Polydeukes) to the other gods. Hence the
epithet _hospitable_ ([Greek: philoxeinois]) applied to the Dioskouroi
in the first line. The clan of the Emmenidai to which Theron belonged
was especially devoted to the worship of the Twins.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tyndareus' hospitable sons and lovely-haired Helen shall I please
assuredly in doing honour to renownëd Akragas by a hymn upraised for
Theron's Olympian crown; for hereunto hath the Muse been present with
me that I should find out a fair new[1] device, fitting to feet that
move in Dorian time the Komos-voices' splendid strain.

For crowns entwined about his hair demand from me this god-appointed
debt, that for Ainesidamos' son I join in seemly sort the lyre of
various tones with the flute's cry and ordering of words.

And Pisa bids me speak aloud, for from her come to men songs of
divine assignment, when the just judge of games the Aitolian[2] man,
fulfilling Herakles' behests of old, hath laid upon one's hair above
his brows pale-gleaming glory of olive.

That tree from Ister's shadowy springs did the son of Amphitryon bear
to be a memorial most glorious of Olympian triumphs, when that by his
words he had won the Hyperborean folk, who serve Apollo. In loyal
temper he besought for the precinct of Zeus, whereto all men go up,
a plant that should be a shadow of all folk in common, and withal a
crown for valorous deeds.

For already, when the altars had been sanctified to his sire, the
midmonth Moon riding her golden car lit full the counter-flame of the
eye of Even, and just judgment of great games did he ordain, and the
fifth year's feast beside the holy steeps of Alpheos[3].

But no fair trees were nursed upon that place in Kronian Pelops'
glens; whereof being naked his garden seemed to him to be given over
to the keen rays of the sun.

Then was it that his soul stirred to urge him into the land of Ister;
where Leto's horse-loving daughter[4] received him erst when he was
come from the ridged hills and winding dells of Arcady, what time his
father laid constraint upon him to go at Eurystheus' bidding to fetch
the golden-hornëd hind, which once Taÿgete vowed to her[5] of Orthion
and made a sign thereon of consecration. For in that chase he saw also
the land that lieth behind the blast of the cold North-wind: there he
halted and marvelled at the trees: and sweet desire thereof possessed
him that he might plant them at the end of the course which the
race-horses should run twelve times round.

So now to this feast cometh he in good-will in company with the Twins
Divine, deep-girdled Leto's children. For to them he gave charge when
he ascended into Olympus to order the spectacle of the games, both the
struggle of man with man, and the driving of the nimble car.

Me anywise my soul stirreth to declare that to the Emmenidai and to
Theron hath glory come by gift of the Tyndaridai of goodly steeds,
for that beyond all mortals they do honour to them with tables of
hospitality, keeping with pious spirit the rite of blessed gods.

Now if Water be the Best[6], and of possessions Gold be the most
precious, so now to the furthest bound doth Theron by his fair deeds
attain, and from his own home touch the pillars of Herakles. Pathless
the things beyond, pathless alike to the unwise and the wise. Here I
will search no more; the quest were vain.


[Footnote 1: i. e. probably a new combination of lyre and flute to
accompany the singing.]

[Footnote 2: When the Dorians invaded Peloponnesos one of their
leaders is said to have been Oxylos, a man of Elean descent but living
in Aitolia. As a result of the invasion he became king of Elis;
and the judge at the Olympic games seems to have been considered a
descendant of him or of some Aitolian who came with him.]

[Footnote 3: The Olympic games were held in the middle of the month
Hekatombaion, when the moon was full. It is here implied that Herakles
wished to institute them when the moon was full, as that was a season
of good luck.]

[Footnote 4: Artemis.]

[Footnote 5: Artemis.]

[Footnote 6: See Ol. i. 1.]



IV.

FOR PSAUMIS OF KAMARINA,

WINNER IN THE MULE-CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Psaumis won this race in the year 452; therefore this ode and its
companion, the next following, are the latest work of Pindar possessed
by us to which we can assign a date.

The mule-chariot-race was introduced at Olympia B.C. 500 and abolished
B.C. 444, according to Pausanias.

This ode seems to have been written immediately on Psaumis' victory,
to be sung the same night beneath the moon by the company of friends
who escorted the winner to return thanks at the altar of Zeus.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hurler of thunderbolts unfaltering, the most high Zeus, for that thy
chosen hour recurrent hath sent me with a song set to the music of
the subtle lute for a witness to the greatest of all games--and
when friends have good hap the good are glad forthwith at the sweet
tidings--now therefore, O son of Kronos, unto whom Ætna belongeth,
the wind-beaten burden that crusheth fierce Typhon's hundred heads,
receive thou this band of triumph for an Olympian victory won by the
Graces' aid, a most enduring light of far-prevailing valorous deeds.

For the sake of Psaumis' mule-chariot it draweth nigh to
thee--Psaumis, who, crowned with Pisan olive, hasteth to raise up
glory for Kamarina. May God be gracious to our prayers for what shall
be! For I praise him as a man most zealous in the rearing of horses,
and delighting in ever-open hospitality, and bent on peace and on the
welfare of his city, with guileless soul.

With no lie will I tinge my tale: trial is the test of men; this
it was that delivered the son of Klymenos from the Lemnian women's
slight. He, when he had won the foot-race in bronze armour[1], spake
thus to Hypsipyle as he went to receive his crown: 'For fleetness such
am I: hands have I and a heart to match. So also on young men grow
oftentimes grey hairs even before the natural season of man's
life[2].'


[Footnote 1: See introduction to Pythian ix.]

[Footnote 2: We may suppose that Psaumis probably had grey hair.]



V.

FOR PSAUMIS OF KAMARINA,

WINNER IN THE MULE-CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

  This ode is for the same victory as the foregoing one, but was to be
  sung after Psaumis' return home, at Kamarina, and probably at, or in
  procession to, a temple of either Pallas, Zeus, or the tutelary nymph
  Kamarina, all of whom are invoked. The city is called 'new-peopled'
  ([Greek: neoikos]) because it had been destroyed by Gelo, and was only
  restored B.C. 461, nine years before this victory, the first which had
  been won by any citizen since its restoration.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of lofty deeds and crowns Olympian this sweet delight, O daughter[1]
of Ocean, with glad heart receive, the gift of Psaumis and his
untiring car. He to make great thy city, Kamarina, with its fostered
folk, hath honoured six twin altars in great feasts of the gods with
sacrifices of oxen and five-day contests of games, with chariots of
horses and of mules and with the steed of single frontlet[2].

To thee hath the victor consecrated the proud token[3] of his fame,
and hath glorified by the herald's voice his father Akron and this
new-peopled town.

Also, returning from the gracious dwelling place of Oinomaos and
Pelops, thy sacred grove, O city-guarding Pallas, doth he sing, and
the river Oanis, and the lake of his native land, and the sacred
channels wherethrough doth Hipparis give water to the people, and
build[4] with speed a lofty forest of stedfast dwellings, bringing
from perplexity to the light this commonwealth of citizens.

Now ever in fair deeds must toil and cost contend toward an
accomplishment hidden in perilous chance: yet if men have good hap
therein, even to their own townsfolk is their wisdom approved.

O guardian Zeus that sittest above the clouds, that inhabitest the
Kronian hill and honourest the broad river of Alpheos and Ida's holy
cave, suppliant to thee I come, making my cry on Lydian flutes, to
pray thee that thou wilt glorify this city with brave men's renown.

For thee also, Olympian victor, I pray that, joying in the steeds
Poseidon[5] gave, thou mayest bear with thee to the end a serene old
age, and may thy sons, O Psaumis, be at thy side. If a man cherish his
wealth to sound ends, having a sufficiency of goods and adding thereto
fair repute, let him not seek to become a god.


[Footnote 1: Kamarina.]

[Footnote 2: I. e. probably with horses ridden, not driven.]

[Footnote 3: His Olympian crown of wild olive.]

[Footnote 4: This seems to mean that the new city was built with wood
brought down the stream of the river Hipparis.]

[Footnote 5: When Poseidon and Athene were contending for the
protectorate of Athens, Poseidon brought the first horse up out of the
earth, Athene the first olive-tree.]



VI.

FOR AGESIAS OF SYRACUSE,

WINNER IN THE MULE-CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *
  One of the Iamid clan, to which belonged hereditary priestly functions
  in Arcadia and at Olympia, had come with the first colonists to Syracuse,
  and from him the present victor Agesias was descended. Thus
  the ode is chiefly concerned with the story of his ancestor Iamos.
  Agesias was a citizen of Stymphalos in Arcadia, as well as of Syracuse,
  where he lived, and the ode was sung by a chorus in Stymphalos,
  B.C. 468.

       *       *       *       *       *

Golden pillars will we set up in the porch of the house of our song,
as in a stately palace-hall; for it beseemeth that in the fore-front
of the work the entablature shoot far its splendour.

Now if one be an Olympian conqueror and treasurer to the prophetic
altar of Zeus at Pisa, and joint founder[1] of glorious Syracuse,
shall such an one hide him from hymns of praise, if his lot be among
citizens who hear without envy the desired sounds of song? For in a
sandal of such sort let the son of Sostratos know that his fortunate
foot is set. Deeds of no risk are honourless whether done among men or
among hollow ships; but if a noble deed be wrought with labour, many
make mention thereof.

For thee, Agesias, is that praise prepared which justly and openly
Adrastos spake of old concerning the seer Amphiaraos the son of
Oikleus, when the earth had swallowed him and his shining steeds. For
afterward, when on seven pyres dead men were burnt, the son[2] of
Talaos spake on this wise: 'I seek the eye of my host, him who was
alike a good seer and a good fighter with the spear.'

This praise also belongeth to the Syracusan who is lord of this
triumphal song. I who am no friend of strife or wrongful quarrel will
bear him this witness even with a solemn oath, and the sweet voice of
the Muses shall not say me nay.

O Phintis[3] yoke me now with all speed the strength of thy mules that
on the clear highway we may set our car, that I may go up to the far
beginning of this race. For those mules know well to lead the way in
this course as in others, who at Olympia have won crowns: it behoveth
them that we throw open to them the gates of song, for to Pitane by
Eurotas' stream must I begone betimes to-day.

Now Pitane[4], they say, lay with Poseidon the son of Kronos and
bare the child Euadne with tresses iris-dark. The fruit of her body
unwedded she hid by her robe's folds, and in the month of her delivery
she sent her handmaids and bade them give the child to the hero son[5]
of Elatos to rear, who was lord of the men of Arcady who dwelt at
Phaisane, and had for his lot Alpheos to dwell beside.

There was the child Euadne nurtured, and by Apollo's side she first
knew the joys of Aphrodite.

But she might not always hide from Aipytos the seed of the god within
her; and he in his heart struggling with bitter strain against a grief
too great for speech betook him to Pytho that he might ask of the
oracle concerning the intolerable woe.

But she beneath a thicket's shade put from her silver pitcher and her
girdle of scarlet web, and she brought forth a boy in whom was the
spirit of God. By her side the gold-haired god set kindly Eleutho and
the Fates, and from her womb in easy travail came forth Iamos to the
light. Him in her anguish she left upon the ground, but by the counsel
of gods two bright-eyed serpents nursed and fed him with the harmless
venom[6] of the bee.

But when the king came back from rocky Delphi in his chariot he asked
all who were in the house concerning the child whom Euadne had born;
for he said that the sire whereof he was begotten was Phoibos, and
that he should be a prophet unto the people of the land excelling all
mortal men, and that his seed should be for ever.

Such was his tale, but they answered that they had neither seen nor
heard of him, though he was now born five days. For he was hidden
among rushes in an impenetrable brake, his tender body all suffused
with golden and deep purple gleams of iris flowers; wherefore his
mother prophesied saying that by this holy name[7] of immortality he
should be called throughout all time.

But when he had come to the ripeness of golden-crowned sweet youth,
he went down into the middle of Alpheos and called on wide-ruling
Poseidon his grandsire, and on the guardian of god-built Delos, the
bearer of the bow[8], praying that honour might be upon his head for
the rearing of a people; and he stood beneath the heavens, and it was
night.

Then the infallible Voice of his father answered and said unto him:
Arise, my son, and come hither, following my voice, into a place where
all men shall meet together.

So they came to the steep rock of lofty Kronion; there the god gave
him a twofold treasure of prophecy, that for the time then being he
should hearken to his voice that cannot lie; but when Herakles of
valorous counsels, the sacred scion of the Alkeidai, should have come,
and should have founded a multitudinous feast and the chief ordinance
of games[9], then again on the summit of the altar of Zeus he bade him
establish yet another oracle, that thenceforth the race of Iamidai
should be glorious among Hellenes.

Good luck abode with them; for that they know the worth of valour they
are entered on a glorious road.

The matter proveth the man, but from the envious calumny ever
threateneth them on whom, as they drive foremost in the twelfth[10]
round of the course, Charis sheddeth blushing beauty to win them fame
more fair.

Now if in very truth, Agesias, thy mother's ancestors dwelling by the
borders of Kyllene did piously and oft offer up prayer and sacrifice
to Hermes, herald of the gods, who hath to his keeping the strife and
appointment of games, and doeth honour to Arcadia the nurse of goodly
men,--then surely he, O son of Sostratos, with his loud-thundering
sire, is the accomplisher of this thy bliss.

Methinks I have upon my tongue a whetstone of loud sounding speech,
which to harmonious breath constraineth me nothing loth. Mother of my
mother was Stymphalian Metope[11] of fair flowers, for she bare Thebe
the charioteer, whose pleasant fountain I will drink, while I weave
for warriors the changes of my song.

Now rouse thy fellows, Ainëas, first to proclaim the name of
maiden[12] Hera, and next to know for sure whether we are escaped from
the ancient reproach that spake truly of Boeotian swine. For thou art
a true messenger, a writing-tally[13] of the Muses goodly-haired, a
bowl wherein to mix high-sounding songs.

And bid them make mention of Syracuse and of Ortygia, which Hieron
ruleth with righteous sceptre devising true counsels, and doth honour
to Demeter whose footsteps make red the corn, and to the feast of her
daughter with white steeds, and to the might of Aetnaean Zeus. Also he
is well known of the sweet voices of the song and lute. Let not the
on-coming time break his good fortune. And with joyful welcome may
he receive this triumphal song, which travelleth from home to home,
leaving Stymphalos' walls, the mother-city of Arcadia, rich in flocks.

Good in a stormy night are two anchors let fall from a swift ship. May
friendly gods grant to both peoples[14] an illustrious lot: and thou
O lord and ruler of the sea, husband of Amphitrite of the golden
distaff, grant this my friend straight voyage and unharmed, and bless
the joyous flower of my song.


[Footnote 1: Agesias is so called because an Iamid ancestor of his had
gone with Archias when he planted the Corinthian colony of Syracuse.]

[Footnote 2: Adrastos.]

[Footnote 3: Phintis was Agesias' charioteer.]

[Footnote 4: I. e. the nymph who gave her name to the place.]

[Footnote 5: Aipytos.]

[Footnote 6: Honey.]

[Footnote 7: Iamos, from [Greek: ion]: the iris was considered a
symbol of immortality.]

[Footnote 8: His father, Apollo.]

[Footnote 9: At Olympia.]

[Footnote 10: The course in the chariot-race was twelve times round
the Hippodrome.]

[Footnote 11: The nymph of the lake Metopë near Stymphalos.]

[Footnote 12: Hera was worshipped in her prenuptial as well as her
postnuptial state.]

[Footnote 13: It was a custom between correspondents who wished for
secrecy to have duplicate [Greek: skutalai], or letter-sticks. The
writer wrote on a roll wrapt round his stick, and the receiver of the
letter read it wrapt similarly on his. And thus Aineas the bearer of
this ode would teach the chorus of Stymphalians how rightly to sing
and understand it. See [Greek: skutalae] in Dict. Ant.]

[Footnote 14: I. e. of Stymphalos and Syracuse. Agesias was a citizen
of both, and thus his two homes are compared to two anchors.]



VII.

FOR DIAGORAS OF RHODES,

WINNER IN THE BOXING-MATCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Rhodes is said to have been colonised at the time of the Dorian
  migrations by Argive Dorians from Epidauros, who were Herakleidai of
  of the family of Tlepolemos. They founded a confederacy of three
  cities, Kameiros, Lindos, and Ialysos. Ialysos was then ruled by
  the dynasty of the Eratidai. Their kingly power had now been extinct
  two hundred years, but the family was still pre-eminent in the state.
  Of this family was Diagoras, and probably the ode was sung at a
  family festival; but it commemorates the glories of the island generally.
  The Rhodians caused it to be engraved in letters of gold in the
  temple of Athene at Lindos.

  There is a noteworthy incident of the Peloponnesian war which should
  be remembered in connection with this ode. In the year 406, fifty-eight
  years after this victory of Diagoras, during the final and most
  embittering agony of Athens, one Dorieus, a son of Diagoras, and himself
  a famous athlete, was captured by the Athenians in a sea-fight.
  It was then the custom either to release prisoners of war for a ransom
  or else to put them to death. The Athenians asked no ransom of
  Dorieus, but set him free on the spot.

       *       *       *       *       *

As when from a wealthy hand one lifting a cup, made glad within with
the dew of the vine, maketh gift thereof to a youth his daughter's
spouse, a largess of the feast from home to home, an all-golden
choicest treasure, that the banquet may have grace, and that he may
glorify his kin; and therewith he maketh him envied in the eyes of the
friends around him for a wedlock wherein hearts are wedded--

So also I, my liquid nectar sending, the Muses' gift, the sweet fruit
of my soul, to men that are winners in the games at Pytho or Olympia
make holy offering. Happy is he whom good report encompasseth; now
on one man, now on another doth the Grace that quickeneth look
favourably, and tune for him the lyre and the pipe's stops of music
manifold.

Thus to the sound of the twain am I come with Diagoras sailing home,
to sing the sea-girt Rhodes, child of Aphrodite and bride of Helios,
that to a mighty and fair-fighting man, who by Alpheos' stream and by
Kastalia's hath won him crowns, I may for his boxing make award of
glory, and to his father Demegetos in whom Justice hath her delight,
dwellers in the isle of three cities with an Argive host, nigh to a
promontory of spacious Asia.

Fain would I truly tell from the beginning from Tlepolemos the message
of my word, the common right of this puissant seed of Herakles. For
on the father's side they claim from Zeus, and on the mother's from
Astydameia, sons of Amyntor.

Now round the minds of men hang follies unnumbered--this is the
unachievable thing, to find what shall be best hap for a man both
presently and also at the last. Yea for the very founder[1] of this
country once on a time struck with his staff of tough wild-olive-wood
Alkmene's bastard brother Likymnios in Tiryns as he came forth from
Midea's chamber, and slew him in the kindling of his wrath. So even
the wise man's feet are turned astray by tumult of the soul.

Then he came to enquire of the oracle of God. And he of the golden
hair from his sweet-incensed shrine spake unto him of a sailing of
ships that should be from the shore of Lerna unto a pasture ringed
with sea, where sometime the great king of gods rained on the
city golden snow, what time by Hephaistos' handicraft beneath the
bronze-wrought axe from the crown of her father's head Athene leapt to
light and cried aloud with an exceeding cry; and Heaven trembled at
her coming, and Earth, the Mother.

Then also the god who giveth light to men, Hyperion, bade his beloved
sons see that they guard the payment of the debt, that they should
build first for the goddess an altar in the sight of all men, and
laying thereon a holy offering they should make glad the hearts of
the father and of his daughter of the sounding spear. Now Reverence,
Forethought's child, putteth valour and the joy of battle into the
hearts of men; yet withal there cometh upon them bafflingly the cloud
of forgetfulness and maketh the mind to swerve from the straight path
of action. For they though they had brands burning yet kindled not the
seed of flame, but with fireless rites they made a grove on the hill
of the citadel. For them Zeus brought a yellow cloud into the sky and
rained much gold upon the land; and Glaukopis herself gave them to
excel the dwellers upon earth in every art of handicraft. For on their
roads ran the semblances of beasts and creeping things: whereof they
have great glory, for to him that hath knowledge the subtlety that is
without deceit[2] is the greater altogether.

Now the ancient story of men saith that when Zeus and the other gods
made division of the earth among them, not yet was island Rhodes
apparent in the open sea, but in the briny depths lay hid. And for
that Helios was otherwhere, none drew a lot for him; so they left him
portionless of land, that holy god. And when he spake thereof Zeus
would cast lots afresh; but he suffered him not, for that he said that
beneath the hoary sea he saw a certain land waxing from its root in
earth, that should bring forth food for many men, and rejoice in
flocks. And straightway he bade her of the golden fillet, Lachesis, to
stretch her hands on high, nor violate the gods' great oath, but with
the son of Kronos promise him that the isle sent up to the light of
heaven should be thenceforth a title of himself alone.

And in the end of the matter his speech had fulfilment; there sprang
up from the watery main an island, and the father who begetteth
the keen rays of day hath the dominion thereof, even the lord of
fire-breathing steeds. There sometime having lain with Rhodos he begat
seven sons, who had of him minds wiser than any among the men of old;
and one begat Kameiros, and Ialysos his eldest, and Lindos: and they
held each apart their shares of cities, making threefold division of
their father's land, and these men call their dwelling-places. There
is a sweet amends for his piteous ill-hap ordained for Tlepolemos
leader of the Tirynthians at the beginning, as for a god, even the
leading thither of sheep for a savoury burnt-offering, and the award
of honour in games[3].

Of garlands from these games hath Diagoras twice won him crowns, and
four times he had good luck at famous Isthmos and twice following
at Nemea, and twice at rocky Athens. And at Argos the bronze shield
knoweth him, and the deeds of Arcadia and of Thebes and the yearly
games Boeotian, and Pellene and Aigina where six times he won; and the
pillar of stone at Megara hath the same tale to tell.

But do thou, O Father Zeus, who holdest sway on the mountain-ridges of
Atabyrios glorify the accustomed Olympian winner's hymn, and the man
who hath done valiantly with his fists: give him honour at the hands
of citizens and of strangers; for he walketh in the straight way that
abhorreth insolence, having learnt well the lessons his true soul hath
taught him, which hath come to him from his noble sires. Darken not
thou the light of one who springeth from the same stock of Kallianax.
Surely with the joys of Eratidai the whole city maketh mirth. But the
varying breezes even at the same point of time speed each upon their
various ways.


[Footnote 1: Tlepolemos.]

[Footnote 2: That is, probably, without magic, or the pretence of
being anything but machines. This is considered an allusion to the
Telchines who lived before the Heliadai in Rhodes, and were magicians
as well as craftsmen. For illustrations of Rhodian art at various
times the British Museum may be consulted, which is particularly rich
in vases from Kameiros and Ialysos.]

[Footnote 3: That is, he presides over the celebration of games, as
tutelar hero of the island.]



VIII.

FOR ALKIMEDON OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE WRESTLING-MATCH OF BOYS.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this victory is B.C. 460. Long as the ode is, it would
seem however to have been written, like the fourth Olympian, to be
sung in the procession to the altar of Zeus on the night of the
victory.

Of the forty-four odes remaining to us no less than eleven are in
honour of winners from Aigina.

       *       *       *       *       *

O mother of gold-crowned contests, Olympia, queen of truth; where men
that are diviners observing burnt-offerings make trial of Zeus the
wielder of white lightnings, whether he hath any word concerning
men who seek in their hearts to attain unto great prowess and a
breathing-space from toil; for it is given in answer to the reverent
prayers of men--do thou, O tree-clad precinct of Pisa by Alpheos,
receive this triumph and the carrying of the crown.

Great is his glory ever on whom the splendour of thy honour waiteth.
Yet this good cometh to one, that to another, and many are the roads
to happy life by the grace of gods.

Thee, O Timosthenes[1], and thy brother hath Destiny assigned to Zeus
the guardian of your house, even to him who hath made thee glorious at
Nemea, and Alkimedon by the hill of Kronos a winner in Olympic games.

Now the boy was fair to look upon, neither shamed he by his deeds his
beauty, but in the wrestling match victorious made proclamation that
his country was Aigina of long oars, where saviour Themis who sitteth
in judgment by Zeus the stranger's succour is honoured more than any
elsewhere among men[2].

For in a matter mighty and bearing many ways to judge with unswayed
mind and suitably, this is a hard essay, yet hath some ordinance of
immortals given this sea-defended land to be to strangers out of every
clime a pillar built of God. May coming time not weary of this work.

To a Dorian folk was the land given in trust from Aiakos, even the man
whom Leto's son and far-ruling Poseidon, when they would make a crown
for Ilion, called to work with them at the wall, for that it was
destined that at the uprising of wars in city-wasting fights it should
breathe forth fierce smoke.

Now when it was new-built three dragons fiery-eyed leapt at the
rampart: two fell and perished in despair; but the third sprang in
with a war-cry[3].

Then Apollo pondering, the sign spake straightway unto Aiakos by his
side: 'Hero, where thy hands have wrought is Pergamos taken: thus
saith this sign, sent of the son of Kronos, loud-thundering Zeus. And
that not without thy seed; but with the first and fourth it shall be
subdued'[4].

Thus plainly spoke the god, and away to Xanthos and the Amazons of
goodly steeds and to Ister urged his car.

And the Trident-wielder for Isthmos over seas harnessed his swift
chariot, and hither[5] first he bare with him Aiakos behind the golden
mares, and so on unto the mount of Corinth, to behold his feast of
fame.

Now shall there never among men be aught that pleaseth all alike. If
I for Melesias[6] raise up glory in my song of his boys, let not envy
cast at me her cruel stone. Nay but at Nemea too will I tell of honour
of like kind with this, and of another ensuing thereon, won in the
pankration of men.

Verily to teach is easier to him that knoweth: it is folly if one hath
not first learnt, for without trial the mind wavereth. And beyond all
others can Melesias declare all works on that wise, what method shall
advance a man who from the sacred games may win the longed-for glory.

Now for the thirtieth time is honour gained for him by the victory of
Alkimedon, who by God's grace, nor failing himself in prowess, hath
put off from him upon the bodies of four striplings the loathed return
ungreeted of fair speech, and the path obscure[7]; and in his father's
father he hath breathed new vigour to wrestle with old age. A man that
hath done honourable deeds taketh no thought of death.

But I must needs arouse memory, and tell of the glory of their hands
that gave victory to the Blepsiad clan, to whom this is now the sixth
crown that hath come from the wreathed games to bind their brows.

Even the dead have their share when paid them with due rites, and
the grace of kinsmen's honour the dust concealeth not. From Hermes'
daughter Fame shall Iphion[8] hear and tell to Kallimachos this lustre
of Olympic glory, which Zeus hath granted to this house. Honour upon
honour may he vouchsafe unto it, and shield it from sore disease[9]. I
pray that for the share of glory fallen to them he raise against them
no contrary discontent, but granting them a life unharmed may glorify
them and their commonwealth.


[Footnote 1: Alkimedon's brother. He had won a victory at the Nemean
games.]

[Footnote 2: Aigina had a high commercial reputation, and strangers
were equitably dealt with in her courts.]

[Footnote 3: The two first dragons typify the Aiakids, Aias and
Achilles, who failed to enter Troy, the third typifies Achilles' son,
Neoptolemos, who succeeded.]

[Footnote 4: Aiakos' son, Telamon, was with Herakles when he took
Troy: his great-grandson Neoptolemos was in the Wooden Horse.]

[Footnote 5: To Aigina.]

[Footnote 6: Alkimedon's trainer.]

[Footnote 7: I. e. Alkimedon has escaped the disagreeable
circumstances of defeat and transferred them to the four opponents
against whom he was matched in four successive ties.]

[Footnote 8: Iphion seems to have been the father and Kallimachos the
uncle of Alkimedon.]

[Footnote 9: Perhaps Iphion and Kallimachos died of some severe
illness.]



IX.

FOR EPHARMOSTOS OF OPOUS,

WINNER IN THE WRESTLING-MATCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this ode is uncertain. Its last line seems to imply that
it was sung at a banquet at Opous, after crowning the altar of Aias
Oileus, tutelar hero of the Lokrians. From the beginning we gather
that on the night of the victory at Olympia Epharmostos' friends had
sung in his honour the conventional triple strain of Archilochos--

  [Greek: (o kallinike chair' anax Herakleaes
  autos te k' Iolaos, aichmaeta duo.
  taenella kallinike)]

to which perhaps some slight additions had been made, but not by
Pindar.

       *       *       *       *       *

The strain of Archilochos sung without music at Olympia, the triple
resonant psalm of victory, sufficed to lead to the hill of Kronos
Epharmostos triumphing with his comrade friends: but now with darts of
other sort, shot from the Muses' far-delivering bow, praise Zeus of
the red lightning, and Elis' holy headland, which on a time Pelops the
Lydian hero chose to be Hippodameia's goodly dower.

And shoot a feathered arrow of sweet song Pythoward, for thy words
shall not fall to the ground when thou tunest the throbbing lyre
to the praise of the wrestlings of a man from famous Opous, and
celebratest her and her son. For Themis and her noble daughter
Eunomia the Preserver have made her their own, and she flourisheth in
excellent deeds both at Kastalia and beside Alpheos' stream: whence
come the choicest of all crowns to glorify the mother city of
Lokrians, the city of beautiful trees.

I, to illuminate the city of my friends with eager blaze of song,
swifter than high-bred steed or winged ship will send everywhere these
tidings, so be it that my hand is blessed at all in labouring in the
choice garden of the Graces; for they give all pleasant things to men.

By fate divine receive men also valour and wisdom: how else[1] might
the hands of Herakles have wielded his club against the trident, when
at Pylos Poseidon took his stand and prest hard on him, ay, and there
prest him hard embattled Phoibos with his silver bow, neither would
Hades keep his staff unraised, wherewith he leadeth down to ways
beneath the hollow earth the bodies of men that die?

O my mouth, fling this tale from thee, for to speak evil of gods is
a hateful wisdom, and loud and unmeasured words strike a note that
trembleth upon madness. Of such things talk thou not; leave war of
immortals and all strife aside; and bring thy words to the city of
Protogeneia, where by decree of Zeus of the bickering lightning-flash
Pyrrha and Deukalion coming down from Parnassos first fixed their
home, and without bed of marriage made out of stones a race to be one
folk: and hence cometh the name of peoples[2]. Awake for them the
clear-toned gale of song, and if old wine be best, yet among songs
prefer the newer flowers.

Truly men say that once a mighty water swept over the dark earth, but
by the craft of Zeus an ebb suddenly drew off the flood. From these
first men came anciently your ancestors of the brazen shields, sons of
the women of the stock of Iapetos and of the mighty Kronidai, Kings
that dwelt in the land continually; until the Olympian Lord caught up
the daughter[3] of Opöeis from the land of the Epeians, and lay with
her in a silent place among the ridges of Mainalos; and afterward
brought her unto Lokros, that age might not bring him[4] low beneath
the burden of childlessness. But the wife bare within her the seed of
the Mightiest, and the hero saw the bastard born and rejoiced, and
called him by the name of his mother's father, and he became a man
preeminent in beauty and great deeds: and his father gave unto him a
city and a people to rule over.

Then there came unto him strangers, from Argos and from Thebes, and
from Arcadia others, and from Pisa. But the son of Aktor and Aigina,
Menoitios, he honoured above all settlers, him whose son[5] went with
the Atreidai to the plain of Teuthras and stood alone beside Achilles,
when Telephos had turned the valiant Danaoi to flight, and drove them
into the sterns of their sea-ships; so proved he to them that had
understanding that Patroklos' soul was strong. And thenceforward the
son of Thetis persuaded him that he should never in murderous battle
take his post far from his friend's conquering spear.

Fit speech may I find for my journey in the Muses' car; and let me
therewith have daring and powers of ample scope. To back the prowess
of a friend I came, when Lampromachos won his Isthmian crown, when on
the same day both he and his brother overcame. And afterward at the
gates[6] of Corinth two triumphs again befell Epharmostos, and more in
the valleys of Nemea. At Argos he triumphed over men, as over boys
at Athens. And I might tell how at Marathon he stole from among the
beardless and confronted the full-grown for the prize of silver
vessels, how without a fall he threw his men with swift and cunning
shock, and how loud the shouting pealed when round the ring he ran,
in the beauty of his youth and his fair form and fresh from fairest
deeds.

Also before the Parrhasian host was he glorified, at the assembly of
Lykaian Zeus, and again when at Pellene he bare away a warm antidote
of cold winds[7]. And the tomb of Iolaos, and Eleusis by the sea, are
just witnesses to his honours.

The natural is ever best: yet many men by learning of prowess essay to
achieve fame. The thing done without God is better kept in silence.
For some ways lead further than do others, but one practice will not
train us all alike. Skill of all kinds is hard to attain unto: but
when thou bringest forth this prize, proclaim aloud with a good
courage that by fate divine this man at least was born deft-handed,
nimble-limbed, with the light of valour in his eyes, and that now
being victorious he hath crowned at the feast Oilean Alas' altar.


[Footnote 1: This is the common interpretation, implying that Herakles
in contending with the gods here mentioned must have been helped by
other gods. But perhaps it might also be translated 'therefore how
could the hands, &c.,' meaning that since valour, as has just been
said, comes from a divine source, it could not be used against gods,
and that thus the story ought to be rejected.]

[Footnote 2: Perhaps the story of the stones arose from the like sound
of [Greek: Laos] and [Greek: Laas], words here regarded in the inverse
relation to each other.]

[Footnote 3: Protogeneia.]

[Footnote 4: Lokros.]

[Footnote 5: Patroklos.]

[Footnote 6: The Isthmus, the gate between the two seas.]

[Footnote 7: A cloak, the prize.]



X.

FOR AGESIDAMOS OF EPIZEPHYRIAN LOKRIS,

WINNER IN THE BOYS' BOXING-MATCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

  This ode bears somewhat the same relation to the next that the fourth
  does to the fifth. It was to be sung at Olympia on the night after
  the victory, and Pindar promises the boy to write a longer one for
  the celebration of his victory in his Italian home. The date is
  B.C. 484.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes have men most need of winds, sometimes of showered waters of
the firmament, the children of the cloud.

But when through his labour one fareth well, then are due honey-voiced
songs, be they even a prelude to words that shall come after, a pledge
confirmed by oath in honour of high excellence.

Ample is the glory stored for Olympian winners: thereof my shepherd
tongue is fain to keep some part in fold. But only by the help of God
is wisdom[1] kept ever blooming in the soul.

Son of Archestratos, Agesidamos, know certainly that for thy boxing I
will lay a glory of sweet strains upon thy crown of golden[2] olive,
and will have in remembrance the race of the Lokrians' colony in the West.

There do ye, O Muses, join in the song of triumph: I pledge my word
that to no stranger-banishing folk shall ye come, nor unacquainted
with things noble, but of the highest in arts and valiant with the
spear. For neither tawny fox nor roaring lion may change his native
temper.

[Footnote 1: Perhaps [Greek: sophos] (which means often rather clever
or skilful than wise) has here the special reference to poetic skill,
which it often has in Pindar.]

[Footnote 2: Golden here means supremely excellent, as in the first
line of the eighth Olympian.]



XI.

FOR AGESIDAMOS OF EPIZEPHYRIAN LOKRIS,

WINNER IN THE BOYS' BOXING-MATCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

  It would seem by his own confession that Pindar did not remember till
  long afterwards the promise he made to Agesidamos in the last ode.
  We do not know how long afterwards this was written, but it must
  have been too late to greet the winner on his arrival in Italy; probably
  it was to be sung at the anniversary or some memorial celebration
  of his victory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Read me the name of the Olympic winner Archestratos' son that I may
know where it is written upon my heart: for I had forgotten that I
owed him a sweet strain.

But do thou, O Muse, and thou Truth, daughter of Zeus, put forth your
hands and keep from me the reproach of having wronged a friend by
breaking my pledged word. For from afar hath overtaken me the time
that was then yet to come, and hath shamed my deep debt.

Nevertheless from that sore reproach I may be delivered by payment
with usury: behold how[1] the rushing wave sweepeth down the rolling
shingle, and how we also will render for our friend's honour a tribute
to him and to his people.

Truth inhabiteth the city of the Lokrians of the West, and Kalliope
they hold in honour and mailëd Ares; yea even conquering Herakles was
foiled by that Kykneän combat[2].

Now let Agesidamos, winner in the boxing at Olympia, so render thanks
to Ilas[3] as Patroklos of old to Achilles. If one be born with
excellent gifts, then may another who sharpeneth his natural edge
speed him, God helping, to an exceeding weight of glory. Without toil
there have triumphed a very few.

Of that light in the life of a man before all other deeds, that first
of contests, the ordinances of Zeus[4] have stirred me to sing, even
the games which by the ancient tomb of Pelops the mighty Herakles
founded, after that he slew Kleatos, Poseidon's goodly son, and slew
also Eurytos, that he might wrest from tyrannous Augeas against his
will reward for service done[5].

Lying in ambush beneath Kleonai did Herakles overcome them on the
road, for that formerly these same violent sons of Molos made havoc of
his own Tirynthian folk by hiding in the valleys of Elis. And not long
after the guest-betraying king of the Epeans saw his rich native land,
his own city, beneath fierce fire and iron blows sink down into the
deep moat of calamity. Of strife against stronger powers it is hard
to be rid. Likewise Augeas last of all in his perplexity fell into
captivity and escaped not precipitate death.

Then the mighty son of Zeus having gathered together all his host at
Pisa, and all the booty, measured a sacred grove for his sovereign
Father; and having fenced round the Altis he marked the bounds thereof
in a clear space, and the plain encompassing it he ordained for rest
and feasting, and paid honour to the river Alpheos together with the
twelve greatest gods. And he named it by the name of the Hill of
Kronos; for theretofore it was without name, when Oinomaos was king,
and it was sprinkled with much snow[6].

And at this first-born rite the Fates stood hard at hand, and he who
alone proveth sure truth, even Time. He travelling onward hath told us
the clear tale of how the founder set apart the choicest of the spoil
for an offering from the war, and sacrificed, and how he ordained the
fifth-year feast with the victories of that first Olympiad.

Who then won to their lot the new-appointed crown by hands or feet
or chariot, setting before them the prize of glory in the games, and
winning it by their act? In the foot-race down the straight course of
the stadion was Likymnios' son Oionos first, from Nidea had he led his
host: in the wrestling was Tegea glorified by Echemos: Doryklos won
the prize of boxing, a dweller in the city of Tiryns, and with the
four-horse chariot, Samos of Mantinea, Halirrhothios' son: with the
javelin Phrastor hit the mark: in distance Enikeus beyond all others
hurled the stone with a circling sweep, and all the warrior company
thundered a great applause.

Then on the evening the lovely shining of the fair-faced moon beamed
forth, and all the precinct sounded with songs of festal glee, after
the manner which is to this day for triumph.

So following the first beginning of old time, we likewise in a song
named of proud victory will celebrate the thunder and the flaming
bolt of loud-pealing Zeus, the fiery lightning that goeth with all
victory[7].

And soft tones to the music of the flute shall meet and mingle with my
verse, which beside famous Dirke hath come to light after long time.

But even as a son by his lawful wife is welcome to a father who hath
now travelled to the other side of youth, and maketh his soul warm
with love--for wealth that must fall to a strange owner from without
is most hateful to a dying man--so also, Agesidamos, when a man who
hath done honourable deeds goeth unsung to the house of Hades, this
man hath spent vain breath, and won but brief gladness for his toil.

On thee the pleasant lyre and the sweet pipe shed their grace, and the
Pierian daughters of Zeus foster thy wide-spread fame.

I with them, setting myself thereunto fervently, have embraced the
Lokrians' famous race, and have sprinkled my honey upon a city of
goodly men: and I have told the praises of Archestratos' comely son,
whom I beheld victorious by the might of his hand beside the altar at
Olympia, and saw on that day how fair he was of form, how gifted with
that spring-tide bloom, which erst with favour of the Cyprian queen
warded from Ganymede unrelenting death.


[Footnote 1: Reading [Greek: horat on hopa].]

[Footnote 2: This Kyknos seems to have been a Lokrian freebooter, said
to have fought with success against Herakles.]

[Footnote 3: His trainer.]

[Footnote 4: Probably because Zeus was especially concerned, both with
the fulfilment of promises and with the Olympic games.]

[Footnote 5: For the story of these Moliones see Nestor's speech, Hom.
Il. xi. 670-761.]

[Footnote 6: Perhaps this implies a tradition of a colder climate
anciently prevailing in Peloponnesos: perhaps the mention of snow is
merely picturesque, referring to the habitual appearance of the hill
in winter, and the passage should then rather be rendered 'when
Oinomaos was king its snow-sprinkled top was without name.']

[Footnote 7: The Lokrians worshipped Zeus especially as the Thunderer,
as certain coins of theirs, stamped with a thunderbolt, still
testify.]



XII.

FOR ERGOTELES OF HIMERA,

WINNER IN THE LONG FOOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Ergoteles was a native of Knosos in Crete, but civil dissension had
  compelled him to leave his country. He came to Sicily and was
  naturalized as a citizen of Himera. Had he stayed in Crete he
  would not have won this victory; nor the Pythian and Isthmian
  victories, referred to at the end of the ode, for the Cretans seem to
  have kept aloof, in an insular spirit, from the Panhellenic games.

  The date of the ode is B.C. 472, the year after the Himeraeans had
  expelled the tyrant Thrasydaios of Akragas. The prayer to Fortune
  would seem to have reference specially to this event. The ode was
  probably sung in a temple either of Zeus or of Fortune.

       *       *       *       *       *

I pray thee, daughter of Zeus the Deliverer, keep watch over
wide-ruling Himera, O saviour Fortune.

By thee upon the sea swift ships are piloted, and on dry land fierce
wars and meetings of councils.

Up and down the hopes of men are tossed as they cleave the waves of
baffling falsity: and a sure token of what shall come to pass hath
never any man on the earth received from God: the divinations of
things to come are blind.

Many the chances that fall to men when they look not for them,
sometimes to thwart delight, yet others after battling with the surge
of sorrowful pain have suddenly received for their affliction some
happiness profound.

Son of Philanor, verily even the glory of thy fleet feet would have
fallen into the sere leaf unrenowned, abiding by the hearth of thy
kin, as a cock that fighteth but at home, had not the strife of
citizen against citizen driven thee from Knosos thy native land.

But now at Olympia hast thou won a crown, O Ergoteles, and at Pytho
twice, and at Isthmos, whereby thou glorifiest the hot springs where
the nymphs Sicilian bathe, dwelling in a land that is become to thee
as thine own.



XIII.

FOR XENOPHON OF CORINTH,

WINNER IN THE STADION RACE AND IN THE PENTATHLON.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this victory is B.C. 464, when Xenophon won both the
Stadion, or short foot-race of about a furlong or 220 yards, and also
the Pentathlon, that is, probably, he won at least three out of the
five contests which composed the Pentathlon--the Jump, Throwing the
Disk, Throwing the Javelin, the Foot-race, and Wrestling, ([Greek:
alma podokeian diskon akonta palaen]). For details, see Dict. Antiq.
and Note on Nem. vii 71-73.

This ode and the speech of Glaukos in the sixth Book of the Iliad
are the most conspicuous passages in poetry which refer to the great
Corinthian hero Bellerophon.

It is thought that this ode was sung on the winner's public entrance
into Corinth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thrice winner in Olympic games, of citizens beloved, to strangers
hospitable, the house in whose praise will I now celebrate happy
Corinth, portal of Isthmian Poseidon and nursery of splendid youth.
For therein dwell Order, and her sisters, sure foundation of states,
Justice and likeminded Peace, dispensers of wealth to men, wise
Themis' golden daughters. And they are minded to keep far from them
Insolence the braggart mother of Loathing.

I have fair witness to bear of them, and a just boldness stirreth my
tongue to speak. Nature inborn none shall prevail to hide. Unto you,
sons[1] of Aletes, ofttimes have the flowery Hours given splendour
of victory, as to men excelling in valour, pre-eminent at the sacred
games, and ofttimes of old have they put subtleties into your men's
hearts to devise; and of an inventor cometh every work.

Whence were revealed the new graces of Dionysos with the dithyramb
that winneth the ox[2]? Who made new means of guidance to the harness
of horses, or on the shrines of gods set the twin images of the king
of birds [3]? Among them thriveth the Muse of dulcet breath, and Ares
in the young men's terrible spears. Sovran lord of Olympia, be not
thou jealous of my words henceforth for ever, O father Zeus; rule
thou this folk unharmed, and keep unchanged the favourable gale of
Xenophon's good hap. Welcome from him this customary escort of his
crown, which from the plains of Pisa he is bringing, having won with
the five contests the stadion-race beside; the like whereof never yet
did mortal man.

Also two parsley-wreaths shadowed his head before the people at the
games of Isthmos, nor doth Nemea tell a different tale. And of his
father Thessalos' lightning feet is record by the streams of Alpheos,
and at Pytho he hath renown for the single and for the double stadion
gained both in a single day, and in the same month at rocky Athens a
day of swiftness crowned his hair for three illustrious deeds, and the
Hellotia[4] seven times, and at the games of Poseidon between seas
longer hymns followed his father Ptoiodoros with Terpsias and
Eritimos. And how often ye were first at Delphi or in the Pastures of
the Lion[5], though with full many do I match your crowd of honours,
yet can I no more surely tell than the tale of pebbles on the
sea-shore. But in everything is there due measure, and most excellent
is it to have respect unto fitness of times.

I with your fleet sailing a privateer will speak no lie concerning the
valour of Corinth's heroes, whether I proclaim the craft of her men
of old or their might in war, whether of Sisyphos of subtlest cunning
even as a god, and Medea who made for herself a marriage in her sire's
despite, saviour of the ship Argo and her crew: or whether how of old
in the struggle before the walls of Dardanos the sons of Corinth were
deemed to turn the issue of battle either way, these with Atreus' son
striving to win Helen back, those to thrust them utterly away[6].

Now when Glaukos was come thither out of Lydia the Danaoi feared him.
To them he proclaimed that in the city of Peirene his sire bare rule
and had rich heritage of land and palace, even he who once, when he
longed to bridle the snaky Gorgon's son, Pegasos, at Peirene's spring,
suffered many things, until the time when maiden Pallas brought to
him a bit with head-band of gold, and from a dream behold it was very
deed.

For she said unto him 'Sleepest thou O Aiolid king? Come, take this
charmer of steeds, and show it to thy father[7] the tamer of horses,
with the sacrifice of a white bull.'

Thus in the darkness as he slumbered spake the maiden wielder of
the shadowy aegis--so it seemed unto him--and he leapt up and stood
upright upon his feet. And he seized the wondrous bit that lay by his
side, and found with joy the prophet of the land, and showed to him,
the son of Koiranos, the whole issue of the matter, how on the altar
of the goddess he lay all night according to the word of his prophecy,
and how with her own hands the child of Zeus whose spear is the
lightning brought unto him the soul-subduing gold.

Then the seer bade him with all speed obey the vision, and that when
he should have sacrificed to the wide-ruling Earth-enfolder the
strong-foot beast[8], he should build an altar straightway to Athene,
queen of steeds.

Now the power of Gods bringeth easily to pass such things as make
forecast forsworn. Surely with zealous haste did bold Bellerophon bind
round the winged steed's jaw the softening charm, and make him his:
then straightway he flew up and disported him in his brazen arms.

In company with that horse also on a time, from out of the bosom of
the chill and desert air, he smote the archer host of Amazons, and
slew the Solymoi, and Chimaira breathing fire. I will keep silence
touching the fate of him: howbeit Pegasos hath in Olympus found a home
in the ancient stalls of Zeus.

But for me who am to hurl straight the whirling javelin it is not meet
to spend beside the mark my store of darts with utmost force of hand:
for to the Muses throned in splendour and to the Oligaithidai a
willing ally came I, at the Isthmos and again at Nemea. In a brief
word will I proclaim the host of them, and a witness sworn and true
shall be to me in the sweet-tongued voice of the good herald[9], heard
at both places sixty times.

Now have their acts at Olympia, methinks, been told already: of those
that shall be hereafter I will hereafter clearly speak. Now I live in
hope, but the end is in the hands of gods. But if the fortune of the
house fail not, we will commit to Zeus and Enyalios the accomplishment
thereof.

Yet other glories won they, by Parnassos' brow, and at Argos how many
and at Thebes, and such as nigh the Arcadians[10] the lordly altar of
Zeus Lykaios shall attest, and Pallene, and Sikyon, and Megara,
and the well-fenced grove of the Aiakidai, and Eleusis, and lusty
Marathon, and the fair rich cities beneath Aetna's towering crest, and
Euboea. Nay over all Hellas if thou searchest, thou shalt find more
than one sight can view.

O king Zeus the Accomplisher, grant them with so light feet[11] to
move through life, give them all honour, and sweet hap of their goodly
things.


[Footnote 1: The clan of the Oligaithidai, to which Xenophon
belonged.]

[Footnote 2: I. e. as a prize. But the passage may be taken
differently as referring to the symbolical identification of Dionysos
with the bull. Dithyrambic poetry was said to have been invented or
improved by Arion of Corinth.]

[Footnote 3: This refers to the introduction into architecture by the
Corinthians of the pediment, within or above which were at that time
constantly placed images of eagles.]

[Footnote 4: The feast of Athene Hellotis.]

[Footnote 5: Nemea.]

[Footnote 6: The Lykians who fought under Glaukos on the Trojan side
were of Corinthian descent.]

[Footnote 7: Poseidon.]

[Footnote 8: A bull.]

[Footnote 9: Proclaiming the name and city of the winner in the
games.]

[Footnote 10: Reading [Greek: Arkasin asson].]

[Footnote 11: As in their foot-races.]



XIV.

FOR ASOPICHOS OF ORCHOMENOS,

WINNER IN THE BOYS' SHORT FOOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

This ode was to be sung, probably by a chorus of boys, at the winner's
city Orchomenos, and most likely in the temple of the three or Graces,
Aglaia, Euphrosyne and Thalia.

The date of the victory is B.C. 476.

       *       *       *       *       *

O ye who haunt the land of goodly steeds that drinketh of Kephisos'
waters, lusty Orchomenos' queens renowned in song, O Graces, guardians
of the Minyai's ancient race, hearken, for unto you I pray. For by
your gift come unto men all pleasant things and sweet, and the wisdom
of a man and his beauty, and the splendour of his fame. Yea even gods
without the Graces' aid rule never at feast or dance; but these have
charge of all things done in heaven, and beside Pythian Apollo of
the golden bow they have set their thrones, and worship the eternal
majesty of the Olympian Father.

O lady Aglaia, and thou Euphrosyne, lover of song, children of the
mightiest of the gods, listen and hear, and thou Thalia delighting in
sweet sounds, and look down upon this triumphal company, moving with
light step under happy fate. In Lydian mood of melody concerning
Asopichos am I come hither to sing, for that through thee, Aglaia,
in the Olympic games the Minyai's home is winner. Fly, Echo, to
Persephone's dark-walled home, and to his father bear the noble
tidings, that seeing him thou mayest speak to him of his son, saying
that for his father's honour in Pisa's famous valley he hath crowned
his boyish hair with garlands from the glorious games.



THE PYTHIAN ODES.

I.

FOR HIERON OF AITNA,

WINNER IN THE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *
The date of this victory is B.C. 474

In the year 480, the year of Salamis, the Syracusans under Hieron had
defeated the Carthaginians in the great battle of Himera.

In 479 a great eruption of Etna (Aitna) began. In 476 Hieron founded,
near the mountain but we may suppose at a safe distance, the new city
of Aitna, in honour of which he had himself proclaimed as an Aitnaian
after this and other victories in the games.

And in this same year, 474, he had defeated the Etruscans, or Tuscans,
or Tyrrhenians in a great sea-fight before Cumae.

Pindar might well delight to honour those who had been waging so well
against the barbarians of the South and West the same war which the
Hellenes of the mother-country waged against the barbarians of the
East.

       *       *       *       *       *

O golden Lyre, thou common treasure of Apollo and the Muses
violet-tressed, thou whom the dancer's step, prelude of festal mirth,
obeyeth, and the singers heed thy bidding, what time with quivering
strings thou utterest preamble of choir-leading overture--lo even the
sworded lightning of immortal fire thou quenched, and on the sceptre
of Zeus his eagle sleepeth, slackening his swift wings either side,
the king of birds, for a dark mist thou hast distilled on his arched
head, a gentle seal upon his eyes, and he in slumber heaveth his
supple back, spell-bound beneath thy throbs.

Yea also violent Ares, leaving far off the fierce point of his spears,
letteth his heart have joy in rest, for thy shafts soothe hearts
divine by the cunning of Leto's son and the deep-bosomed Muses.

But whatsoever things Zeus loveth not fly frighted from the voice of
the Pierides, whether on earth or on the raging sea; whereof is he who
lieth in dreadful Tartaros, the foe of the gods, Typhon of the hundred
heads, whom erst the den Kilikian of many names did breed, but now
verily the sea-constraining cliffs beyond Cumae, and Sicily, lie heavy
on his shaggy breast: and he is fast bound by a pillar of the sky,
even by snowy Etna, nursing the whole year's length her frozen snow.

Whereout pure springs of unapproachable fire are vomited from the
inmost depths: in the daytime the lava-streams pour forth a lurid rush
of smoke: but in the darkness a red rolling flame sweepeth rocks with
uproar to the wide deep sea.

That dragon-thing[1] it is that maketh issue from beneath the terrible
fiery flood, a monster marvellous to look upon, yea a marvel to hear
of from such as go thereby and tell what thing is prisoned between
the dark-wooded tops of Etna and the plain, where the back of him is
galled and furrowed by the bed whereon he lieth.

O Zeus, be it ours to find favour in thy sight, who art defender
of this mountain, the forehead of a fruitful land, whose namesake
neighbour city hath been ennobled by her glorious founder, for that on
the race-course at the Pythian games the herald made proclamation of
her name aloud, telling of Hieron's fair victory in the chariot-race.

Now the first boon to men in ships is that a favourable breeze come to
them as they set forth upon the sea; for this is promise that in
the end also they shall come with good hap home. So after this good
fortune doth reason show us hope of crowns to come for Aitna's horses,
and honour in the banquet-songs.

O Phoibos, lord of Lykia and of Delos, who lovest the spring of
Castaly on thy Parnassos, be this the purpose of thy will, and grant
the land fair issue of her men.

For from gods come all means of mortal valour, hereby come bards and
men of mighty hand and eloquent speech.

This is the man I am fain to praise, and trust that not outside the
ring shall I hurl the bronze-tipped javelin I brandish in my hand, but
with far throw outdo my rivals in the match.

Would that his whole life may give him, even as now, good luck and
wealth right onward, and of his pains forgetfulness.

Verily it shall remind him in what fightings of wars he stood up with
steadfast soul, when the people found grace of glory at the hands
of gods, such as none of the Hellenes hath reaped, a proud crown of
wealth.

For after the ensample of Philoktetes he went but now to war: and when
necessity was upon them even they of proud spirit sought of him a
boon.

To Lemnos once they say came godlike heroes to fetch thence the archer
son of Paian, vexed of an ulcerous wound; and he sacked the city of
Priam and made an end of the Danaoi's labours, for the body wherewith
he went was sick, but this was destined from the beginning.

Even thus to Hieron may God be a guide for the time approaching, and
give him to lay hold upon the things of his desire.

Also in the house of Deinomenes do me grace, O Muse, to sing, for sake
of our four-horsed car: no alien joy to him is his sire's victory.

Come then and next for Etna's king let us devise a friendly song, for
whom with god-built freedom after the laws of Hyllic pattern hath that
city been founded of Hieron's hand: for the desire of the sons of
Pamphylos and of the Herakleidai dwelling beneath the heights of
Taÿgetos is to abide continually in the Dorian laws of Aigimios. At
Amyklai they dwelt prosperously, when they were come down out of
Pindos and drew near in honour to the Tyndaridai who ride on white
horses, and the glory of their spears waxed great.

Thou Zeus, with whom are the issues of things, grant that the true
speech of men ever bear no worse report of citizens and kings beside
the water of Amënas. By thine aid shall a man that is chief and
that instructeth his son after him give due honour unto his people and
move them to be of one voice peacefully.

I pray thee, son of Kronos, grant that the Phenician and the Tuscan
war-cry be hushed at home, since they have beheld the calamity of
their ships that befell them before Cumae, even how they were smitten
by the captain of the Syracusans, who from their swift ships hurled
their youth into the sea, to deliver Hellas from the bondage of the
oppressor.

From Salamis shall I of Athenians take reward of thanks, at Sparta
when I shall tell[2] in a song to come of the battle[3] before
Kithairon, wherein the Medes that bear crooked bows were overthrown,
but by the fair-watered banks of Himëras it shall be for the song
I have rendered to the sons of Deinomenes, which by their valour they
have earned, since the men that warred against them are overthrown.

If thou shalt speak in season, and comprehend in brief the ends of
many matters, less impeachment followeth of men; for surfeit blunteth
the eagerness of expectancy; and city-talk of others' praise grieveth
hearts secretly.

Nevertheless, for that envy is preferred before pity[4], let slip not
fair occasion: guide with just helm thy people and forge the sword
of thy speech on an anvil whereof cometh no lie. Even a word falling
lightly is of import in that it proceedeth from thee. Of many things
art thou steward: many witnesses are there to thy deeds of either
kind.

But abiding in the fair flower of this spirit, if thou art fain to be
continually of good report, be not too careful for the cost: loose
free like a mariner thy sail unto the wind.

Friend, be not deceived by time-serving words of guile. The voice of
the report that liveth after a man, this alone revealeth the lives of
dead men to the singers and to the chroniclers: the loving-kindness
of Craesus fadeth not away; but him who burned men with fire within a
brazen bull, Phalaris that had no pity, men tell of everywhere
with hate, neither will any lute in hall suffer him in the gentle
fellowship of young boys' themes of songs.

To be happy is the chiefest prize; to be glorious the next lot: if a
man have lighted on both and taken them to be his, he hath attained
unto the supreme crown.


[Footnote 1: Typhon.]

[Footnote 2: Reading [Greek: erion].]

[Footnote 3: Plataea.]

[Footnote 4: I. e. it is better to be envied than to be pitied.]



II.

FOR HIERON OF SYRACUSE,

WINNER IN THE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

The classification of this ode as Pythian is probably a mistake:
perhaps the victory was won at the Theban festival in honour of
Herakles, or of Iolaos.

Anaxilaos, tyrant of Rhegium and Messana, had been deterred by
Hieron's threats from attacking the Epizephyrian Lokrians, and the ode
is partly occupied with congratulations of Hieron on this protective
act. As Anaxilaos died B.C. 476, and Hieron was only placed at the
head of the Syracusan state two years before, this seems to fix the
date somewhere in these two years. As Pindar talks of sending his song
across the sea, we may suppose that it was sung at Syracuse.

There is much obscurity about the significances of this ode. The
poet's motive in telling the story of Ixion's sins has been variously
guessed at. Some think it was meant to deter Hieron from contriving
the death of his brother Polyzelos in battle in order to get
possession of Polyzelos' wife (and if Hieron was to be suspected of
such a thought it would be quite in Pindar's manner to mingle warning
and reproof with praise): some think that it refers to the ingratitude
of Anaxilaos toward Hieron. And most probably the latter part of the
ode, in which sincerity is approved, and flattery and calumny are
condemned, had some special and personal reference, though we need not
suppose, as the commentators are fond of doing here and elsewhere,
that it was aimed at Bacchylides or other rival poets.

       *       *       *       *       *

Great city of Syracuse, precinct of warrior Ares, of iron-armed men
and steeds the nursing-place divine, to thee I come[1], bearing from
my bright Thebes this song, the tidings of earth-shaking racing of the
four-horse car, wherein hath Hieron with his goodly chariot
overcome, and decked with far-seen splendour of crowns Ortygia the
dwelling-place of Artemis of the river, her by whose help he tamed
with soothing hand his colts of spangled rein.

For the archer maiden with both hands fitteth the glittering
trappings, and Hermes, god of games, whensoever Hieron to the polished
car and bridle-guided wheels[2] yoketh the strength of his steeds,
calling on the wide-ruling god, the trident-wielder.

Now unto various kings pay various men sweet song, their valour's
meed. So the fair speech of Cyprus echoeth around the name of Kinyras,
him whom Apollo of the golden hair loved fervently, and who dwelt a
priest in the house of Aphrodite: for to such praise are men moved by
the thankfulness that followeth the recompense of friendly acts. But
of thee, O thou son of Deinomenes, the maiden daughter of the Lokrian
in the west before the house-door telleth in her song, being out of
bewildering woes of war by thy might delivered, so that her eyes are
not afraid for anything.

Ixion, they say, by order of the gods, writhing on his winged wheel,
proclaimeth this message unto men: _To him who doeth thee service make
recompense of fair reward_.

This lesson learned he plainly; for when that among the friendly
Kronidai he had gotten a life of pleasantness, his bliss became
greater than he could bear, and with mad heart he lusted after Hera,
whose place was in the happy marriage-bed of Zeus: yet insolence drove
him to the exceeding folly; but quickly suffering his deserts the man
gained to himself a misery most rare.

Two sins are the causes of his pain; one that he first among the
heroes shed blood of kindred[3] craftily, the other that in the
chambers of the ample heavens he attempted the wife of Zeus--for in
all things it behoveth to take measure by oneself[4].

Yet a mocking love-bed hurried him as he approached the couch[5] into
a sea of trouble; for he lay with a cloud, pursuing the sweet lie,
fond man: for its form was as the form of the most highest among the
daughters of heaven, even the child of Kronos; and the hands of Zeus
had made it that it might be a snare unto him, a fair mischief. Thus
came he unto the four-spoked wheel, his own destruction; and having
fallen into chains without escape he became proclaimer of that
message[6] unto many.

His mate[7], without favour of the Graces, bare unto him a monstrous
son, and like no other thing anywhere, even as its mother was, a thing
with no place or honour, neither among men, neither in the society of
gods. Him she reared and called by the name Kentauros, and he in the
valleys of Pelion lay with Magnesian mares, and there were born thence
a wondrous tribe, like unto both parents, their nether parts like unto
the dams, and their upper parts like unto the sire.

God achieveth all ends whereon he thinketh--God who overtaketh even
the winged eagle, and outstrippeth the dolphin of the sea, and
bringeth low many a man in his pride, while to others he giveth glory
incorruptible.

For me it is meet to eschew the sharp tooth of bitter words; for,
though afar off, I have seen the fierce Archilochos lacking most
things and fattening but on cruel words of hate. Of most worth are
riches when joined to the happy gift of wisdom. And this lot hast
thou, and mayest illustrate it with liberal soul, thou sovereign chief
over many streets filled with goodly garlands, and much people. If any
saith that ever yet was any man of old time throughout Hellas who
excelled thee in honour or in the multitude of possessions, such an one
with vain purpose essayeth a fruitless task.

Upon the flower-crowned prow[8] will I go up to sing of brave deeds
done. Youth is approved by valour in dread wars; and hence say I that
thou hast won boundless renown in thy battles, now with horsemen, now
on foot: also the counsels of thine elder years give me sure ground of
praising thee every way.

All hail! This song like to Phenician merchandize is sent across the
hoary sea: do thou look favourably on the strain of Kaster in Aeolian
mood[9], and greet it in honour of the seven-stringed lute.

Be what thou art, now I have told thee what that is: in the eyes of
children the fawning ape is ever comely: but the good fortune of
Rhadamanthos hath come to him because the fruit that his soul bare was
true, neither delighteth he in deceits within his heart, such as by
whisperer's arts ever wait upon mortal man.

An overpowering evil are the secret speakings of slander, to the
slandered and to the listener thereto alike, and are as foxes in
relentless temper. Yet for the beast whose name is of gain[10] what
great thing is gained thereby? For like the cork above the net, while
the rest of the tackle laboureth deep in the sea, I am unmerged in the
brine.

Impossible is it that a guileful citizen utter potent words among the
good, nevertheless he fawneth on all and useth every subtlety. No part
have I in that bold boast of his, 'Let me be a friend to my friend,
but toward an enemy I will be an enemy and as a wolf will cross his
path, treading now here now there in crooked ways[11].' For every form
of polity is a man of direct speech best, whether under a despotism,
or whether the wild multitude, or the wisest, have the state in their
keeping.

Against God it is not meet to strive, who now upholdeth these, and
now again to those giveth great glory. But not even this cheereth the
heart of the envious; for they measure by an unjust balance, and their
own hearts they afflict with bitter pain, till such time as they
attain to that which their hearts devise.

To take the car's yoke on one's neck and run on lightly, this helpeth;
but to kick against the goad is to make the course perilous. Be it
mine to dwell among the good, and to win their love.


[Footnote 1: Pindar here identifies himself with his ode, which he
sent, not took, to Syracuse. Compare Ol. vii. 13, &c.]

[Footnote 2: Properly [Greek: harmata] would seem to include all
except the body of the chariot ([Greek: diphros]) in which the
charioteer stood.]

[Footnote 3: His father-in-law Deioneus.]

[Footnote 4: I. e. to estimate rightly one's capacities,
circumstances, rights, duties.]

[Footnote 5: Reading [Greek: poti koiton ikont'].]

[Footnote 6: The message spoken of above, v. 24.]

[Footnote 7: The cloud, the phantom-Hera.]

[Footnote 8: The prow of the ship carrying this ode, with which
Pindar, as has been said, identifies himself.]

[Footnote 9: It is supposed that another ode, more especially in
honour of the chariot-victory, is here meant, which was to be sent
later.

From this point to the end the ode reads like a postscript of private
import and reference.]

[Footnote 10: It is at least doubtful whether [Greek: kerdo] a fox is
really connected with [Greek: kerdos] gain.]

[Footnote 11: It appears to me to be an absurdity to suppose that
Pindar means to express in this sentence his own rule of conduct,
as the commentators have fancied. He is all through this passage
condemning 'crooked ways.']



III.

FOR HIERON OF SYRACUSE,

WINNER IN THE HORSE-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dates both of the victory and of the ode are uncertain. But as
Pherenikos, the horse that won this race at Pytho, is the same that
won at Olympia B.C. 472, in honour of which event the First Olympian
was written, the victory cannot have been very long before that date,
though the language of the ode implies that it was written a good deal
later, probably for an anniversary of the victory. It must at least
have been written before Hieron's death in 467. It is much occupied
with his illness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fain were I (if meet it be to utter from my mouth the prayer conceived
of all) that Cheiron the son of Philyra were alive and had not
perished among men, even the wide-ruling seed of Kronos the son of
Ouranos; and that there still lorded it in Pelion's glens that Beast
untamed, whose soul was loving unto men, even such as when of old he
trained the gentle deviser of limb-saving anodynes, Asklepios, the
hero that was a defence against all kind of bodily plague.

Of him was the daughter[1] of Phlegyas of goodly steeds not yet
delivered by Eileithuia aid of mothers, ere by the golden bow she was
slain at the hands of Artemis, and from her child-bed chamber went
down into the house of Hades, by contriving of Apollo. Not idle is the
wrath of sons of Zeus.

She in the folly of her heart had set Apollo at nought, and taken
another spouse without knowledge of her sire, albeit ere then she had
lain with Phoibos of the unshorn hair, and bare within her the seed of
a very god.

Neither awaited she the marriage-tables nor the sound of many voices
in hymeneal song, such as the bride's girl-mates are wont to sing at
eventide with merry minstrelsy: but lo, she had longing for things
otherwhere, even as many before and after. For a tribe there is most
foolish among men, of such as scorn the things of home, and gaze on
things that are afar off, and chase a cheating prey with hopes that
shall never be fulfilled.

Of such sort was the frenzied strong desire fair-robed Koronis
harboured in her heart, for she lay in the couch of a stranger that
was come from Arcady.

But one that watched beheld her: for albeit he was at sheep-gathering
Pytho, yet was the temple's king Loxias aware thereof, beside his
unerring partner[2], for he gave heed to his own wisdom, his mind that
knoweth all things; in lies it hath no part, neither in act or thought
may god or man deceive him.

Therefore when he was aware of how she lay with the stranger Ischys
son of Elatos, and of her guile unrighteous, he sent his sister fierce
with terrible wrath to go to Lakereia--for by the steep shores of the
Boibian lake was the home of her virginity--and thus a doom adverse
blasted her life and smote her down: and of her neighbours many fared
ill therefore and perished with her: so doth a fire that from one
spark has leapt upon a mountain lay waste wide space of wood.

But when her kinsfolk had laid the damsel upon the pile of wood, and
fierce brightness of Hephaistos ran around it, then said Apollo: 'Not
any longer may I endure in my soul to slay mine own seed by a most
cruel death in company with its mother's grievous fate.'

He said, and at the first stride he was there, and from the corpse
caught up the child, and the blaze of the burning fiery pile was
cloven before him asunder in the midst.

Then to the Kentaur of Magnes he bare the child, that he should teach
him to be a healer of the many-plaguing maladies of men. And thus all
that came unto him whether plagued with self-grown sores or with limbs
wounded by the lustrous bronze or stone far-hurled, or marred by
summer heat or winter cold--these he delivered, loosing each from
his several infirmity, some with emollient spells and some by kindly
potions, or else he hung their limbs with charms, or by surgery he
raised them up to health.

Yet hath even wisdom been led captive of desire of gain. Even him did
gold in his hands glittering beguile for a great reward to bring back
from death a man already prisoner thereto: wherefore the hands of the
son of Kronos smote the twain of them through the midst, and bereft
their breasts of breath, and the bright lightning dealt them doom.

It behoveth to seek from gods things meet for mortal souls, knowing
the things that are in our path and to what portion we are born.
Desire not thou, dear my soul, a life immortal, but use the tools that
are to thine hand.

Now were wise Cheiron in his cavern dwelling yet, and had our
sweet-voiced songs laid haply some fair magic on his soul, then had
I won him to grant to worthy men some healer of hot plagues, some
offspring of Leto's son, or of her son's sire[3].

And then in a ship would I have sailed, cleaving the Ionian sea, to
the fountain of Arethusa, to the home of my Aitnaian friend, who
ruleth at Syracuse, a king of good will to the citizens, not envious
of the good, to strangers wondrous fatherly. Had I but landed there
and brought unto him a twofold joy, first golden health and next this
my song of triumph to be a splendour in his Pythian crown, which of
late Pherenikos[4] won by his victory at Kirrha--I say that then
should I have come unto him, after that I had passed over the deep
sea, a farther-shining light than any heavenly star.

But I am minded to pray to the Mother[5] for him, to the awful goddess
unto whom, and unto Pan, before my door nightly the maidens move in
dance and song.

Yet, O Hieron, if thou art skilled to apprehend the true meaning of
sayings, thou hast learnt to know this from the men of old; _The
immortals deal to men two ill things for one good._ The foolish cannot
bear these with steadfastness but the good only, putting the fair side
forward.

But thee a lot of happiness attendeth, for if on any man hath mighty
Destiny looked favourably, surely it is on a chief and leader of a
people.

A life untroubled abode not either with Peleus, son of Aiakos, or with
godlike Kadmos: yet of all mortals these, they say, had highest
bliss, who both erewhile listened to the singing of the Muses
golden-filleted, the one in seven-gated Thebes, when he wedded
large-eyed Harmonia, the other on the mountainside, when he took to
him Thetis to be his wife, wise Nereus' glorious daughter. And with
both of them gods sate at meat, and they beheld the sons of Kronos
sitting as kings on thrones of gold, and they received from them gifts
for their espousals; and by grace of Zeus they escaped out of their
former toils and raised up their hearts to gladness.

Yet again in the after time the bitter anguish of those daughters[6]
robbed Kadmos of a part of bliss: howbeit the Father Zeus came to
white-armed Thyone's[7] longed-for couch.

And so did the son of Peleus whom Thetis bare at Phthia, her only son,
die by an arrow in war, and moved the Danaoi to lament aloud, when his
body was burning in fire.

Now if any by wisdom hath the way of truth he may yet lack good
fortune, which cometh of the happy gods.

The blasts of soaring winds blow various ways at various times.
Not for long cometh happiness to men, when it accompanieth them in
exceeding weight.

Small will I be among the small, and great among the great. Whatever
fortune follow me, I will work therewith, and wield it as my power
shall suffice. If God should offer me wealth and ease, I have hope
that I should first have won high honour to be in the times afar off.

Nestor and Lykian Sarpedon, who live in the speech of men, we know
from tales of sounding song, built up by cunning builders.

By songs of glory hath virtue lasting life, but to achieve them is
easy to but few.


[Footnote 1: Koronis.]

[Footnote 2: His father, Zeus.]

[Footnote 3: Some Asklepios or Apollo.]

[Footnote 4: Hieron's horse.]

[Footnote 5: Rhea or Kybele, the mother of the gods. 'Next door to
Pindar's house was a temple of the mother of the gods and of Pan,
which he had built himself.' Scholiast.]

[Footnote 6: Ino, Agaue, and Autonoe.]

[Footnote 7: Semele.]



IV.

FOR ARKESILAS OF KYRENE,

WINNER IN THE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pindar has made this victory of Arkesilas, King of the Hellenic colony
of Kyrene in Africa, an occasion for telling the story of Jason's
expedition with the Argonauts. The ostensible reason for introducing
the story is that Kyrene had been colonised from the island of Thera
by the descendants of the Argonaut Euphemos, according to the prophecy
of Medea related at the beginning of the ode. But Pindar had another
reason. He wished to suggest an analogy between the relation of the
Iolkian king Pelias to Jason and the relation of Arkesilas to his
exiled kinsman Demophilos. Demophilos had been staying at Thebes,
where Pindar wrote this ode, to be afterwards recited at Kyrene. It
was written B.C. 466, when Pindar was fifty-six years of age, and is
unsurpassed in his extant works, or indeed by anything of this kind in
all poetry.

       *       *       *       *       *

This day O Muse must thou tarry in a friend's house, the house of the
king of Kyrene of goodly horses, that with Arkesilas at his triumph
thou mayst swell the favourable gale of song, the due of Leto's
children, and of Pytho. For at Pytho of old she who sitteth beside the
eagles of Zeus--nor was Apollo absent then--the priestess, spake this
oracle, that Battos should found a power in fruitful Libya, that
straightway departing from the holy isle he might lay the foundations
of a city of goodly chariots upon a white breast of the swelling
earth, and might fulfil in the seventeenth generation the word of
Medea spoken at Thera, which of old the passionate child of Aietes,
queen of Colchians, breathed from immortal lips. For on this wise
spake she to the warrior Jason's god-begotten crew: 'Hearken O sons
of high-hearted mortals and of gods. Lo I say unto you that from this
sea-lashed land the daughter[1] of Epaphos shall sometime be planted
with a root to bring forth cities that shall possess the minds of men,
where Zeus Ammon's shrine is builded.

And instead of short-finned dolphins they shall take to them fleet
mares, and reins instead of oars shall they ply, and speed the
whirlwind-footed car.

By that augury shall it come to pass that Thera shall be mother-city
of mighty commonwealths, even the augury that once at the outpourings
of the Tritonian lake Euphemos leaping from the prow took at the hands
of a god who in the likeness of man tendered this present to the
stranger of a clod of earth; and the Father Kronian Zeus confirmed it
with a peal of thunder.

[2]What time he came suddenly upon them as they were hanging against
the ship the bronze-fluked anchor, fleet Argo's bridle; for now for
twelve days had we borne from Ocean over long backs of desert-land our
sea-ship, after that by my counsel we drew it up upon the shore.

Then came to us the solitary god, having put on the splendid semblance
of a noble man; and he began friendly speech, such as well-doers use
when they bid new-comers to the feast.

But the plea of the sweet hope of home suffered us not to stay. Then
he said that he was Eurypylos son of the earth-embracer, immortal
Ennosides; and for that he was aware that we hasted to be gone, he
straightway caught up of the chance earth at his feet a gift that he
would fain bestow. Nor was the hero unheeding, but leaping on the
shore and striking hand in hand he took to him the fateful clod.

But now I hear that it was washed down from the ship and departed into
the sea with the salt spray of evening, following the watery deep. Yet
verily often did I charge the labour-lightening servants that they
should keep it safe, but they forgat: and now upon this island[3]
is the imperishable seed of spacious Libya strown before the time
appointed; for if the royal son[4] of Poseidon, lord of horses, whom
Europa Tityos' child bare him on Kephisos' banks, had in his own home
thrown it down beside the mouth of Hades'[5] gulf, then in the fourth
generation of his sons his seed would have taken that wide continent
of Libya, for then they would have gone forth from mighty Lakedaimon,
and from the Argive gulf, and from Mykenai.

But now he shall in wedlock with a stranger-wife raise up a chosen
seed, who coming to this island with worship of their gods shall beget
one to be lord of the misty plains[6]. Him sometime shall Phoibos in
his golden house admonish by oracles, when in the latter days he shall
go down into the inner shrine at Pytho, to bring a host in ships to
the rich Nile-garden of the son of Kronos[7].'

So ran Medea's rhythmic utterance, and motionless in silence the
godlike heroes bowed their heads as they hearkened to the counsels of
wisdom.

Thee, happy son[8] of Polymnestos, did the oracle of the Delphian
bee[9] approve with call unasked to be the man whereof the word was
spoken, for thrice she bid thee hail and declared thee by decree of
fate Kyrene's king, what time thou enquiredst what help should be from
heaven for thy labouring speech. And verily even now long afterward,
as in the bloom of rosy-blossomed spring, in the eighth descent from
Battos the leaf of Arkesilas is green. To him Apollo and Pytho have
given glory in the chariot-race at the hands of the Amphiktyons: him
will I commend to the Muses, and withal the tale of the all-golden
fleece; for this it was the Minyai sailed to seek when the god-given
glories of their race began.

What power first drave them in the beginning to the quest? What
perilous enterprise clenched them with strong nails of adamant?

There was an oracle of God which said that Pelias should die by force
or by stern counsels of the proud sons of Aiolos, and there had come
to him a prophecy that froze his cunning heart, spoken at the central
stone of tree-clad mother Earth, that by every means he should keep
safe guard against the man of one sandal, whensoever from a homestead
on the hills he shall have come to the sunny land of glorious Iolkos,
whether a stranger or a citizen he be.

So in the fulness of time he came, wielding two spears, a wondrous
man; and the vesture that was upon him was twofold, the garb of the
Magnetes' country close fitting to his splendid limbs, but above he
wore a leopard-skin to turn the hissing showers; nor were the bright
locks of his hair shorn from him but over all his back ran rippling
down. Swiftly he went straight on, and took his stand, making trial of
his dauntless soul, in the marketplace when the multitude was full.

Him they knew not; howbeit some one looking reverently on him would
speak on this wise: 'Not Apollo surely is this, nor yet Aphrodite's
lord of the brazen car; yea and in glistening Naxos died ere now, they
say, the children of Iphimedeia, Otos and thou, bold king Ephialtes:
moreover Tityos was the quarry of Artemis' swift arrow sped from her
invincible quiver, warning men to touch only the loves within their
power.'

They answering each to each thus talked; but thereon with headlong
haste of mules and polished car came Pelias; and he was astonied when
he gazed on the plain sign of the single sandal on the right foot. But
he dissembled his fear within his heart and said unto him, 'What land,
O stranger, dost thou claim to be thy country, and who of earth-born
mortals bare thee of her womb out of due time[10]? Tell me thy race
and shame it not by hateful lies.'

And him with gentle words the other answered undismayed, 'I say to
thee that I bear with me the wisdom of Cheiron, for from Chariklo
and Philyra I come, from the cave where the Centaur's pure daughters
reared me up, and now have I fulfilled twenty years among them without
deceitful word or deed, and I am come home to seek the ancient honour
of my father, held now in rule unlawful, which of old Zeus gave to
the chief Aiolos and his children. For I hear that Pelias yielding
lawlessly to evil thoughts hath robbed it from my fathers whose right
it was from the beginning; for they, when first I looked upon the
light, fearing the violence of an injurious lord, made counterfeit
of a dark funeral in the house as though I were dead, and amid the
wailing of women sent me forth secretly in purple swathing-bands, when
none but Night might know the way we went, and gave me to Cheiron the
son of Kronos to be reared.

But of these things the chief ye know. Now therefore kind citizens
show me plainly the house of my fathers who drave white horses; for it
shall hardly be said that a son of Aison, born in the land, is come
hither to a strange and alien soil. And Jason was the name whereby the
divine Beast[11] spake to me.'

Thus he said, and when he had entered in, the eyes of his father knew
him; and from his aged eyelids gushed forth tears, for his soul was
glad within him when he beheld his son, fairest of men and goodliest
altogether.

Then came to him both brothers, when they heard that Jason was come
home, Pheres from hard by, leaving the fountain Hypereis, and out of
Messena Amythaon, and quickly came Admetos and Melampos to welcome
home their cousin. And at a common feast with gracious words Jason
received them and made them friendly cheer, culling for five long
nights and days the sacred flower of joyous life.

But on the sixth day he began grave speech, and set the whole matter
before his kinsmen from the beginning, and they were of one mind with
him.

Then quickly he rose up with them from their couches, and they came to
Pelias' hall, and they made haste and entered and stood within.

And when he heard them the king himself came forth to them, even the
son of Tyro of the lovely hair. Then Jason with gentle voice opened on
him the stream of his soft speech, and laid foundation of wise words:
'Son of Poseidon of the Rock, too ready are the minds of mortal men to
choose a guileful gain rather than righteousness, howbeit they travel
ever to a stern reckoning. But thee and me it behoveth to give law
to our desires, and to devise weal for the time to come. Though
thou knowest it yet will I tell thee, how that the same mother bare
Kretheus and rash Salmoneus, and in the third generation we again were
begotten and look upon the strength of the golden sun. Now if there
be enmity between kin, the Fates stand aloof and would fain hide the
shame. Not with bronze-edged swords nor with javelins doth it beseem
us twain to divide our forefathers' great honour, nor needeth it,
for lo! all sheep and tawny herds of kine I yield, and all the lands
whereon thou feedest them, the spoil of my sires wherewith thou makest
fat thy wealth. That these things furnish forth thy house moveth me
not greatly; but for the kingly sceptre and throne whereon the son of
Kretheus sate of old and dealt justice to his chivalry, these without
wrath between us yield to me, lest some new evil arise up therefrom.'

Thus he spake, and mildly also did Pelias make reply: 'I will be even
as thou wilt, but now the sere of life alone remaineth to me, whereas
the flower of thy youth is but just burgeoning; thou art able to take
away the sin that maketh the powers beneath the earth wroth with us:
for Phrixos biddeth us lay his ghost, and that we go to the house of
Aietes, and bring thence the thick-fleeced hide of the ram, whereby of
old he was delivered from the deep and from the impious weapons of his
stepmother. This message cometh to me in the voice of a strange dream:
also I have sent to ask of the oracle at Kastalia whether it be worth
the quest, and the oracle chargeth me straightway to send a ship on
the sacred mission. This deed do thou offer me to do, and I swear to
give thee up the sway and kingly rule. Let Zeus the ancestral god of
thee and me be witness of my oath and stablish it surely in thine
eyes.'

So they made this covenant and parted; but Jason straightway bade
heralds to make known everywhere that a sailing was toward. And
quickly came three sons of Zeus, men unwearied in battle, whose
mothers were Alkmene and Leto of the glancing eyes[12], and two
tall-crested men of valour, children of the Earth-shaker, whose honour
was perfect as their might, from Pylos and from farthest Tainaros:
hereby was the excellence of their fame established--even Euphemos'
fame, and thine, wide-ruling Periklymenos. And at Apollo's bidding
came the minstrel father of song, Orpheus of fair renown.

And Hermes of the golden staff sent two sons to the toilsome task,
Echion and Eurytos in the joy of their youth; swiftly they came, even
from their dwelling at the foot of Pangaios: and willingly and with
glad heart their father Boreas, king of winds, harnessed Zetes and
Kalaïs, men both with bright wings shooting from their backs. For Hera
kindled within those sons of gods the all-persuading sweet desire
for the ship Argo, that none should be left behind and stay by his
mother's side in savourless and riskless life, but each, even were
death the price, achieve in company with his peers a magic potency of
his valour.

Now when that goodly crew were come to Iolkos, Jason mustered them
with thanks to each, and the seer Mopsos prophesied by omens and by
sacred lots, and with good will sped the host on board.

And when they had hung the anchors over the prow, then their chief
taking in his hands a golden goblet stood up upon the stern and called
on Zeus whose spear is the lightning, and on the rush of waves and
winds and the nights and paths of the deep, to speed them quickly
over, and for days of cheer and friendly fortune of return. And from
the clouds a favourable voice of thunder pealed in answer; and there
came bright lightning flashes bursting through.

Then the heroes took heart in obedience to the heavenly signs; and the
seer bade them strike into the water with their oars, while he spake
to them of happy hopes; and in their rapid hands the rowing sped
untiringly.

And with breezes of the South they came wafted to the mouth of the
Axine sea; there they founded a shrine and sacred close of Poseidon,
god of seas, where was a red herd of Thracian bulls, and a new-built
altar of stone with hollow top[13].

Then as they set forth toward an exceeding peril they prayed the lord
of ships that they might shun the terrible shock of the clashing
rocks: for they were twain that had life, and plunged along more
swiftly than the legions of the bellowing winds; but that travel of
the seed of gods made end of them at last[14].

After that they came to the Phasis; there they fought with dark-faced
Kolchians even in the presence of Aietes. And there the queen of
keenest darts, the Cyprus-born, first brought to men from Olympus the
frenzied bird, the speckled wry-neck[15], binding it to a four-spoked
wheel without deliverance, and taught the son of Aison to be wise in
prayers and charms, that he might make Medea take no thought to honour
her parents, and longing for Hellas might drive her by persuasion's
lash, her heart afire with love.

Then speedily she showed him the accomplishment of the tasks her
father set, and mixing drugs with oil gave him for his anointment
antidotes of cruel pain, and they vowed to be joined together in sweet
wedlock.

But when Aietes had set in the midst a plough of adamant, and oxen
that from tawny jaws breathed flame of blazing fire, and with bronze
hoofs smote the earth in alternate steps, and had led them and yoked
them single-handed, he marked out in a line straight furrows, and for
a fathom's length clave the back of the loamy earth; then he spake
thus: 'This work let your king, whosoever he be that hath command
of the ship, accomplish me, and then let him bear away with him the
imperishable coverlet, the fleece glittering with tufts of gold.'

He said, and Jason flung off from him his saffron mantle, and putting
his trust in God betook himself to the work; and the fire made him not
to shrink, for that he had had heed to the bidding of the stranger
maiden skilled in all pharmacy. So he drew to him the plough and
made fast by force the bulls' necks in the harness, and plunged the
wounding goad into the bulk of their huge sides, and with manful
strain fulfilled the measure of his work. And a cry without speech
came from Aietes in his agony, at the marvel of the power he beheld.

Then to the strong man his comrades stretched forth their hands, and
crowned him with green wreaths, and greeted him with gracious words.
And thereupon the wondrous son[16] of Helios told him in what place
the knife of Phrixos had stretched the shining fell; yet he trusted
that this labour at least should never be accomplished by him. For it
lay in a thick wood and grasped by a terrible dragon's jaws, and he in
length and thickness was larger than their ship of fifty oars, which
the iron's blows had welded.

Long were it for me to go by the beaten track, for the time is nigh
out, and I know a certain short path, and many others look to me for
skill. The glaring speckled dragon, O Arkesilas, he slew by subtlety,
and by her own aid he stole away Medea, the murderess of Pelias. And
they went down into the deep of Ocean and into the Red Sea, and to the
Lemnian race of husbandslaying wives; there also they had games and
wrestled for a prize of vesture, and lay with the women of the land.

And then it was that in a stranger womb, by night or day, the fateful
seed was sown of the bright fortune of thy race. For there began the
generations of Euphemos, which should be thenceforth without end. And
in time mingling among the homes of Lakedaimonian men they made their
dwelling in the isle that once was Kalliste[17]: and thence the son
of Leto gave thy race the Libyan plain to till it and to do honour
therein to your gods, and to rule the divine city of golden-throned
Kyrene with devising of the counsels of truth.

Now hearken to a wise saying even as the wisdom of Oedipus. If one
with sharp axe lop the boughs of a great oak and mar the glorious
form, even in the perishing of the fruit thereof it yet giveth token
of that it was; whether at the last it come even to the winter fire,
or whether with upright pillars in a master's house it stand, to serve
drear service within alien walls, and the place thereof knoweth it no
more[18].

But thou art a physician most timely, and the god of healing maketh
thy light burn brightly. A gentle hand must thou set to a festering
wound. It is a small thing even for a slight man to shake a city, but
to set it firm again in its place this is hard struggle indeed, unless
with sudden aid God guide the ruler's hand. For thee are prepared the
thanks which these deeds win. Be strong to serve with all thy might
Kyrene's goodly destiny.

And of Homer's words take this to ponder in thy heart: _Of a good
messenger_, he saith, _cometh great honour to every deed._ Even to the
Muse is right messengership a gain. Now good cause have Kyrene and the
glorious house of Battos to know the righteous mind of Demophilos. For
he was a boy with boys, yet in counsels an old man of a hundred years:
and the evil tongue he robbeth of its loud voice, and hath learnt to
abhor the insolent, neither will he make strife against the good, nor
tarry when he hath a deed in hand. For a brief span hath opportunity
for men, but of him it is known surely when it cometh, and he waiteth
thereon a servant but no slave.

Now this they say is of all griefs the sorest, that one knowing good
should of necessity abide without lot therein. Yea thus doth Atlas
struggle now against the burden of the firmament, far from his native
land and his possessions. Yet the Titans were set free by immortal
Zeus. As time runneth on the breeze abateth and there are shiftings of
the sails. And he hath hope that when he shall have endured to the end
his grievous plague he shall see once more his home, and at Apollo's
fountain[19] joining in the feast give his soul to rejoice in her
youth, and amid citizens who love his art, playing on his carven lute,
shall enter upon peace, hurting and hurt of none. Then shall he tell
how fair a fountain of immortal verse he made to flow for Arkesilas,
when of late he was the guest of Thebes.


[Footnote 1: Libya. Epaphos was son of Zeus by Io.]

[Footnote 2: This incident happened during the wanderings of the
Argonauts on their return with the Golden Fleece from Kolchis to
Iolkos.]

[Footnote 3: Thera.]

[Footnote 4: Euphemos.]

[Footnote 5: At Tainaros there was a cave supposed to be a mouth of
Hades.]

[Footnote 6: Of Libya.]

[Footnote 7: The purport of this is: If Euphemos had taken the clod
safely home to Tainaros in Lakonia, then his great-grandsons with
emigrants from other Peloponnesian powers would have planted a colony
in Libya. But since the clod had fallen into the sea and would be
washed up on the shore of the island of Thera, it was necessary that
Euphemos' descendants should first colonize Thera, and then, but not
till the seventeenth generation, proceed, under Battos, to found the
colony of Kyrene in Libya.]

[Footnote 8: Battos.]

[Footnote 9: The priestess.]

[Footnote 10: The epithet [Greek: polias] is impossible to explain
satisfactorily. It has been suggested to me by Professor S.H. Butcher,
that [Greek: chamaigenaes] may have been equivalent to [Greek:
gaegenaes] and that Pelias may thus mean, half ironically, to imply
that Jason's stature, garb and mien, as well as his mysteriously
sudden appearance, argue him a son of one of the ancient giants who
had been seen of old among men.]

[Footnote 11: The Kentaur Cheiron.]

[Footnote 12: I. e. one son of Zeus and Alkmene, Herakles, and two
sons of Zeus and Leto, Kastor and Polydeukes.]

[Footnote 13: For the blood of the victims.]

[Footnote 14: The Symplegades having failed to crush the ship Argo
between them were themselves destroyed by the shock of their encounter
with each other. Probably a tradition of icebergs survived in this
story.]

[Footnote 15: Used as a love-charm.]

[Footnote 16: Aietes.]

[Footnote 17: Thera.]

[Footnote 18: In this parable the oak is the state, the boughs its
best men, the fire and the alien house destruction and servitude.]

[Footnote 19: The fountain Kyra in the heart of the city Kyrene.]



V.

FOR ARKESILAS OF KYRENE,

WINNER IN THE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

This ode celebrates the same victory as the foregoing. It would seem
that the chariot had been consecrated to Apollo and left in the temple
at Delphi, but the horses were brought home to Kyrene and led in
procession through the sacred street of Apollo, with their charioteer
Karrhotos, brother of Arkesilas' wife.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wide-reaching is the power of wealth, whensoever a mortal man hath
received it at the hands of Fate with pure virtue mingled, and
bringeth it to his home, a follower that winneth him many friends.
Arkesilas, thou favourite of the gods, thou verily seekest after it
with good report from the first steps of thy glorious life, with aid
of Kastor of the golden car, who after the wintry storm hath shed
bright calm about thy happy hearth[1].

Now the wise bear better the power that is given of God. And thou
walkest in righteousness amid thy prosperity which is now great;
first, for that thou art king of mighty cities, thy inborn virtue
hath brought this majestic honour to thy soul, and again thou art now
blessed in that from the famous Pythian games thou hast won glory by
thy steeds, and hast received this triumphal song of men, Apollo's
joy.

Therefore forget not, while at Kyrene round Aphrodite's pleasant
garden thy praise is sung, to set God above every other as the cause
thereof: also love thou Karrhotos[2] chiefest of thy friends; who
hath not brought with him Excuse the daughter of late-considering
Afterthought back to the house of the just-ruling sons of Battos; but
beside the waters of Kastalia a welcomed guest he crowned thy hair
with the crown of the conquering car, for the reins were safe[3] in
his hands throughout the twelve swift turns along the sacred course.

Of the strong harness brake he no whit: but there is hung up[4] all
that cunning work of the artificers that he brought with him when he
passed over the Krisaian hill to the plain within the valley of the
god: therefore now the chamber of cypress-wood possesseth it, hard by
the statue which the bow-bearing Kretans dedicated in the Parnassian
shrine, the natural image in one block[5]. Therefore with eager heart
it behoveth thee to go forth to meet him who hath done thee this good
service.

Thee also, son[6] of Alexibios, the Charites of lovely hair make
glorious. Blessed art thou for that after much toil thou hast a
monument of noble words. Among forty charioteers who fell[7] thou
didst with soul undaunted bring thy car unhurt, and hast now come back
from the glorious games unto the plain of Libya and the city of thy
sires.

Without lot in trouble hath there been never any yet, neither shall
be: yet still the ancient bliss of Battos followeth the race, albeit
with various fortune; a bulwark is it to the city, and to strangers a
most welcome light.

From Battos even deep-voiced lions[8] fled in fear when he uttered
before them a voice from overseas: for the captain and founder Apollo
gave the beasts over to dire terror, that he might not be false to his
oracles which he had delivered to the ruler of Kyrene.

Apollo it is who imparteth unto men and women cures for sore maladies,
and hath bestowed on them the lute, and giveth the Muse to whomsoever
he will, bringing into their hearts fair order of peace; and
inhabiteth the secret place of his oracles; whereby at Lakedaimon and
at Argos and at sacred Pylos he made to dwell the valiant sons of
Herakles and Aigimios[9].

From Sparta they say came my own dear famous race[10]: thence sprang
the sons of Aigeus who came to Thera, my ancestors, not without
help of God; but a certain destiny brought thither a feast of much
sacrifice[11], and thence receiving, O Apollo, thy Karneia we honour
at the banquet the fair-built city of Kyrene, which the spear-loving
strangers haunt[12], the Trojan seed of Antenor. For with Helen they
came thither after they had seen their native city smoking in the
fires of war.

And now to that chivalrous race do the men whom Aristoteles[13]
brought, opening with swift ships a track through the deep sea, give
greeting piously, and draw nigh to them with sacrifice and gifts.

He also planted greater groves of gods, and made a paved road[14] cut
straight over the plain, to be smitten with horsehoofs in processions
that beseech Apollo's guardianship for men; and there at the end of
the market-place he lieth apart in death. Blessed was he while he
dwelt among men, and since his death the people worship him as their
hero.

And apart from him before their palace lie other sacred kings that
have their lot with Hades; and even now perchance they hear, with
such heed as remaineth to the dead, of this great deed sprinkled with
kindly dew of outpoured song triumphal, whence have they bliss in
common with their son Arkesilas unto whom it falleth due.

Him it behoveth by the song of the young men to celebrate Phoibos of
the golden sword, seeing that from Pytho he hath won a recompense of
his cost in this glad strain of glorious victory.

Of him the wise speak well: I but repeat their words saying that he
cherisheth understanding above his years, that in eloquent speech and
boldness he is as the wide-winged eagle among birds, and his strength
in combat like a tower. And he hath wings to soar with the Muses,
as his mother before him, and now hath he proved him a cunning
charioteer: and by all ways that lead to honour at home hath he
adventured.

As now the favour of God perfecteth his might, so for the time to
come, blest children of Kronos, grant him to keep it in counsel and
in deed, that never at any time the wintry blast of the late autumn
winds[15] sweep him away. Surely the mighty mind of Zeus guideth the
destiny of the men he loveth. I pray that to the seed of Battos he may
at Olympia grant a like renown.


[Footnote 1: Kastor was not only a patron of charioteers, but also,
with his twin-brother Polydeukes, a protector of mariners and giver of
fair weather.]

[Footnote 2: The charioteer.]

[Footnote 3: I. e. well-handled and un-broken in the sharp turns round
the goal.]

[Footnote 4: I. e. in Apollo's temple at Delphi.]

[Footnote 5: This would seem to have been a piece of wood growing
naturally in the form of a man.]

[Footnote 6: Karrhotos.]

[Footnote 7: This seems great havoc among the starters. Probably
besides the forty who fell there were others who were not actually
upset but yet did not win. No doubt the race must have been run in
heats, but these must still have been crowded enough to make the crush
at the turns exceedingly dangerous.]

[Footnote 8: Pausanias says that Battos, the founder of Kyrene, was
dumb when he went to Africa, but that on suddenly meeting a lion the
fright gave him utterance. According to Pindar the lions seem to have
been still more alarmed, being startled by Battos' foreign accent.]

[Footnote 9: The Dorians.]

[Footnote 10: There were Aigidai at Sparta and Spartan colonies, of
which Kyrene was one, and also at Thebes: to the latter branch of the
family Pindar belonged.]

[Footnote 11: The Karneia, a Dorian feast of which we hear often in
history.]

[Footnote 12: These Trojan refugees were supposed to have anciently
settled on the site where Kyrene was afterwards built. Battos (or
Aristoteles) and his new settlers honoured the dead Trojans as tutelar
heroes of the spot.]

[Footnote 13: Battos.]

[Footnote 14: The sacred street of Apollo, along which the procession
moved which sang this ode. The pavement, and the tombs cut in the rock
on each side are still to be seen, or at least were in 1817, when the
Italian traveller Della Cella visited the place. Böckh quotes from
his Viaggio da Tripoli di Barberia alle frontiere occedentali dell'
Egitto, p. 139: 'Oggi ho passeggiato in una delle strade (di Cirene)
che serba ancora Papparenza di essere stata fra le più cospicue. Non
solo è tutta intagliata nel vivo sasso, ma a due lati è fiancheggiata
da lunga fila di tombe quadrate di dieci circa piedi di altezza, anch'
esse tutte d'un pezzo scavate nella roccia.']

[Footnote 15: I. e., probably, calamity in old age.]



VI.

FOR XENOKRATES OF AKRAGAS,

WINNER IN THE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

This victory was won B.C. 494, when Pindar was twenty-eight years old,
and the ode was probably written to be sung at Delphi immediately
on the event. Thus, next to the tenth Pythian, written eight years
before, this is the earliest of Pindar's poems that remains to us.

Xenokrates was a son of Ainesidamos and brother of Theron. The second
Isthmian is also in his honour.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hearken! for once more we plough the field[1] of Aphrodite of the
glancing eyes, or of the Graces call it if you will, in this our
pilgrimage to the everlasting centre-stone of deep-murmuring[2] earth.

For there for the blissful Emmenidai, and for Akragas by the
riverside, and chiefliest for Xenokrates, is builded a ready treasure
of song within the valley of Apollo rich in golden gifts.

That treasure of his shall neither wind nor wintry rain-storm coming
from strange lands, as a fierce host born of the thunderous cloud,
carry into the hiding places of the sea, to be beaten by the
all-sweeping drift:

But in clear light its front shall give tidings of a victory won
in Krisa's dells, glorious in the speech of men to thy father
Thrasyboulos, and to all his kin with him.

Thou verily in that thou settest him ever at thy right hand cherishest
the charge which once upon the mountains they say the son[3] of
Philyra gave to him of exceeding might, even to the son of Peleas,
when he had lost his sire: first that of all gods he most reverence
Kronos' son, the deep-voiced lord of lightnings and of thunders, and
then that he never rob of like honour a parent's spell of life.

Also of old time had mighty Antilochos this mind within him, who died
for his father's sake, when he abode the murderous onset of Memnon,
the leader of the Ethiop hosts.

For Nestor's chariot was stayed by a horse that was stricken of the
arrows of Paris, and Memnon made at him with his mighty spear. Then
the heart of the old man of Messene was troubled, and he cried unto
his son; nor wasted he his words in vain; in his place stood up the
godlike man and bought his father's flight by his own death. So by the
young men of that ancient time he was deemed to have wrought a mighty
deed, and in succouring of parents to be supreme.

These things are of the past; but of men that now are Thrasyboulos
hath come nearest to our fathers' gauge. And following his uncle also
he hath made glory to appear for him; and with wisdom doth he handle
wealth, neither gathereth the fruit of an unrighteous or overweening
youth, but rather of knowledge amid the secret places of the Pierides.
And to thee, Earthshaker, who didst devise ventures of steeds, with
right glad heart he draweth nigh. Sweet is his spirit toward the
company of his guests, yea sweeter than the honeycomb, the toil of
bees.


[Footnote 1: The field of poesy.]

[Footnote 2: An epithet appropriate to volcanic soils.]

[Footnote 3: Cheiron.]



VII.

FOR MEGAKLES OF ATHENS,

WINNER IN THE FOUR-HORSE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

Megakles won this victory B.C. 490, the year of the battle of
Marathon. He was a member of the great house of the Alkmaionidai, to
which Kleisthenes and Perikles belonged. Megakles was a frequent name
in the family: this Megakles was probably the nephew, possibly the
son, of Kleisthenes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fairest of preludes is the great name of Athens to whosoever will lay
foundation of songs for the mighty race of Alkmaionidai and for their
steeds. What country, what house among all lands shall I name more
glorious throughout Hellas?

For unto all cities is the fame familiar of the citizens of
Erechtheus, who at divine Pytho have wrought thee, O Apollo, a
glorious house[1].

And I hereto am led by victories, at Isthmos five, and one
pre-eminent, won at Olympia at the feast of Zeus, and two at Kirrha,
which thou, O Megakles, and thy sire have won.

Now at this new good fortune I rejoice; yet somewhat also I grieve,
even to behold how envy requiteth noble deeds[2]. Yet thus ever, they
say, must fair hap abiding with a man engender bad with good.


[Footnote 1: The Alkmainodai had lately been spending large sums on
the rebuilding of Apollo's temple at Delphi.]

[Footnote 2: Megakles was twice ostracized.]



VIII.

FOR ARISTOMENES OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE WRESTLING-MATCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

The precise date of this ode is uncertain, but there is strong
internal evidence of its having been written soon after the battle of
Salamis, after which, as is well known, the [Greek: aristeia] or first
honours for valour, were awarded to Aigina. The insolence of the
barbarian despot seems to be symbolized by that of the giants Typhon
and Porphyrion.

The ode was apparently to be sung on the winner's return to Aigina. No
less than eleven of the extant odes were written for winners from that
island.

       *       *       *       *       *

O kindly Peace, daughter of Righteousness, thou that makest cities
great, and boldest the supreme keys of counsels and of wars, welcome
thou this honour to Aristomenes, won in the Pythian games.

Thou knowest how alike to give and take gentleness in due season: thou
also, if any have moved thy heart unto relentless wrath, dost terribly
confront the enemy's might, and sinkest Insolence in the sea.

Thus did Porphyrion provoke thee unaware. Now precious is the gain
that one beareth away from the house of a willing giver. But violence
shall ruin a man at the last, boast he never so loudly. He of Kilikia,
Typhon of the hundred heads, escaped not this, neither yet the king of
giants[1]: but by the thunderbolt they fell and by the bow of Apollo,
who with kind intent hath welcomed Xenarches home from Kirrha, crowned
with Parnassian wreaths and Dorian song.

Not far from the Graces' ken falleth the lot of this righteous
island-commonwealth, that hath attained unto the glorious deeds of the
sons of Aiakos[2]: from the beginning is her fame perfect, for she is
sung of as the nurse of heroes foremost in many games and in violent
fights: and in her mortal men also is she pre-eminent.

But my time faileth me to offer her all I might tell at length by lute
and softer voice of man, so that satiety vex not.

So let that which lieth in my path, my debt to thee, O boy, the
youngest of thy country's glories, run on apace, winged by my art.

For in wrestlings thou art following the footsteps of thy uncles, and
shamest neither Theognetos at Olympia, nor the victory that at Isthmos
was won by Kleitomachos' stalwart limbs.

And in that thou makest great the clan of the Midylidai thou attainest
unto the very praise which on a time the son of Oikleus spake in
a riddle, when he saw at seven-gated Thebes the sons of the Seven
standing to their spears, what time from Argos came the second race on
their new enterprise[3]. Thus spake he while they fought: 'By nature,
son, the noble temper of thy sires shineth forth in thee. I see
clearly the speckled dragon that Alkmaion weareth on his bright
shield, foremost at the Kadmean gates.

And he who in the former fight fared ill, hero Adrastos, is now
endowed with tidings of a better omen. Yet in his own house his
fortune shall be contrariwise: for he alone of all the Danaan host,
after that he shall have gathered up the bones of his dead son, shall
by favour of the gods come back with unharmed folk to the wide streets
of Abas[4].'

On this wise spake Amphiaraos. Yea and with joy I too myself throw
garlands on Alkmaion's grave, and shower it withal with songs, for
that being my neighbour and guardian of my possessions[5] he met me as
I went up to the earth's centre-stone, renowned in song, and showed
forth the gift of prophecy which belongeth unto his house[6].

But thou, far-darter, ruler of the glorious temple whereto all men go
up, amid the glens of Pytho didst there grant this the greatest of
joys: and at home before didst thou bring to him at the season of thy
feast the keen-sought prize of the pentathlon. My king, with willing
heart I make avowal that through thee is harmony before mine eyes in
all that I sing of every conqueror.

By the side of our sweet-voiced song of triumph hath Righteousness
taken her stand, and I pray, O Xenarches[7], that the favour of God be
unfailing toward the fortune of thee and thine. For if one hath good
things to his lot without long toil, to many he seemeth therefore to
be wise among fools and to be crowning his life by right devising of
the means. But these things lie not with men: it is God that ordereth
them, who setteth up one and putteth down another, so that he is bound
beneath the hands of the adversary.

Now at Megara also hast thou won a prize, and in secluded Marathon,
and in the games of Hera in thine own land, three times, Aristomenes,
hast thou overcome.

And now on the bodies of four others[8] hast thou hurled thyself with
fierce intent, to whom the Pythian feast might not award, as unto
thee, the glad return, nor the sweet smile that welcometh thee to thy
mother's side; nay but by secret ways they shrink from meeting their
enemies, stricken down by their evil hap.

Now he that hath lately won glory in the time of his sweet youth is
lifted on the wings of his strong hope and soaring valour, for his
thoughts are above riches.

In a little moment groweth up the delight of men; yea and in like sort
falleth it to the ground, when a doom adverse hath shaken it.

Things of a day--what are we, and what not? Man is a dream of shadows.

Nevertheless when a glory from God hath shined on them, a clear light
abideth upon men, and serene life.

Aigina[9], mother dear, this city in her march among the free, with
Zeus and lordly Aiakos, with Peleus and valiant Telamon and with
Achilles, guard thou well.



[Footnote 1: Porphyrion.]

[Footnote 2: Aiakos and his descendants, especially Aias, were the
chief national heroes of Aigina.]

[Footnote 3: It seems doubtful what this legend exactly was. Either
Amphiaraos, during the attack of the first Seven against Thebes,
saw by prophetic vision the future battle of the second Seven, the
Epigonoi, among whom were his own son Alkmaion, and Adrastos, the sole
survivor of the first Seven; or else these are the words of his oracle
after his death, spoken when the battle of the Epigonoi had begun but
was not yet ended.]

[Footnote 4: Abas was an ancient king of Argos.]

[Footnote 5: Probably there was a shrine of Alkmaion near Pindar's
house at Thebes, so that he considered his household to be under the
hero's protection: perhaps he had deposited money in the shrine, for
temples were often used as treasuries.]

[Footnote 6: Probably in some vision seen by Pindar on his journey to
Delphi.]

[Footnote 7: Father of Aristomenes.]

[Footnote 8: His competitors in four ties of the wrestling-match.]

[Footnote 9: The nymph, protectress of the island.]



IX.

FOR TELESIKRATES OF KYRENE,

WINNER OF THE FOOT-RACE IN FULL ARMOUR.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Hellenic heavy-armed soldier was often called upon to advance at a
run, as for instance in the charge at Marathon. With a view no doubt
to such occasions this race in full armour had been instituted at
Pytho in 498, and in 478 it was won by Telesikrates. The ode was
probably sung in a procession at Thebes, before Telesikrates had gone
back to Kyrene, but the legends related are mainly connected with
Kyrene. Probably the commentators are right in supposing
that Telesikrates was to take home with him a bride from the
mother-country, a fact which makes the legends told specially
appropriate.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have desire to proclaim with aid of the deep-vested Graces a victory
at Pytho of Telesikrates bearing the shield of bronze, and to speak
aloud his name, for his fair fortune and the glory wherewith he hath
crowned Kyrene, city of charioteers.

Kyrene[1] once from Pelion's wind-echoing dells Leto's son, the
flowing-haired, caught up and in a golden car bore away the
huntress-maiden to the place where he made her queen of a land rich in
flocks, yea richest of all lands in the fruits of the field, that her
home might be the third part[2] of the mainland of earth, a stock that
should bear lovely bloom. And silver-foot Aphrodite awaited the Delian
stranger issuing from his car divine, and lightly laid on him her
hand: then over their sweet bridal-bed she cast the loveliness of
maiden shame, and in a common wedlock joined the god and the daughter
of wide-ruling Hypseus, who then was king of the haughty Lapithai,
a hero whose father's father was the Ocean-god--for amid the famous
mountain-dells of Pindos the Naiad Kreüsa bare him after she had
delight in the bed of Peneus, Kreüsa, daughter of Earth.

Now the child he reared was Kyrene of the lovely arms: She was not one
who loved the pacings to and fro before the loom, neither the delights
of feastings with her fellows within the house, but with bronze
javelins and a sword she fought against and slew wild beasts of prey;
yea and much peace and sure she gave thereby to her father's herds,
but for sleep, the sharer of her bed, short spent she it and sweet,
descending on her eyelids as the dawn drew near.

Once as she struggled alone, without spear, with a terrible lion, he
of the wide quiver, far-darting Apollo, found her: and straightway he
called Cheiron from his hall and spake to him aloud: 'Son of Philyra,
come forth from thy holy cave, and behold and wonder at the spirit of
this woman, and her great might, what strife she wageth here with soul
undaunted, a girl with heart too high for toil to quell; for her mind
shaketh not in the storm of fear. What man begat her? From what tribe
was she torn to dwell in the secret places of the shadowing hills? She
hath assayed a struggle unachievable. Is it lawful openly to put forth
my hand to her, or rather on a bridal-bed pluck the sweet flower?'

To him the Centaur bold with a frank smile on his mild brow made
answer straightway of his wisdom: 'Secret are wise Lovecraft's keys
unto love's sanctities, O Phoibos, and among gods and men alike all
deem this shame, to have pleasure of marriage at the first openly. Now
even thee, who mayest have no part in lies, thy soft desire hath led
to dissemble in this thy speech.

The maiden's lineage dost thou, O king, enquire of me--thou who
knowest the certain end of all things, and all ways? How many leaves
the earth sendeth forth in spring, how many grains of sand in sea and
river are rolled by waves and the winds' stress, what shall come to
pass, and whence it shall be, thou discernest perfectly. But if even
against wisdom I must match myself, I will speak on. To wed this
damsel camest thou unto this glen, and thou art destined to bear her
beyond the sea to a chosen garden of Zeus, where thou shalt make her a
city's queen, when thou hast gathered together an island-people to
a hill in the plain's midst. And now shall queenly Libya of broad
meadow-lands well-pleased receive for thee within a golden house thy
glorious bride, and there make gift to her of a portion in the land,
to be an inhabiter thereof with herself, neither shall it be lacking
in tribute of plants bearing fruit after all kinds, neither a stranger
to the beasts of chase. There shall she bring forth a son, whom
glorious Hermes taking up from his mother's arms shall bear to the
fair-throned Hours and to Earth: and they shall set the babe upon
their knees, and nectar and ambrosia they shall distil upon his lips,
and shall make him as an immortal, a Zeus or a holy Apollo, to men
beloved of him a very present help, a tutelar of flocks, and to some
Agreus and Nomios; but to others Aristaios shall be his name.'

By these words he made him ready for the bridal's sweet fulfilment.
And swift the act and short the ways of gods who are eager to an end.
That same day made accomplishment of the matter, and in a golden
chamber of Libya they lay together; where now she haunteth a city
excellent in beauty and glorious in the games.

And now at sacred Pytho hath the son of Karneadas wedded that city
to the fair flower of good luck: for by his victory there he hath
proclaimed Kyrene's name, even her's who shall receive him with glad
welcome home, to the country of fair women bringing precious honour
out of Delphi.

Great merits stir to many words: yet to be brief and skilful on
long themes is a good hearing for bards: for fitness of times is in
everything alike of chief import.

That Iolaos had respect thereto[3] seven-gated Thebes knoweth well,
for when he had stricken down the head of Eurystheus beneath the edge
of the sword, she buried the slayer beneath the earth in the tomb of
Amphitryon the charioteer, where his father's father was laid, a guest
of the Spartoi, who had left his home to dwell among the streets of
the sons of Kadmos who drave white horses. To him and to Zeus at once
did wise Alkmene bear the strength of twin sons prevailing in battle.

Dull is that man who lendeth not his voice to Herakles, nor hath in
remembrance continually the waters of Dirke that nurtured him and
Iphikles. To them will I raise a song of triumph for that I have
received good at their hands, after that I had prayed to them that the
pure light of the voiceful Graces might not forsake me. For at Aigma
and on the hill of Nisos twice ere now I say that I have sung Kyrene's
praise, and by my act have shunned the reproach of helpless dumbness.

Wherefore if any of the citizens be our friend, yea even if he be
against us, let him not seek to hide the thing that hath been well
done in the common cause, and so despise the word of the old god of
the sea[4]. He biddeth one give praise with the whole heart to noble
deeds, yea even to an enemy, so be it that justice be on his side.

Full many times at the yearly feast of Pallas have the maidens seen
thee winner, and silently they prayed each for herself that such an
one as thou, O Telesikrates, might be her beloved husband or her son;
and thus also was it at the games of Olympia and of ample-bosomed
Earth[5], and at all in thine own land.

Me anywise to slake my thirst for song the ancient glory of thy
forefathers summoneth to pay its due and rouse it yet again--to tell
how that for love of a Libyan woman there went up suitors to the city
of Irasa to woo Antaios' lovely-haired daughter of great renown; whom
many chiefs of men, her kinsmen, sought to wed, and many strangers
also; for the beauty of her was marvellous, and they were fain to cull
the fruit whereto her gold-crowned youth had bloomed.

But her father gained for his daughter a marriage more glorious still.
Now he had heard how sometime Danaos at Argos devised for his forty
and eight maiden daughters, ere mid-day was upon them, a wedding
of utmost speed--for he straightway set the whole company at the
race-course end, and bade determine by a foot-race which maiden each
hero should have, of all the suitors that had come.

Even on this wise gave the Libyan a bridegroom to his daughter, and
joined the twain. At the line he set the damsel, having arrayed her
splendidly, to be the goal and prize, and proclaimed in the midst that
he should lead her thence to be his bride who, dashing to the front,
should first touch the robes she wore.

Thereon Alexidamos, when that he had sped through the swift course,
took by her hand the noble maiden, and led her through the troops of
Nomad horsemen. Many the leaves and wreaths they showered on him; yea
and of former days many plumes of victories had he won.



[Footnote 1: A Thessalian maiden, from whom, according to this legend,
the colony of Kyrene in Africa took its name.]

[Footnote 2: I. e. Libya, the continent which we now call Africa.]

[Footnote 3: I. e. by seizing the moment left to him before it should
be too late to act. Thebes and Kyrene were connected by the fact that
members of the Aigid family lived at both places.]

[Footnote 4: Nereus. Powers of divination and wisdom generally are
often attributed to sea-deities.]

[Footnote 5: I. e. at Delphi or Pytho. As being the supposed centre of
the Earth it was the place of the worship of the Earth-goddess.]



X.

FOR HIPPOKLEAS OF THESSALY,

WINNER IN THE TWO-STADION FOOT-RACE OF BOYS.

       *       *       *       *       *

The only reason we know for the digression about Perseus which
occupies great part of this ode seems to be that Thorax, who engaged
Pindar to write it for Hippokleas, and perhaps Hippokleas himself,
belonged to the family of the Aleuadai, who were descended through
Herakles from Perseus.

This ode is the earliest entire poem of Pindar's which survives. He
wrote it when he was twenty years old. The simplicity of the style and
manner of composition are significant of this. But there can scarcely
be said to be traces here of Pindar's early tendency in dealing with
mythological allusions to 'sow not with the hand but with the whole
sack,' which Korinna advised him to correct, and which is conspicuous
in a fragment remaining to us of one of his Hymns.

       *       *       *       *       *

Happy is Lakedaimon, blessed is Thessaly: in both there reigneth a
race sprung from one sire, from Herakles bravest in the fight. What
vaunt is this unseasonable? Nay, now, but Pytho calleth me, and
Pelinnaion[1], and the sons of Aleuas who would fain lead forth the
loud voices of a choir of men in honour of Hippokleas.

For now hath he tasted the joy of games, and to the host of the
dwellers round about hath the valley beneath Parnassos proclaimed him
best among the boys who ran the double race[2].

O Apollo, sweet is the end when men attain thereto, and the beginning
availed more when it is speeded of a god. Surely of thy devising were
his deeds: and this his inborn valour hath trodden in the footsteps
of his father twice victor at Olympia in panoply of war-affronting
arms[3]: moreover the games in the deep meadow beneath Kirrha's cliff
gave victory to the fleet feet of Phrikias[4].

May good luck follow them, so that even in after days the splendour of
their wealth shall bloom. Of the pleasant things of Hellas they
have no scanty portion to their lot; may they happen on no envious
repentings of the gods. A god's heart, it may be, is painless ever;
but happy and a theme of poet's song is that man who for his valiance
of hands or feet the chiefest prizes hath by strength and courage won,
and in his life-time seen his young son by good hap attaining to the
Pythian crown. Never indeed shall he climb the brazen heaven, but
whatsoever splendours we of mortal race may reach, through such he
hath free course even to the utmost harbourage. But neither by taking
ship, neither by any travel on foot, to the Hyperborean folk shalt
thou find the wondrous way.

Yet of old the chieftain Perseus entered into their houses and feasted
among them, when that he had lighted on them as they were sacrificing
ample hecatombs of asses to their god. For ever in their feasts and
hymns hath Apollo especial joy, and laugheth to see the braying ramp
of the strange beasts. Nor is the Muse a stranger to their lives, but
everywhere are stirring to and fro dances of maidens and shrill noise
of pipes: and binding golden bay-leaves in their hair they make them
merry cheer. Nor pestilence nor wasting eld approach that hallowed
race: they toil not neither do they fight, and dwell unharmed of cruel
Nemesis.

In the eagerness of his valiant heart went of old the son of Danaë,
for that Athene led him on his way, unto the company of that blessed
folk. Also he slew the Gorgon and bare home her head with serpent
tresses decked, to the island folk a stony death. I ween there is no
marvel impossible if gods have wrought thereto.

Let go the oar, and quickly drive into the earth an anchor from the
prow, to save us from the rocky reef, for the glory of my song of
praise flitteth like a honey-bee from tale to tale.

I have hope that when the folk of Ephyra pour forth my sweet strains
by Peneus' side, yet more glorious shall I make their Hippokleas for
his crowns and by my songs among his fellows and his elders, and I
will make him possess the minds of the young maidens.

For various longings stir secretly the minds of various men; yet each
if he attain to the thing he striveth for will hold his eager desire
for the time present to him, but what a year shall bring forth, none
shall foreknow by any sign.

My trust is in the kindly courtesy of my host Thorax, of him who to
speed my fortune hath yoked this four-horse car of the Pierides, as
friend for friend, and willing guide for guide.

As gold to him that trieth it by a touch-stone, so is a true soul
known.

His noble brethren also will we praise, for that they exalt and make
great the Thessalians' commonwealth. For in the hands of good men
lieth the good piloting of the cities wherein their fathers ruled.


[Footnote 1: Hippokleas' birth-place.]

[Footnote 2: Down the stadion (220 yards) and back.]

[Footnote 3: I. e. in the race run in full armour, like that at Pytho
which Telesikrates, of Kyrene won, celebrated in the fore-going ode.]

[Footnote 4: Probably a horse with which Hippokleas' father won a race
at Pytho.]



XI.

FOR THRASYDAIOS OF THEBES,

WINNER IN THE BOYS' SHORT FOOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this victory was B.C. 478, nearly two years after the
battle of Plataea, and the deliverance of Thebes from Persian
influence and the sway of a tyrannous oligarchy. But beyond this we
have nothing certain to which we can refer the allusions to Theban
affairs, public and private, which we have reason to think present in
the ode.

       *       *       *       *       *

Daughters of Kadmos, thou Semele whose goings are with the queens of
Olympus, and thou Ino Leukothea who housest with the Nereids of the
sea, come ye up with the mother[1] of a mighty son, even of Herakles,
unto the temple of M[)e]lia[2] and into the holy place of the golden
tripods, which beyond all others Loxias hath honoured, and named it
the shrine Ismenian, a truthful seat of seers; where now, O children
of Harmonia, he calleth the whole heroic sisterhood of the soil to
assemble themselves together, that of holy Themis and of Pytho and
the Earth-navel of just judgments ye may sing at early evening, doing
honour to seven-gated Thebes, and to the games at Kirrha, wherein
Thrasydaios hath made his father's house glorious by casting thereon a
third wreath for his victory in the rich cornlands[3] of Pylades, who
was the host of Lakonian Orestes.

Orestes, on the murder of his father, Arsinoë his nurse saved from the
violent hands of Klytaimnestra and out of the ruinous treason, what
time the daughter of Dardanid Priam, Kassandra, was by the glittering
bronze in company with Agamemnon's soul sped to the shadowy shore of
Acheron by the woman who had no pity.

Did then the slaughter of Iphigenia far from her own land on Euripos'
shore so sting her mother to the arousal of a wrath of grievous act?
Or had nocturnal loves misguided her, in thraldom to a paramour's
embrace? a sin in new-wed brides most hateful, and that cannot be
hidden for the talk of stranger tongues: for the citizens repeat the
shame. For prosperity must sustain an envy equalling itself: but
concerning the man of low place the rumour is obscure.

Thus died the hero himself[4], the son of Atreus, when after long
time he came unto famous Amyklai, and drew down with him to death the
maiden prophetess[5], after that he consumed with fire the Trojans'
habitations of softness.

And thus Orestes, in the tenderness of his youth, came and was the
guest of the old man Strophios, who dwelt at the foot of Parnassos:
but with long-tarrying sword he slew his mother, and left Aigisthos'
body in its blood.

Verily, my friends, by triple roads of interchanging ways I have wound
about, though heretofore I had kept on a straight track. Or hath some
wind blown me out of my course, as when it bloweth a boat upon the
sea? But thine it is, my Muse, since thou for reward didst promise the
loan thereof, to raise thy voice for silver now on this tale, now
on that, so that for this time at least it is on behalf either of
Thrasydaios or of his sire who conquered at Pytho: for of both are the
joy and glory burning lights.

Of old for victories in the chariot-race they had bright glory at
Olympia in the famous games for the swiftness of their steeds: and now
have they gone down among the naked runners in the stadion, and have
put to rebuke the host of the Hellenes by their speed.

God grant me to desire things honourable, seeking things possible in
my life's prime.

The middle course I find to prosper most enduringly in the
commonwealth, and a state of tyranny I condemn. On well-doing for the
common good[6] I bestow my pains: so are the envious baffled, if one
hath excelled in such acts to the uttermost, and bearing it modestly
hath shunned the perilous reproach of insolence: so also at the end
shall he find black death more gracious unto him, to his dear children
leaving the best of possessions, even the glory of an honourable name.

This it is that beareth abroad the name of Iolaos in song, and the
names of the mighty Kastor and of thee, king Polydeukes, ye sons of
gods, who one day in Therapnai and the next in Olympus have your
dwelling-place.


[Footnote 1: Alkmene.]

[Footnote 2: Mother of Ismenios and Teucros, by Apollo.]

[Footnote 3: In Phokis.]

[Footnote 4: Agamemnon. It is a strange variety of the tale that he
is spoken of as having been murdered at Amyklai and not at Argos or
Mykenai. So above Orestes is called Lakonian.]

[Footnote 5: Kassandra.]

[Footnote 6: (Not for a party.)]



XII.

FOR MIDAS OF AKRAGAS,

WINNER IN THE FLUTE-PLAYING MATCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is an early ode: the victory was won either in 494 or 450. It
was to be sung, it would seem, at Akragas, and very probably in a
procession to the shrine of the tutelar divinity of the city, with an
address to whom it seemingly begins, though it is difficult to say
what degree of personification is intended.

       *       *       *       *       *

I pray thee, lover of splendour, most beautiful among the cities of
men, haunt of Persephone, thou who by the banks of Akragas' stream
that nourisheth thy flocks, inhabitest a citadel builded pleasantly--O
queen, graciously and with goodwill of gods and men welcome this crown
that is come forth from Pytho for Midas' fair renown; and him too
welcome therewithal who hath overcome all Hellas in the art which once
on a time Pallas Athene devised, when she made music of the fierce
Gorgon's death-lament.

That heard she pouring from the maiden heads and heads of serpents
unapproachable amidst the anguish of their pains, when Perseus had
stricken the third sister, and to the isle Seriphos and its folk bare
thence their doom.

Yea also he struck with blindness the wondrous brood of Phorkos[1],
and to Polydektes' bridal brought a grievous gift, and grievous
eternally he made for that man his mother's slavery and ravished bed:
for this he won the fair-faced Medusa's head, he who was the son of
Danaë, and sprung, they say, from a living stream of gold.

But the Maiden[2], when that she had delivered her well-beloved from
these toils, contrived the manifold music of the flute, that with such
instrument she might repeat the shrill lament that reached her from
Euryale's[3] ravening jaws.

A goddess was the deviser thereof, but having created it for
a possession of mortal men, she named that air she played the
many-headed[4] air, that speaketh gloriously of folk-stirring games,
as it issueth through the thin-beat bronze and the reeds which grow by
the Graces' city of goodly dancing-ground in the precinct of Kephisos'
nymph, the dancers' faithful witnesses.

But if there be any bliss among mortal men, without labour it is not
made manifest: it may be that God will accomplish it even to-day, yet
the thing ordained is not avoidable: yea, there shall be a time that
shall lay hold on a man unaware, and shall give him one thing beyond
his hope, but another it shall bestow not yet.


[Footnote 1: The three Grey Sisters, whose one common eye Perseus
stole,

  [Greek: daenaiai korai
  treis kyknomorphoi koinon omm' ektaemenai
  monodontes, has outh' haelios prosderketai
  aktisin, outh' hae nukteros maenae pote.]

Aesch. Prom. 813.

This must mean some kind of twilight, not total darkness, or they
could hardly have missed their eye.]

[Footnote 2: Athene.]

[Footnote 3: One of the Gorgons.]

[Footnote 4: A certain [Greek: nomos aulaetikos] was known by this
name.]



THE NEMEAN ODES.

I.

FOR CHROMIOS OF AITNA,

WINNER IN THE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

This Chromios was a son of Agesidamos and brother-in-law of Hieron,
and the same man for whom the ninth Nemean was written. He had become
a citizen of Hieron's new city of Aitna, and won this victory B.C.
473.

This ode seems to have been sung before his house in Ortygia, a
peninsula on which part of Syracuse was built, and in which was the
fountain Arethusa. The legend of Arethusa and Alpheos explains the
epithets of Ortygia with which the ode opens. The greater part of the
ode is occupied with the story of Herakles, perhaps because Chromios
was of the Hyllean tribe and thus traced his descent to Herakles.

       *       *       *       *       *

O resting-place august of Alpheos, Ortygia, scion of famous Syracuse,
thou that art a couch of Artemis and a sister of Delos[1], from thee
goeth forth a song of sweet words, to set forth the great glory of
whirlwind-footed steeds in honour of Aitnaian Zeus.

For now the car of Chromios, and Nemea, stir me to yoke to his
victorious deeds the melody of a triumphal song. And thus by that
man's heaven-sped might I lay my foundations in the praise of gods. In
good fortune men speak well of one altogether: and of great games the
Muse is fain to tell.

Sow then some seed of splendid words in honour of this isle, which
Zeus, the lord of Olympus, gave unto Persephone, and bowed his hair
toward her in sign that this teeming Sicily he would exalt to be the
best land in the fruitful earth, with gorgeous crown of citadels. And
the son of Kronos gave unto her a people that wooeth mailed war, a
people of the horse and of the spear, and knowing well the touch of
Olympia's golden olive-leaves. Thus shoot I arrows many, and without
falsehood I have hit the mark.

And now at the doors of the hall of a hospitable man I stand to sing
a goodly song, where is prepared for me a friendly feast, and not
unwonted in that house are frequent stranger-guests: thus hath he
found good friends to pour a quenching flood on the mouldering fire of
reproach.

Each hath his several art: but in straight paths it behoveth him to
walk, and to strive hard wherein his nature setteth him. Thus worketh
strength in act, and mind in counsels, when one is born to foresee
what shall come after. In thy nature, son of Agesidamos, are uses both
for this and that.

I love not to keep hidden in my house great wealth, but to have joy of
that I have, and to have repute of liberality to my friends: for the
hopes of much-labouring men seem to me even as mine.

Now I to Herakles cleave right willingly, among high deeds of valour
rousing an ancient tale; how that when from his mother's womb the son
of Zeus escaping the birth-pang came quickly into the glorious light
with his twin-brother, not unobserved of Hera did he put on the
saffron swaddling bands; but the queen of gods in the kindling of her
anger sent presently the two snakes, and they when the doors were
opened went right on into the wide bedchamber, hasting to entwine the
children, that they should be a prey to their fierce teeth.

But the boy lifted up his head upright and was first to essay the
fight, seizing with inevitable grasp of both his hands the two
serpents by the necks, and time, as he strangled them, forced the
breath out of their monstrous forms.

But a shock unendurable startled the women about Alkmene's bed, yea
and herself too started to her feet from the couch half-robed, and
would fain have beaten back the fierce beasts' violence.

And quickly ran thronging thither with bronze arms the captains of
the sons of Kadmos; and brandishing in his hand his sword bare of its
sheath came Amphitryon smitten with sharp pain; for everyone alike is
grieved by the ills of his own house, but the heart is soon quit of
sorrow that careth but for another's care.

And he stood in amazement, and gladness mingled with his fear; for he
saw the marvellous courage and might of his son, since the immortals
had turned to the contrary the saying of the messengers unto him.

Then he called a man that lived nigh to him, a chosen prophet of the
most high Zeus, Teiresias the true seer: and he set forth to him and
to all his company with what manner of fortune should the child have
his lot cast, how many lawless monsters on the dry land, how many on
the sea he should destroy.

Others moreover, of men the hatefullest, who walked in guile and
insolence, he prophesied that he should deliver over unto death:
saying that when on Phlegra's plain the gods should meet the giants
in battle, beneath the rush of his arrows their bright hair should be
soiled with earth; but he in peace himself should obtain a reward of
rest from his great toils throughout all time continually within the
house of bliss, and after that he had received fair Hebe to be his
bride, and made his marriage-feast, should remain beside Zeus, the son
of Kronos, well-pleased with his dwelling-place divine.


[Footnote 1: I. e. so honoured by Artemis as to rank with her native
Delos.]



II.

FOR TIMODEMOS OF ATHENS,

WINNER IN THE PANKRATION.

* * * *

The date of this ode is unknown. It would seem to have been sung at
Athens on the winner's return home. He belonged to the clan of the
Timodemidai of Salamis, but to the deme of Acharnai.

As to the nature of the Pankration see Dict. Ant. It was a combination
of wrestling and boxing, probably with wide license of rules. The best
extant illustration of it in sculpture is the famous group of the
Pankratiasts (commonly called the Luttatori) in the Tribune of the
Uffizi at Florence.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the self-same beginning whence the Homerid bards draw out the
linkèd story of their song, even a prelude calling upon Zeus--so also
Nemeaian Zeus it is in whose far-famous grove this man hath attained
unto laying his first foundation of victory in the sacred games.

And yet again must the son of Timonoös, if in the way of his fathers'
guiding him straight this age hath given him to be a glory of great
Athens--yet again and often must he pluck the noble flower of Isthmian
games, and in the Pythian conquer. Like is it that not far from the
mountain-brood of Pleiads[1] shall be the rising of Orion.

Well able verily is Salamis to rear a man of battles: so at Troy was
Hektor aware of Aias; and so now, O Timodemos, art thou glorified by
thy stubborn prowess in the pankration.

Acharnai of old was famous for its men, and as touching games the
Timodemidai rank there pre-eminent. Beneath Parnassos' lordly height
they won four victories in the games; moreover in the valleys of noble
Pelops they have obtained eight crowns at the hands of the men of
Corinth, and seven at Nemea; and at home more than may be numbered, at
the games of Zeus:

To whose glory, O citizens, sing for Timodemos a song of triumph, and
bring him in honour home, and chant our prelude tunefully.


[Footnote 1: The Pleiads were daughters of Atlas. One victory betokens
another to come, as the rising of a constellation betokens the rising
of its neighbour.]



III.

FOR ARISTOKLEIDES OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE PANKRATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of the victory is unknown: the ode seems to have been written
long afterwards, probably for some anniversary celebration of the
event.

       *       *       *       *       *

O divine Muse, our mother, I pray thee come unto this Dorian isle
Aigina stranger-thronged, for the sacred festival of the Nemean
games[1]: for by the waters of Asopos[2] young men await thee, skilled
to sing sweet songs of triumph, and desiring to hear thy call.

For various recompense are various acts athirst; but victory in the
games above all loveth song, of crowns and valiant deeds the fittest
follower. Thereof grant us large store for our skill, and to the king
of heaven with its thronging clouds do thou who art his daughter begin
a noble lay; and I will marry the same to the voices of singers and to
the lyre.

A pleasant labour shall be mine in glorifying this land where of old
the Myrmidons dwelt, whose ancient meeting-place Aristokleides through
thy favour hath not sullied with reproach by any softness in the
forceful strife of the pankration; but a healing remedy of wearying
blows he hath won at least in this fair victory in the deep-lying
plain of Nemea.

Now if this son of Aristophanes, being fair of form and achieving
deeds as fair, hath thus attained unto the height of manly excellence,
no further is it possible for him to sail untraversed sea beyond the
pillars of Herakles, which the hero-god set to be wide-famed witnesses
of the end of voyaging: for he had overcome enormous wild-beasts on
the seas, and tracked the streams through marshes to where he came to
the goal that turned him to go back homeward, and there did he mark
out the ends of the earth.

But to what headland of a strange shore, O my soul, art thou carrying
aside the course of my ship? To Aiakos and to his race I charge thee
bring the Muse. Herein is perfect justice, to speak the praise of good
men: neither are desires for things alien the best for men to cherish:
search first at home: a fitting glory for thy sweet song hast thou
gotten there in deeds of ancient valour.

Glad was King Peleus when he cut him his gigantic spear, he who took
Iolkos by his single arm without help of any host, he who held firm in
the struggle Thetis the daughter of the sea.

Also the city of Laomedon did mighty Telamon sack, when he fought with
Iolaos by his side, and again to the war of the Amazons with brazen
bows he followed him; neither at any time did man-subduing terror
abate the vigour of his soul.

By inborn worth doth one prevail mightily; but whoso hath but precepts
is a vain man and is fain now for this thing and now again for that,
but a sure step planteth he not at any time, but handleth countless
enterprises with a purpose that achieveth naught.

Now Achilles of the yellow hair, while he dwelt in the house of
Philyra[3], being yet a child made mighty deeds his play; and
brandishing many a time his little javelin in his hands, swift as the
wind he dealt death to wild lions in the fight, and boars he slew also
and dragged their heaving bodies to the Centaur, son of Kronos, a six
years' child when he began, and thenceforward continually. And Artemis
marvelled at him, and brave Athene, when he slew deer without dogs or
device of nets; for by fleetness of foot he overcame them.

This story also of the men of old have I heard: how within his cavern
of stone did deep-counselled Cheiron rear Jason, and next Asklepios,
whom he taught to apportion healing drugs with gentle hand: after this
it was that he saw the espousals of Nereus' daughter of the shining
wrists, and fondling nursed her son, strongest of men, rearing his
soul in a life of harmony; until by blowing of sea winds wafted to
Troy he should await the war-cry of the Lykians and of the Phrygians
and of the Dardanians, cried to the clashing of spears; and joining in
battle with the lancer Ethiops hand to hand should fix this purpose in
his soul, that their chieftain Memnon, Helenos' fiery cousin, should
go back again to his home no more.

Thenceforward burneth ever a far-shining light for the house of
Aiakos; for thine O Zeus is their blood, even as thine also are the
games whereat my song is aimed, by the voice of the young men of the
land proclaiming aloud her joy. For victorious Aristokleides hath well
earned a cheer, in that he hath brought new renown to this island, and
to the Theoroi[4] of the Pythian god, by striving for glory in the
games.

By trial is the issue manifest, wherein may one be more excellent than
his fellows, whether among boys a boy, or among men a man, or in the
third age among elders, according to the nature of our mortal race.
Four virtues doth a long life bring, and biddeth one fit his thought
to the things about him[5]. From such virtues this man is not far.

Friend, fare thee well: I send to thee this honey mingled with white
milk, and the dew of the mixing hangeth round about it, to be a drink
of minstrelsy distilled in breathings of Aiolian flutes; albeit it
come full late.

Swift is the eagle among the birds of the air, who seizeth presently
with his feet his speckled prey[6], seeking it from afar off; but in
low places dwell[7] the chattering daws. To thee at least, by the will
of throned Kleio, for sake of thy zeal in the games, from Nemea and
from Epidauros and from Megara hath a great light shined.


[Footnote 1: I. e. commemorating the Nemean games and the victories
obtained by citizens of Aigina there.]

[Footnote 2: There seems to have been a stream of this name in Aigina,
as well as in Boeotia.]

[Footnote 3: Cheiron's mother.]

[Footnote 4: Sent from Aigina to Apollo's temple at Delphi.]

[Footnote 5: This is very obscure: Böckh said that the longer he
considered it the more obscure it became to him. Donaldson 'is
inclined to think that Pindar is speaking with reference to the
Pythagorean division of virtue into four species, and that he assigns
one virtue to each of the four ages of human life (on the same
principle as that which Shakespeare has followed in his description of
the seven ages) namely temperance as the virtue of youth, courage of
early manhood, justice of mature age, and prudence of old age.']

[Footnote 6: Snakes.]

[Footnote 7: Or 'on vile things feed.']



IV.

FOR TIMASARCHOS OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE BOYS' WRESTLING-MATCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this ode is unknown: we can only infer, from the way in
which Athens is spoken of, that it was written before the war between
that state and Aigina. It seems to have been sung on the winner's
return home, very likely in a procession through the streets.

       *       *       *       *       *

Best of physicians for a man's accomplished toil is festive joy:
and the touch of songs, wise daughters of the Muses, hath power of
comforting. Less doth warm water avail to bathe limbs for soothing
than words of praise married to the music of the lyre. For speech is
longer-lived than act, whensoever by favour of the Graces the tongue
hath drawn it forth out of the depth of the heart.

Be it the prelude of my hymn to dedicate it to Zeus the son of Kronos,
and to Nemea, and to the wrestling of Timasarchos; and may it have
welcome in the Aiakids' stronghold of goodly towers, the common light
of all, which aideth the stranger with justice[1].

Now if thy sire Timokritos were still cheered by the quickening sun,
full oft with music manifold of the lute would he have bent him unto
this my theme, and sounded a hymn for the fair triumphs that
have brought thee a chain of wreaths, even from the games of the
Kleonaians[2] now, and erewhile from the bright and famous Athens, and
at seven-gated Thebes: for beside Amphitryon's splendid sepulchre the
sons of Kadmos nothing loth sprinkled the winner with flowers for
Aigina's sake. For thither as a friend to friends he came, though to a
city not his own, and abode in the fortunate hall of Herakles.

With Herakles on a time did mighty Telamon destroy the city of Troy,
and the Meropes, and the man of war, the great and terrible Alkyoneus,
yet not until by hurling of stones he had subdued twelve four-horse
chariots, and horse-taming heroes twice so many thereupon. Unversed in
battles must he be who understandeth not this tale, for whoso will do
aught is like to suffer also.

But to tell the tale at length custom forbiddeth me, and the
constraining hours: and a love-spell draweth me to put forth my hand
to the feast of the new moon.

Albeit the deep brine of the sea hold thee even to thy waist,
nevertheless bear bravely up against conspirings; assuredly shall
we shine forth above our enemies as we sail home in open day; while
another man of envious eye turneth about in darkness an empty purpose
that falleth to the ground. For me I know certainly that whatsoever
excellence Fate that is our lord hath given me, time creeping onward
will bring to its ordained fulfilment.

Weave then this woof too presently, sweet my lute, a strain with
Lydian harmony that shall be dear to Oinone[3], and to Cyprus, where
Teukros, son of Telamon, holdeth rule in a new land.

But Aias hath the Salamis of his father: and in the Euxine Sea
Achilles hath a shining isle, and at Phthia hath Thetis power, and
Neoptolemos in wide Epeiros, where cattle-pasturing headlands, from
Dodona onwards, slope forward to the Ionian Sea. And beside the foot
of Pelion did Peleus set his face against Iolkos, and deliver it over
to be a servant to the Haimones, after that he had proved the guileful
counsels of Hippolyte, Akastos' wife.

For by (stealing) his sword of cunning workmanship the son[4] of
Pelias prepared death for him in an ambush; but Cheiron delivered him
out of his hand; and thus he fulfilled the destiny ordained him of
Zeus, and having escaped the violence of the fire and the dauntless
lion's claws exceeding keen, and the bitings of teeth most
terrible[5], he espoused one of the Nereids high-enthroned, and beheld
the circle of fair seats whereon were sitting the kings of heaven and
of the sea, as they revealed unto him their gifts, and the kingdom
that should be unto him and unto his seed.

Nightward[6] beyond Gadeira none may pass. Turn back again to the
mainland of Europe the tackle of our ship; for it were impossible for
me to go through unto the end all the tale of the sons of Aiakos.

For the Theandrid clan came I a ready herald of games that make men's
limbs wax strong, to Olympia and to Isthmos, and to Nemea according
to my promise, where having put themselves to the proof they are
returning homeward, not without wreaths whose fruitage is renown; and
there report hath told us, O Timasarchos, that thy clan's name is
preeminent in songs of victory.

Or if further for thy mother's brother Kallikles thou biddest me set
up a pillar whiter than Parian stone, lo as the refining of gold
showeth forth all his splendours, so doth a song that singeth a
man's rare deeds make him as the peer of kings. Let Kallikles in his
dwelling beside Acheron find in my tongue a minstrel of his praise,
for that at the games[7] of the deep-voiced wielder of the trident
his brows were green with parsley of Corinth; of him, boy, did
Euphänes, thy aged grandsire, rejoice erewhile to sing.

Each hath his own age-fellow; and what each hath seen for himself that
may he hope to set forth best of all. How for Melesias'[8] praise
must such an one grapple in the strife, bending the words beneath his
grasp, yielding not his ground as he wrestleth in speech, of gentle
temper toward the good, but to the froward a stern adversary.


[Footnote 1: Aigina. See Ol viii. 21; Pyth. viii. 22.]

[Footnote 2: Kleonai was very near Nemea, and the Kleonaians were for
a long time managers of the Nemean games.]

[Footnote 3: Seemingly the same personage as Aigina.]

[Footnote 4: Akastos.]

[Footnote 5: Thetis, resisting her wooer Peleus, changed herself into
fire and wild beasts. See Dict. Myth.]

[Footnote 6: Westward.]

[Footnote 7: The Isthmian games.]

[Footnote 8: Timasarchos' trainer in wrestling. He is here praised in
terms borrowed from the wrestling-school.]



V.

FOR PYTHEAS OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE BOYS' PANKRATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this ode is uncertain. The winner's brother Phylakidas,
gained the two victories, also in the pankration, which are celebrated
in the fourth and fifth Isthmians.

       *       *       *       *       *

No statuary I, that I should fashion images to rest idly on their
pedestals, nay but by every trading-ship and plying boat forth from
Aigina fare, sweet song of mine, and bear abroad the news, how that
Lampon's son, the strong-limbed Pytheas, hath won at Nemea the
pankratiast's crown, while on his cheeks he showeth not as yet the
vine-bloom's mother, mellowing midsummer.

So to the warrior heroes sprung from Kronos and Zeus and from the
golden nymphs, even to the Aiakidai, hath he done honour, and to the
mother-city, a friendly field to strangers. That she should have issue
of goodly men and should be famous in her ships, this prayed they of
old, standing beside the altar of their grandsire, Zeus Hellenios, and
together stretched forth their hands toward heaven, even the glorious
sons of Endais[1] and the royal strength of Phokos, the goddess-born,
whom on the sea-beach Psamatheia[2] bare. Of their deed portentous and
unjustly dared I am loth to tell, and how they left that famous isle,
and of the fate that drove the valiant heroes from Oinone. I will make
pause: not for every perfect truth is it best that it discover its
face: silence is oft man's wisest thought.

But if the praise of good hap or of strength of hand or of steel-clad
war be my resolve, let one mark me a line for a long leap hence: in
my knees I have a nimble spring: even beyond the sea the eagles wing
their way.

With goodwill too for the Aiakidai in Pelion sang the Muses' choir
most fair, and in the midst Apollo playing with golden quill upon his
seven-toned lyre led them in ever-changing strains. They first of all
from Zeus beginning sang of holy Thetis and of Peleus, and how that
Kretheus' dainty daughter Hippolyte would fain have caught him by her
wile, and persuaded his friend the king of the Magnetes her husband by
counsels of deceit, for she forged a lying tale thereto devised, how
that he essayed to go in unto her in Akastos' bridal bed. But the
truth was wholly contrary thereto, for often and with all her soul she
had besought him with beguiling speech; but her bold words vexed his
spirit; and forthwith he refused the bride, fearing the wrath of the
Father who guardeth host and guest. And he, the cloud-compelling Zeus
in heaven, the immortal's king, was aware thereof, and he promised
him that with all speed he would find him a sea-bride from among the
Nereids of golden distaffs, having persuaded thereto Poseidon, their
kinsman by his marriage, who from Aigai to the famous Dorian Isthmus
cometh oftentimes, where happy troops with the reed-flute's noise
welcome the god, and in bold strength of limb men strive.

The fate that is born with a man is arbiter of all his acts. Thou,
Euthymenes[3], at Aigina falling into the goddess victory's arms didst
win thee hymns of subtle strain: yea and now too to thee, O Pytheas,
who art his kinsman of the same stock and followest in his footsteps,
doth thy mother's brother honour. Nemea is favourable unto him, and
the month[4] of his country that Apollo loveth: the youth that came
to strive with him he overcame, both at home and by Nisos' hill of
pleasant glades[5]. I have joy that the whole state striveth for
glory. Know that through Menander's[6] aid thou hast attained unto
sweet recompense of toils. And meet it is that from Athens a fashioner
of athletes come.

But if thou comest to Themistios[7], to sing of him, away with chill
reserve, shout aloud, hoist to the top-yard of the mast the sail, and
tell how in the boxing and the pankration at Epidauros he won a double
prize of valour, and to the portals of Aiakos bare fresh wreaths of
flowers, led by the Graces of the yellow hair.


[Footnote 1: Wife of Aiakos and mother of Peleus and Telamon. They
killed Phokos.]

[Footnote 2: A sea-nymph, mother of Phokos by Aiakos.]

[Footnote 3: Maternal uncle of Pytheas.]

[Footnote 4: The month called in Aigina Delphinios (April-May) when
the Nemean games took place.]

[Footnote 5: At Megara]

[Footnote 6: Pytheas' trainer, an Athenian.]

[Footnote 7: Maternal grandfather of Pytheas.]



VI.

FOR ALKIMIDAS OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE BOYS' WRESTLING-MATCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this ode is unknown, but from the mention of the trainer
Melesias it has been inferred that it was among Pindar's later works.
It would seem to have been sung at Aigina, perhaps at some feast of
the Bassid clan given in honour of the victory.

       *       *       *       *       *

One race there is of men and one of gods, but from one mother[1] draw
we both our breath, yet is the strength of us diverse altogether,
for the race of man is as nought, but the brazen heaven abideth, a
habitation steadfast unto everlasting.

Yet withal have we somewhat in us like unto the immortals' bodily
shape or mighty mind, albeit we know not what course hath Destiny
marked out for us to run, neither in the daytime, neither in the
night.

And now doth Alkimidas give proof that it is with his kindred as with
fruitful fields: for they in turn now yield to man his yearly bread
upon the plains, and now again they pause, and gather back their
strength[2].

From the pleasant meeting-places of Nemea hath the athlete boy come
back, who following the ordinance[3] of Zeus hath now approved him no
baffled hunter in his wrestling-quest, and hath guided his feet by
the foot-prints of Praxidamas, his father father, of whose blood he
sprang.

For Praxidamas also by his Olympian victory first won olive-wreath
from Alpheos for the Aiakidai, and five times been crowned at Isthmos,
and at Nemea thrice, he took away thereby the obscurity of Sokleides,
who was the eldest of the sons of Agesimachos[4].

For these three-warriors attained unto the topmost height of prowess,
of all who essayed the games, and by grace of God to no other house
hath the boxing-match given keeping of so many crowns in this inmost
place of all Hellas. I deem that though my speech be of high sound I
yet shall hit the mark, as it were an archer shooting from a bow.

Come, Muse, direct thou upon this house a gale of glorious song: for
after that men are vanished away, the minstrel's story taketh up their
noble acts, whereof is no lack to the Bassid clan; old in story is the
race and they carry cargo of home-made renown, able to deliver into
the Muses' husbandmen rich matter of song in honour of their lofty
deeds.

For at sacred Pytho in like wise did a scion of the same stock
overcome, with the thong of the boxer bound about his hand, even
Kallias in whom were well-pleased the children of Leto of the golden
distaff, and beside Kastaly in the evening his name burnt bright, when
the glad sounds of the Graces rose.

Also the Bridge[5] of the untiring sea did honour unto Kreontidas at
the triennial sacrifice of bulls by the neighbour states in the holy
place of Poseidon; and once did the herb[6] of the lion shadow his
brows for a victory won beneath the shadeless primal hills of Phlious.

Wide avenues of glory are there on every side for chroniclers to
draw nigh to do honour unto this isle: for supreme occasion have the
children of Aiakos given them by the showing forth of mighty feats.

Over land and beyond the sea is their name flown forth from afar: even
unto the Ethiopians it sprang forth, for that Memnon came not home:
for bitter was the battle that Achilles made against him, having
descended from his chariot upon the earth, what time by his fierce
spear's point he slew the son of the bright Morn.

And herein found they of old time a way wherein to drive their car:
and I too follow with my burden of song: and all men's minds, they
say, are stirred the most by whatsoever wave at the instant rolleth
nearest to the mainsheet of the ship.

On willing shoulders bear I this double load, and am come a messenger
to proclaim this honour won in the games that men call holy to be the
five-and-twentieth that the noble house of Alkimidas hath shown forth:
yet were two wreaths in the Olympian games beside the precinct of
Kronion denied to thee, boy, and to Polytimidas, by the fall of the
lot[7].

Peer of the dolphin hurrying through the brine--such would I call
Melesias[8] by whom thy hands and strength were guided, as a chariot
by the charioteer.


[Footnote 1: Earth.]

[Footnote 2: The ancients understood little of the rotation of crops,
and often let their fields lie fallow alternate years.]

[Footnote 3: Of the celebrity of alternate generations.]

[Footnote 4: The order of descent was: Agesimachos, Sokleides,
Praxidamas, Theon, Alkimidas. Of these the first, third, and fifth,
were distinguished athletes, the others not.]

[Footnote 5: The Isthmos.]

[Footnote 6: The parsley which grew near the lair of the Nemean lion.]

[Footnote 7: This can hardly mean, as some commentators take it,
the drawing of any particular tie; for if better men than any given
competitor were entered for the match, his defeat would be inevitable
whether they were encountered sooner or later.]

[Footnote 8: Alkimidas' trainer.]



VII.

FOR SOGENES OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE BOYS' PENTATHLON.

       *       *       *       *       *

This victory was probably won B.C. 462. The ode would seem to be full
of allusions, which however we cannot with any certainty explain. It
is partly occupied with the celebration of Achilles' son Neoptolemos,
and Pindar seems anxious to repel the charge of having on some
occasion depreciated that hero.

       *       *       *       *       *

O Eileithuia that sittest beside the deep-counselling Moirai, child of
the mighty Hera, thou who bringest babes to the birth, hearken unto
us! Without thee looked we never on the light or on the darkness of
the night, nor came ever unto her who is thy sister, even Hebe of the
comely limbs.

But we receive our breath not all for a like life; each to his several
lot is kept apart by the yoke of fate.

Now by thy grace hath Sogenes the son of Thearion been foremost
in prowess, and his glory is sung aloud among the winners of the
five-game prize.

For he is a dweller in a city that loveth song, even this city of the
spear-clashing sons of Aiakos, and exceeding fain are they to cherish
a spirit apt for the strife of the games.

If a man have good hap in his attempt, he throweth into the Muses'
stream sweet cause of song: for even deeds of might for lack of song
fall into deep darkness, and in but one way have we knowledge of a
mirror for fair deeds, if by the grace of Mnemosyne of the shining
fillet they attain unto a recompense of toils by the sound of voice
and verse.

Wise shipmates know that the wind which tarrieth shall come on the
third day, nor throw away their goods through greed of more[1]: the
rich and the poor alike fare on their way to death.

Now I have suspicion that the fame of Odysseus is become greater
than his toils, through the sweet lays that Homer sang; for over the
feigning of his winged craft something of majesty abideth, and the
excellence of his skill persuadeth us to his fables unaware.

Blind hearts have the general folk of men; for could they have
discovered the truth, never would stalwart Aias in anger for the arms
have struck through his midriff the sharp sword--even he who after
Achilles was best in battle of all men whom, to win back his bride for
fair-haired Menelaos, the fair breeze of straight-blowing Zephyros
wafted in swift ships toward Ilos' town.

But to all men equally cometh the wave of death, and falleth on the
fameless and the famed: howbeit honour ariseth for them whose fair
story God increaseth to befriend them even when dead, whoso have
journeyed to the mighty centre-stone of wide-bosomed earth.

There now beneath the floor of Pytho lieth Neoptolemos, dying there
when he had sacked the city of Priam where the Danaoi toiled with him.
He sailing thence missed Skyros, and they wandered till they came to
Ephyra, and in Molossia he was king for a little while: howbeit his
race held this state[2] continually. Then was he gone to the god's
home[3], carrying an offering of the chief spoils from Troy: and there
in quarrel concerning meats a man smote him with a knife.

Thereat were the Delphian entertainers of strangers grieved
exceedingly: nevertheless he but paid a debt to destiny: for it was
needful that in that most ancient grove someone of the lords the sons
of Aiakos should abide within thenceforward, beside the goodly walls
of the god's house, and that when with plenteous sacrifice the
processions do honour to the heroes, he should keep watch that fair
right be done. Three words shall be enough: when he presideth over the
games there is no lie found in his testimony thereof.

O thou Aigina, of thy children that are of Zeus I have good courage to
proclaim that as of inheritance they claim the path to glory, through
splendour of their valorous deeds: howbeit in every work a rest is
sweet, yea even of honey cometh surfeit and of the lovely flowers of
Love.

Now each of us is in his nature diverse, and several are the lots
of life we draw, one this and one another: but that one man receive
perfect bliss, this is impossible to men. I cannot find to tell of any
to whom Fate hath given this award abidingly.

To thee, Thearion[4], she giveth fair measure of bliss, first daring
in goodly deeds, and then understanding and sound mind. Thy friend am
I, and I will keep far from the man I love the secret slander, and
bring nigh unto him praise and true glory, as it were streams of
water: for meet is such recompense for the good.

If there be near me now a man of the Achaians who dwelleth far up the
Ionian sea, he shall not upbraid me: I have faith in my proxeny[5]:
and among the folk of my own land I look forth with clear gaze, having
done naught immoderate, and having put away all violence from before
my feet. So let the life that remaineth unto me run cheerly on.

He who knoweth shall say if indeed I come with slanderous speech upon
my lips to strike a jarring note. To thee, Sogenes of the house of the
sons of Euxenos, I swear that without overstepping the bound I have
sent forth the swift speech of my tongue as it were a bronze-headed
javelin, such as saveth from the wrestling the strong neck sweatless
yet, or ever the limbs be plunged in the sun's fire[6].

If toil there were, delight more abundant followeth after. Let be; if
somewhat over far I soared when I cried aloud, yet am I not froward,
that I should deny his glory unto one that conquereth.

The weaving of wreaths is an easy thing: tarry a little: behold the
Muse fasteneth together gold and white ivory, and a lily flower
withal, that she hath plucked from beneath the deep sea's dew[7].

Of Zeus be mindful when thou tellest of Nemea, and guide the
multitudinous voices of our song with a quiet mind: meet is it that
with gentle voice we celebrate in this land the king of gods: for
they tell how he begat Aiakos of a mortal mother, to be for his own
fortunate land a ruler of cities, and for thee, Herakles, a loving
friend and brother.

And if man receiveth aught from man, then may we say that neighbour
is to neighbour a joy worth all else, if he loveth him with steadfast
soul: now if even a god will consent hereto, then in such bond with
thee, O conqueror of the giants[8], is Sogenes fain to dwell happily
in the well-built sacred street of his ancestors, cherishing a mind of
tenderness toward his sire: for as when four horses are yoked together
in a car, so hath he his house in the midst of thy holy places, and
goeth in unto them both on the right hand and on the left[9].

O blessed spirit, thine is it to win hereto the husband of Hera, and
the grey-eyed maid[10]; and thou art able to give to mortals strength
ever and again against baffling perplexities. Make thou to cleave to
them[11] a life of steadfast strength, and wind the bliss thereof amid
both youth and a serene old age, and may their children's children
possess continually the honours that they now have, and greater in the
time to come.

Never shall my heart confess that I have outraged Neoptolemos with
irreclaimable words. But thrice and four times to tell over the same
tale is emptiness in the end thereof, even as he of the proverb that
babbleth among children how that Korinthos was the son of Zeus[12].


[Footnote 1: Retaining the reading [Greek: hupo kerdei balon]. I
conjecture it to mean, 'do not in their eagerness for trade choose an
unfavourable and dangerous time for their voyage, but wait for the
[Greek: kairos], the right opportunity.']

[Footnote 2: The kingdom of Epeiros. Pyrrhos, the invader of Italy,
called himself a descendant of Neoptolemos (who was also called
Pyrrhos).]

[Footnote 3: Delphi.]

[Footnote 4: Father of Sogenes.]

[Footnote 5: Pindar would seem to have been [Greek: proxenos] at
Thebes for some state of Epeiros, to which fact he appeals as a proof
that he stood well with the Epirot descendants of Neoptolemos.]

[Footnote 6: The Pentathlon was composed of five contests, namely,
the jump, throwing the disk, throwing the javelin, the foot-race, and
wrestling. The prize was for the best man in three contests out of the
five. These came in the order in which they are enumerated above; thus
if the best javelin-thrower had already won two of the other matches
he would not be challenged to wrestle, as the prize of the Pentathlon
would be already his. Very probably this had been the case with
Sogenes, so that it would naturally occur to Pindar thus allusively to
expand his not unfrequent comparison of his own art of poetry to that
of a javelin-thrower or archer. On the Pentathlon may be consulted
an article by Professor Percy Gardner in the _Journal of Hellenic
Studies_ for October, 1880; and also Smith's _Dictionary of
Antiquities_ (revised edition).]

[Footnote 7: Coral.]

[Footnote 8: Herakles.]

[Footnote 9: Thearion's house seems to have had a shrine, or at least
some sacred ground, of Herakles at each side of it, so that he might
regard that hero as his neighbour.]

[Footnote 10: Athene.]

[Footnote 11: Thearion and Sogenes.]

[Footnote 12: A proverbial equivalent for vain and wearisome
repetition.]



VIII.

FOR DEINIS OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE SHORT FOOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this ode is unknown. It was probably sung before the
shrine of Aiakos at Aigina.

       *       *       *       *       *

Spirit of beautiful youth, thou herald of Aphrodite's loves ambrosial,
who on the eyes of girl or boy alighting, with tenderly constraining
hands dost handle one, but other otherwise--it is enough if one not
swerving from the true aim, in his every act prevail to attain to the
fulfilment of his worthier loves.

Such loves were they that waited on the bridal-bed of Zeus and Aigina,
and were dispensers unto them of the Cyprian's[1] gifts: and thence
sprang there a son[2] to be king of Oinone[3], in might of hand and in
counsel excellent, and many a time did many pray that they might look
on him: for the chosen among the heroes that dwelt around him were
fain of their own will to submit them unto his sovereignty, both whoso
in rocky Athens were leaders of the host, and at Sparta the children
of Pelops.

So Aiakos' holy knees clasp I a suppliant for a city well-beloved and
for these citizens, and I bear a Lydian crown wrought cunningly with
the sound of song, a glory out of Nemea for two races run, of Deinis
and of his father Meges.

Behold, the happiness that is planted with the favour of God is most
abiding among men; even such as once in the isle of Cyprus loaded
Kinyras with riches.

With poised feet I stand, and take breath for a little ere I speak.
For much and in many ways hath been said ere now; and the contriving
of new things and putting them to the touchstone to be tried is
perilous altogether.

In words find the envious their dainties: envy fasteneth ever on the
good, and careth not to strive against the base.

Yea thus did envy slay the son of Telamon, thrusting him through with
his own sword. Verily if one be of stout heart but without gift of
speech, such an one is a prey unto forgetfulness in a bitter strife,
and to the shiftiness of lies is proffered the prize of the greatest.
For in the secret giving of their votes the Danaoi courted Odysseus,
and thus did Aias, robbed of the golden arms, wrestle in the grip of a
bloody death.

Yet diverse verily were the strokes wherewith those twain had cloven
the warm flesh of the foe, what time they bare up the war against the
hedge of spears, whether about Achilles newly slain, or in whatsoever
labours else of those wide-ruining days.

Thus was there even of old the treacherous speech of hate, that
walketh with the subtleties of tales, intent on guile, slander that
breedeth ill: so doth it violence on the thing that shineth, and
uplifteth the rottenness of dim men's fame.

Never in me be this mind, O our father Zeus, but to the paths of
simplicity let me cleave throughout my life, that being dead I may set
upon my children a name that shall be of no ill report.

For gold some pray, and some for limitless lands: mine be it amid my
townsfolk's love to shroud my limbs in earth, still honouring where
honour is due, and sowing rebuke on the evildoers.

Thus groweth virtue greater, uplifted of the wise and just, as when a
tree watered by fresh dew shooteth toward the moist air on high.

Manifold are the uses of friends, chiefest truly amid the press of
toil, yet doth joy also desire to behold his own assurance.[4]

Ah Meges, to bring back thy spirit to earth is to me impossible, and
of empty hopes the end is naught. Yet for thy house and the clan of
Chariadai I can upraise a lofty column of song in honour of these two
pairs of fortunate feet[5].

I have joy to utter praise meet for the act, for by such charms of
song doth a man make even labour a painless thing. Yet surely was
there a Komos-song even of old time, yea before strife began between
Adrastos and the sons of Kadmos[6].


[Footnote 1: Aphrodite.]

[Footnote 2: Aiakos.]

[Footnote 3: Aigina.]

[Footnote 4: Through celebration in song, which a friendly poet can
give.]

[Footnote 5: Of Meges and Deinis.]

[Footnote 6: The invention of encomiastic hymns was attributed by
legend to the time of the expedition of Adrastos and the other six
against Thebes.]



IX.

FOR CHROMIOS OF AITNA,

WINNER IN THE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

This ode is placed by usage among the Nemeans, but the victory was not
won at Nemea, but at Sikyon, in the local games called Pythian. Its
date is unknown: it must have been after the founding of Aitna, B.C.
476. Probably the ode was sung in a procession at Aitna, some length
of time after the victory. The Chromios is the Chromios of the first
Nemean, Hieron's brother-in-law.

       *       *       *       *       *

From Apollo at Sikyon will we lead our triumph forth, ye Muses, unto
the new-made city of Aitna, where doors are opened wide to greet the
invading guests, even to the fortunate house of Chromios. Come claim
for him a song of sweetness: for he goeth up into the chariot of his
victory, and biddeth us sing aloud to the mother[1] and her twin
children who keep watch over high Pytho in fellowship.

Now there is a saying among men, that one hide not in silence on the
ground a good deed done: and meet for such brave tales is divine song.

Therefore will we arouse the pealing lyre and rouse the flute, in
honour of the very crown of all contests of steeds, which Adrastos in
honour of Phoibos ordained beside Asopos' stream.

Whereof when I make mention with voiceful honour I will celebrate
withal the Hero[2], who then being king in that place did by the
founding of a new feast and struggles of the strength of men and of
carven cars make his city known abroad and glorious.

For he was flying before Amphiaraos of bold counsels, and before a
dangerous civil strife, from Argos and his father's house: for no
longer were the sons of Talaos lords therein, for a sedition had
thrust them forth. The stronger man endeth the contention that hath
been before.

But when they had given to the son of Oikleus for his wife, as one
should give surety of an oath, Eriphyle, the slayer of her husband,
they became the greatest of the fair-haired Danaoi. So thereafter led
they on a time against seven-gated Thebes a host of men, but not by a
road of signs propitious: nor would the son of Kronos speed them on
their mad journey from their homes, but by the quivering lightnings he
darted forth he bade them hold from their road[3].

But unto a revealed calamity hasted that company to go forth with
bronze shields and the gear of steeds; and on the banks of Ismenos,
stayed from their sweet return, they fed the white smoke with their
bodies.

For seven pyres devoured the young men's limbs, but for Amphiaraos
Zeus by almighty thunderbolt clave the deep-breasted earth, and buried
him with his steeds, or ever the warrior's soul should be shamed by
the smiting of him in the back by Periklymenos' spear. For when the
terror cometh of heaven, then flee even the sons of gods.

If it be possible, O son of Kronos, this trial of valour against
Phenician spears[4] for life or death I would fain defer unto the
utmost: and I beg of thee to grant unto the sons of the men of Aitna
for long time a portion in good laws, and to make their people to
dwell among glories that the citizens have won. Men are there here
that love steeds and that have souls above desire of wealth. Hard of
credence is the word I have spoken; for the spirit of honour which
bringeth glory is stolen secretly by lust of gain.

Hadst thou been shield-bearer to Chromios among foot and horse and in
fightings of ships, thou hadst judged concerning his jeopardy in the
fierce fray, for in war did that divine honour stir his warrior-soul
to ward off havoc of Enyalios. Few are there who may prevail by
strength or valour to contrive a turning of the cloud of imminent
death against the ranks of the enemy. Howbeit they tell how Hektor's
glory flowered beside Skamander's streams, and thus on the steep
cliffs of Heloros' banks[5], where men call the ford the Fountain of
Ares, hath this light shined for Agesidamos' son in the beginning of
his praise.

And other deeds on other days will I declare, many done amid the dust
on the dry land, and yet others on the neighbouring sea. Now out of
toils which in youth have been done with righteousness there ripeneth
toward old age a day of calm.

Let Chromios know that he hath from the gods a lot of wondrous bliss.
For if one together with much wealth have won him glorious renown, it
is impossible that a mortal's feet touch any further mountain-top.

The banquet loveth peace, and by a gentle song a victory flourisheth
afresh, and beside the bowl the singer's voice waxeth brave. Let one
mix it now, that sweet proclaimer of the triumphal song, and in silver
goblets hand the grapes' potent child, even the goblets which for
Chromios his mares erst won, and sent to him from sacred Sikyon,
entwined with well-earned crowns of Leto's son.

Now claim I, father Zeus, to have well sung this excellent deed by aid
of the Charites, and beyond many to do honour to this victory by my
words, for the javelin that I throw falleth nearest to the Muses'
mark.


[Footnote 1: Leto.]

[Footnote 2: Adrastos.]

[Footnote 3: Lightning and thunder were often an encouraging sign
(there is an instance in the fourth Pythian), but this would depend on
the manner of them.]

[Footnote 4: War with the Carthaginians, who were still threatening
the Hellenic colonists in Sicily, in spite of their recent defeat.]

[Footnote 5: About B.C. 492 a battle was fought on the Heloros between
the Syracusans and the army of Hippokrates, tyrant of Gela.]



X.

FOR THEAIOS OF ARGOS,

WINNER IN THE WRESTLING-MATCH.

       *       *       *       *       *

This ode, like the last, is improperly called Nemean. It commemorates
a victory won at the feast of the Hekatombaia at Argos. The date is
unknown.

       *       *       *       *       *

The city of Danaos and of his fifty bright-throned daughters, Argos
the home of Hera, meet abode of gods, sing Graces! for by excellencies
innumerable it is made glorious in the deeds of valiant men.

Long is the tale of Perseus[1], that telleth of the Gorgon Medusa:
many are the cities in Egypt founded by the hands of Epaphos[2]:
neither went Hypermnestra's choice astray when she kept sheathed her
solitary sword[3].

Also their Diomedes did the grey-eyed goddess make incorruptible and
a god: and at Thebes, the earth blasted by the bolts of Zeus received
within her the prophet[4], the son of Oikleus, the storm-cloud of war.

Moreover in women of beautiful hair doth the land excel. Thereto in
days of old Zeus testified, when he followed after Alkmene and after
Danaë.

And in the father of Adrastos and in Lynkeus did Argos mingle ripe
wisdom with upright justice: and she reared the warrior Amphitryon.
Now he came to the height of honour in his descendants, for in bronze
armour he slew the Teleboai, and in his likeness the king of the
immortals entered his hall, bearing the seed of fearless Herakles,
whose bride in Olympos is Hebe, who by the side of her mother, the
queen of marriage, walketh of all divinities most fair.

My tongue would fail to tell in full the honours wherein the sacred
Argive land hath part: also the distaste[5] of men is ill to meet. Yet
wake the well-strung lyre, and take thought of wrestlings; a strife
for the bronze shield stirreth the folk to sacrifice of oxen unto Hera
and to the issue of games, wherein the son of Oulias, Theaios, having
overcome twice, hath obtained forgetfulness of the toils he lightly
bore.

Also on a time at Pytho he was first of the Hellenic host, and won
crowns at Isthmos and at Nemea, led thither by fair hap, and gave work
for the Muses' plough by thrice winning at the Gates[6] of the Sea and
thrice on the famous plains in the pastures of Adrastos' home[7]. Of
that he longeth for, O Father Zeus, his mouth is silent, with thee are
the issues of deeds: but with a spirit strong to labour and of a good
courage he prayeth thy grace. Both Theaios, and whosoever struggleth
in the perfect consummation of all games, know this, even the
supremacy of the ordinance of Herakles that is holden at Pisa[8]: yet
sweet preluding strains are those that twice have welcomed his triumph
at the festival of the Athenians: and in earthenware baked in the
fire, within the closure of figured urns, there came among the goodly
folk of Hera[9] the prize of the olive fruit[10].

On the renowned race of thy mother's sires there waiteth glory of
games by favour of the Graces and the sons of Tyndareus together. Were
I kinsman of Thrasyklos and Antias I would claim at Argos not to hide
mine eyes. For with how many victories hath this horse-breeding city
of Proitos flourished! even in the Corinthian corner and from the
men of Kleonai[11] four times, and from Sikyon they came laden with
silver, even goblets for wine, and out of Pellene clad in soft woof of
wool[12]. But to tell over the multitude of their prizes of bronze is
a thing impossible--to count them longer leisure were needed--which
Kleitor and Tegea and the Achaians' high-set cities and the Lykaion
set for a prize by the race-course of Zeus for the conquerors by
strength of hands or feet.

And since Kastor and his brother Polydeukes came to be the guests
of Pamphaes[13], no marvel is it that to be good athletes should be
inborn in the race. For they[14] it is who being guardians of the wide
plains of Sparta with Hermes and Herakles mete out fair hap in games,
and to righteous men they have great regard. Faithful is the race of
gods.

Now, changing climes alternately, they dwell one day with their dear
father Zeus, and the next in the secret places under the earth, within
the valleys of Therapnai, fulfilling equal fate: because on this wise
chose Polydeukes to live his life rather than to be altogether god and
abide continually in heaven, when that Kastor had fallen in the fight.

Him did Idas, wroth for his oxen, smite with a bronze spearhead, when
from his watch upon Taÿgetos Lynkeus had seen them sitting within a
hollow oak; for he of all men walking the earth had keenest eyes. So
with swift feet they were straightway come to the place, and compassed
speedily a dreadful deed[15].

But terrible also was the vengeance which by the devising of Zeus
those sons[16] of Aphareus suffered: for on the instant came Leto's
son[17] in chase of them: and they stood up against him hard by the
sepulchre of their father. Thence wrenched they a carved headstone
that was set to glorify the dead, and they hurled it at the breast of
Polydeukes. But they crushed him not, neither made him give back,
but rushing onward with fierce spear he drave the bronze head into
Lynkeus' side. And against Idas Zeus hurled a thunderbolt of consuming
fire.

So were those brothers in one flame[18] burnt unbefriended: for a
strife with the stronger is grievous for men to mix in.

Then quickly came back the son of Tyndareus[19] to his great brother,
and found him not quite dead, but the death-gasp rattled in his
throat. Then Polydeukes wept hot tears, and groaned, and lifted up his
voice, and cried: 'Father Kronion--ah! what shall make an end of woes?
Bid me, me also, O king, to die with him. The glory is departed from
a man bereaved of friends. Few are they who in a time of trouble are
faithful in companionship of toil.'

Thus said he, and Zeus came, and stood before his face, and spake
these words: 'Thou art my son: but thy brother afterward was by mortal
seed begotten in thy mother of the hero that was her husband. But
nevertheless, behold I give thee choice of these two lots: if,
shunning death and hateful old age, thou desirest for thyself to dwell
in Olympus with Athene and with Ares of the shadowing spear, this lot
is thine to take: but if in thy brother's cause thou art so hot, and
art resolved in all to have equal share with him, then half thy time
thou shalt be alive beneath the earth, and half in the golden house of
heaven.'

Thus spake his father, and Polydeukes doubted not which counsel he
should choose. So Zeus unsealed the eye, and presently the tongue
also, of Kastor of the brazen mail.


[Footnote 1: Son of the Argive Danaë.]

[Footnote 2: Son of the Argive Io.]

[Footnote 3: Or perhaps: 'Neither were Hypermnestra's story misplaced
here, how she, &c.']

[Footnote 4: Amphiaraos.]

[Footnote 5: Disgust at hearing anything profusely praised.]

[Footnote 6: At Corinth, in the Isthmian games.]

[Footnote 7: Nemea.]

[Footnote 8: The Olympic games.]

[Footnote 9: The Argives.]

[Footnote 10: The Athenian prize seems to have been an olive-bough in
a vase of burnt clay.]

[Footnote 11: Near Nemea.]

[Footnote 12: I. e. with prizes of cloaks.]

[Footnote 13: An ancestor of Theaios. Probably he had given Theoxenia.
See Ol. III.]

[Footnote 14: Kastor and Polydeukes.]

[Footnote 15: They slew Kastor.]

[Footnote 16: Idas and Lynkeus.]

[Footnote 17: Polydeukes.]

[Footnote 18: Either of the thunderbolt, or of a funeral-pile.]

[Footnote 19: Both brothers were nominally sons of Tyndareus, but
really only Kastor was: Polydeukes was a son of Zeus.]



XI.

FOR ARISTAGORAS OF TENEDOS,

ON HIS ELECTION TO THE PRESIDENCY OF THE SENATE.

       *       *       *       *       *

This ode again was written neither for a Nemean nor for any other
athletic victory, but for the [Greek: eisitaeria] or initiatory
ceremonies at the election of a new [Greek: prytanis] of Tenedos. The
Prytanis would seem to have been a kind of President of the Senate.
The date is unknown.

       *       *       *       *       *

Daughter of Rhea, who hast in thy keeping the city halls[1], O
Hestia! sister of highest Zeus and of Hera sharer of his throne, with
good-will welcome Aristagoras to thy sanctuary, with good-will also
his fellows[2] who draw nigh to thy glorious sceptre, for they
in paying honour unto thee keep Tenedos in her place erect, by
drink-offerings glorifying thee many times before the other gods, and
many times by the savour of burnt sacrifice; and the sound of their
lutes is loud, and of their songs: and at their tables never-failing
are celebrated the rites of Zeus, the stranger's friend.

So with fair fame and unvexed heart may Aristagoras fulfil his
twelve-month term.

Blessed among men I count his father Arkesilas, and himself for his
splendid body and his heritage of a dauntless heart.

But if any man shall possess wealth, and withal surpass his fellows in
comely form, and in games have shown his strength to be the best, let
such an one remember that his raiment is upon mortal limbs, and that
the earth shall be his vesture at the end.

Yet in good words of his fellow-citizens is it meet that his praise be
told, and that we make his name comely with notes of honey-sounding
song.

Now among the neighbouring peoples sixteen illustrious victories have
crowned Aristagoras and his famous clan in the wrestling-match and
in the pankration of weighty honour. But hopes too diffident of his
parents kept back the might of their son from essaying the Pythian or
Olympian strife: yet verily by the God of Truth I am persuaded that
both at Castaly and at the tree-clad hill of Kronos, had he gone
thither, he should have turned back home with more honour than any of
his rivals who had striven with him, when that he had kept the fifth
year's feast[3] ordained of Herakles with dance and song, and with the
shining shoots had bound his hair.

But thus among mortals is one cast down from weal by empty boasts,
while another through overmuch mistrusting of his strength is robbed
of his due honours, for that a spirit of little daring draggeth him
backward by the hand.

This were an easy thing to divine, that Peisander's[4] stock was from
Sparta in the time of old (for from Amyklai he came[5] with Orestes,
bringing hither an army of Aiolians in bronze mail): and also that the
blood of his mother's brother Melanippos was blended with Ismenos'
stream[6].

The virtues of an old descent repeat their vigour uncertainly in the
generations of men. Neither doth the black-soiled tilth bring forth
fruit continually, neither will the trees be persuaded to bear with
every year's return a fragrant flower of equal wealth, but in their
turns only. Thus also doth destiny lead on the race of mortals. From
Zeus there cometh no clear sign to men: yet nevertheless we enter on
high counsels, and meditate many acts: for by untameable hope our
bodies are enthralled: but the tides of our affairs are hidden from
our fore-knowledge. Meet is it to pursue advantage moderately:
fiercest is the madness that springeth from unappeasable desires.


[Footnote 1: The sacred fire of the state, over which Hestia watched,
was kept in the Prytaneion.]

[Footnote 2: The other Senators.]

[Footnote 3: The Olympic.]

[Footnote 4: Ancestor of Aristagoras and head of his clan.]

[Footnote 5: 'In the loins of his father.']

[Footnote 6: I. e. a Theban alliance.]



THE ISTHMIAN ODES.


I.

FOR HERODOTOS OF THEBES.

WINNER IN THE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this ode is unknown. We gather from the first strophe that
Pindar was engaged at the time to write an ode in honour of the Delian
Apollo to be sung at Keos, but that he put this off in order first to
write the present ode in honour of a victory won for his own native
state of Thebes.

       *       *       *       *       *

O mother, Thebe of the golden shield, thy service will I set even
above the matter that was in my hand. May rocky Delos, whereto I am
vowed, be not therefore wroth with me. Is there aught dearer to the
good than noble parents?

Give place O Apollonian isle: these twain fair offices, by the grace
of God, will I join together in their end, and to Phoibos of the
unshorn hair in island Keos with men of her sea-race will I make my
choral song, and therewithal this other for the sea-prisoning cliffs
of Isthmos.

For six crowns hath Isthmos given from her games to the people of
Kadmos, a fair glory of triumph for my country, for the land wherein
Alkmene bare her dauntless son, before whom trembled aforetime the
fierce hounds of Geryon.

But I for Herodotos' praise am fain to do honour unto his four-horsed
car, and to marry to the strain of Kastoreian or Iolaic song the fame
that he hath earned, handling his reins in his own and no helping
hand.

For these Kastor and Iolaos were of all heroes the mightiest
charioteers, the one to Lakedaimon, the other born to Thebes. And at
the games they entered oftenest for the strife, and with tripods and
caldrons and cups of gold they made fair their houses, attaining unto
victorious crowns: clear shineth their prowess in the foot-race, run
naked or with the heavy clattering shield; and when they hurled the
javelin and the quoit: for then was there no five-fold game[1], but
for each several feat there was a prize. Oft did they bind about their
hair a crowd of crowns, and showed themselves unto the waters of Dirke
or on Eurotas' banks[2], the son of Iphikles a fellow-townsman of
the Spartoi's race, the son of Tyndareus inhabiting the upland
dwelling-place of Therapna[3] among the Achaians.

So hail ye and farewell: I on Poseidon and holy Isthmos, and on the
lake-shores of Onchestos will throw the mantle of my song, and will
among the glories of this man make glorious also the story of his
father Asopodoros' fate, and his new country Orchomenos, which, when
he drave ashore on a wrecked ship, harboured him amid his dismal
hap[4]. But now once more hath the fortune of his house raised him up
to see the fair days of the old time: and he who hath suffered pain
beareth forethought within his soul.

If a man's desire be wholly after valour, and he give thereto both
wealth and toil, meet is it that to such as attain unto it we offer
with ungrudging heart high meed of praise. For an easy gift it is for
a son of wisdom[5], by a good word spoken in recompense for labour
manifold to set on high the public fame. For diverse meeds for diverse
works are sweet to men, to the shepherd and to the ploughman, to the
fowler and to him whom the sea feedeth--howbeit all those strive but
to keep fierce famine from their bellies; but whoso in the games or in
war hath won delightful fame, receiveth the highest of rewards in fair
words of citizens and of strangers.

Us it beseemeth to requite the earth-shaking son of Kronos, who is
also neighbour unto us, and to sound his praise as our well-doer,
who hath given speed to the horses of our car, and to call upon thy
sons[6], Amphitryon, and the inland dwelling[7] of Minyas, and the
famous grove of Demeter, even Eleusis, and Euboia with her curving
race-course. And thy holy place, Protesilas, add I unto these, built
thee at Phylake by Achaian men.

But to tell over all that Hermes lord of games hath given to Herodotos
by his horses, the short space of my hymn alloweth not. Yea and full
oft doth the keeping of silence bring forth a larger joy.

Now may Herodotos, up-borne upon the sweet-voiced Muse's shining
wings, yet again with wreaths from Pytho and choice wreaths from
Alpheos from the Olympian games entwine his hand, and bring honour
unto seven-gated Thebes.

Now if one at home store hidden wealth, and fall upon other men to
mock them, this man considereth not that he shall give up his soul to
death having known no good report.


[Footnote 1: The Pentathlon. See Introduction to Ol. xiii, and note on
Nem. vii, p. 129.]

[Footnote 2: Rivers were [Greek: kourotrophoi] (nurturers of youth),
and thus young men who had achieved bodily feats were especially bound
to return thanks to the streams of their native places.]

[Footnote 3: In Lakonia.]

[Footnote 4: Asopodoros seems to have been banished from Thebes and
kindly received in his banishment by Orchomenos.]

[Footnote 5: Here, as elsewhere probably in the special sense of a
poet.]

[Footnote 6: Herakles and Iolaos.]

[Footnote 7: Orchomenos.]



II.

FOR XENOKRATES OF AKRAGAS,

WINNER IN THE CHARIOT-RACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is the same winner for whom the sixth Pythian ode was written.
Its date would seem to be 476, while that of the sixth Pythian
was 494. Yet the opening passage of this ode seems to imply that
Xenokiates' son Thrasyboulos was still little more than a boy, whereas
in 494 he had been old enough to be his father's charioteer, and this
would be eighteen years later. But perhaps the passage is only an
allusion to Thrasyboulos' boyhood as a time past. And certainly both
Xenokrates and his brother Theron seem to be spoken of in this ode as
already dead, and we know that Theron did not die till 473. Perhaps
therefore Thrasyboulos was celebrating in 472 the anniversary of his
deceased father's victory, four years after the victory itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

The men of old, Thrasyboulos, who went up into the Muse's car to give
welcome with the loud-voiced lyre, lightly for honour of boys shot
forth their honey-sounding songs, whensoever in one fair of form was
found that sweetest summer-bloom that turneth hearts to think on
fair-throned Aphrodite.

For then the Muse was not yet covetous nor a hireling, neither were
sweet lays tender-voiced sold with silvered faces by Terpsichore of
honeyed speech. But now doth she bid heed the word of the Argive
man[1] which keepeth nigh to the paths of truth:

'Money, money maketh man,' he said, when robbed of goods at once and
friends.

Forasmuch as thou art wise it is nothing hidden to thee that I sing,
while I do honour to the Isthmian victory won by speed of horses,
which to Xenokrates did Poseidon give, and sent to him a wreath of
Dorian parsley to bind about his hair, a man of goodly chariot, a
light of the people of Akragas.

Also at Krisa did far-prevailing Apollo look upon him, and gave him
there too glory: and again when he attained unto the crowns of the
Erectheidai in shining Athens he found no fault in the chariot-saving
hand of the man Nikomachos who drave his horses, the hand wherewith in
the instant of need he bare on all the reins[2].

Moreover the heralds of the seasons[3], the Elean truce-bringers
of Zeus the son of Kronos, recognized him, having met belike with
hospitality from him, and in a voice of dulcet breath they gave him
greeting for that he had fallen at the knees of golden Victory in
their land which men call the holy place of Olympic Zeus, where the
sons[4] of Ainesidamos attained unto honour everlasting.

For no stranger is your house, O Thrasyboulos, to pleasant shouts
of triumph, neither to sweet-voiced songs. For not uphill neither
steep-sloped is the path whereby one bringeth the glories of the
Helikonian maidens to dwell with famous men.

By a far throw of the quoit may I hurl even so far as did Xenokrates
surpass all men in the sweetness of his spirit. In converse with
citizens was he august, and upheld horse-racing after the Hellenes'
wont: also worshipped he at all festivals of the gods, nor ever did
the breeze that breathed around his hospitable board give him cause to
draw in his sail, but with the summer-gales he would fare unto Phasis,
and in his winter voyage unto the shores of Nile[5].

Let not Thrasyboulos now, because that jealous hopes beset the mind
of mortals, be silent concerning his father's prowess, nor from these
hymns: for not to lie idle have I devised them. That message give him,
Nikesippos, when thou comest unto my honoured friend.


[Footnote 1: Aristodemos.]

[Footnote 2: I. e. either tightened the near or slackened the off
reins to the utmost in turning the goal, or perhaps, gave full rein to
his horses between each turn or after the final one.]

[Footnote 3: The heralds who proclaimed throughout Hellas the approach
of the Olympic games, and an universal solemn truce during their
celebration.]

[Footnote 4: Theron, the tyrant of Akragas, and Xenokrates.]

[Footnote 5: Metaphorically, in the extent of his hospitality.]



III.

FOR MELISSOS OF THEBES,

WINNER IN THE PANKRATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this ode is uncertain, though some on the hypothesis that
the battle alluded to is the battle of Plataiai, have dated it 478
or 474. In this battle, whatever it was, the Kleonymid clan to which
Melissos belonged had lost four men. The celebrity of the clan in the
games seems to have been eclipsed for some time, but Melissos revived
it by a chariot-victory at Nemea and this pankration-victory at the
Isthmus, won in spite of his small stature which might have seemed to
place him at a disadvantage. The ode compares his match against his
antagonists with that of Herakles against the African giant Antaios.

Very probably this ode was sung at a night meeting of the clan, while
the altars of Herakles were blazing.

       *       *       *       *       *

If any among men having good fortune and dwelling amid prizes of
renown or the power of wealth restraineth in his heart besetting
insolence, this man is worthy to have part in his citizens' good
words.

But from thee, O Zeus, cometh all high excellence to mortals; and
longer liveth their bliss who have thee in honour, but with minds
perverse it consorteth never steadfastly, flourishing throughout all
time.

In recompense for glorious deeds it behoveth that we sing the valiant,
and amid his triumphal company exalt him with fair honours. Of two
prizes is the lot fallen to Melissos, to turn his heart unto sweet
mirth, for in the glens of Isthmos hath he won crowns, and again
in the hollow vale of the deep-chested lion being winner in the
chariot-race he made proclamation that his home was Thebes.

Thus shameth he not the prowess of his kinsmen. Ye know the ancient
fame of Kleonymos with the chariot: also on the mother's side being
akin to the Labdakidai his race hath been conversant with riches, and
bestowed them on the labours of the four-horse car.

But time with rolling days bringeth changes manifold: only the
children of gods are free of wounds.

By grace of God I have ways countless everywhere open unto me[1]: for
thou hast shown forth to me, O Melissos, in the Isthmian games an
ample means to follow in song the excellence of thy race: wherein the
Kleonymidai flourish continually, and in favour with God pass onward
through the term of mortal life: howbeit changing gales drive all men
with ever-changing drift.

These men verily are spoken of as having honour at Thebes from the
beginning, for that they cherished the inhabitants round about, and
had no part in loud insolence; if there be borne about by the winds
among men aught of witness to the great honour of quick or dead, unto
such have they attained altogether. By the brave deeds of their house
they have touched the pillars of Herakles, that are at the end of
things. Beyond that follow thou no excellence.

Horse-breeders moreover have they been, and found favour with mailed
Ares; but in one day the fierce snow-storm of war hath made a happy
hearth to be desolate of four men.

But now once more after that wintry gloom hath it blossomed, even as
in the flowery months the earth blossometh with red roses, according
to the counsels of gods.

For the Shaker of Earth who inhabiteth Onchestos and the Bridge[2]
between seas that lieth before the valley of Corinth, now giveth to
the house this hymn of wonder, and leadeth up out of her bed the
ancient glory of the famous deeds thereof: for she was fallen on
sleep; but she awaketh and her body shineth preeminent, as among stars
the Morning-star.

For in the land of Athens proclaiming a victory of the car, and at
Sikyon at the games of Adrastos did she give like wreaths of song for
the sons of Kleonymos that then were. For neither did they refrain to
contend with the curved chariot in the great meetings of the people,
but they had delight to strive with the whole folk of Hellas in
spending their wealth on steeds.

Touching the unproven there is silence, and none knoweth them: yea and
even from them that strive Fortune hideth herself until they come unto
the perfect end; for she giveth of this and of that.

The better man hath been ere now overtaken and overthrown by the craft
of worse. Verily ye know the bloody deed of Aias, that he wrought
beneath the far-spent night, when he smote himself through with his
own sword, whereby he upbraideth yet the children of the Hellenes, as
many as went forth to Troy.

But lo! Homer hath done him honour among men, and by raising up his
excellence in the fulness thereof hath through the rod[3] of his
divine lays delivered it to bards after him to sing.

For the thing that one hath well said goeth forth with a voice unto
everlasting: over fruitful earth and beyond the sea hath the light of
fair deeds shined, unquenchable for ever.

May we find favour with the Muses, that for Melissos too we kindle
such beacon-blaze of song, a worthy prize of the pankration for this
scion of Telesias' son.

He being like unto the roaring lions in courage taketh unto him their
spirit to be his own in the struggle: but in sleight he is as the fox
that spreadeth out her feet[4] and preventeth the swoop of the eagle:
for all means must be essayed by him that would prevail over his foe.
For not of the stature of Orion was this man, but his presence is
contemptible, yet terrible is he to grapple with in his strength.

And verily once to the house of Antaios came a man to wrestle against
him, of short stature but of unbending soul, from Kadmean Thebes even
unto corn-bearing Libya, that he might cause him to cease from roofing
Poseidon's temple with the skulls of strangers--even the son of
Alkmene, he who ascended up to Olympus, after that he had searched out
the surface of the whole earth and of the crag-walled hoary sea,
and had made safe way for the sailing of ships. And now beside the
aegis-bearer he dwelleth, possessing happiness most fair, and hath
honour from the immortals as their friend, and hath Hebe to wife, and
is lord of a golden house, and husband of Hera's child.

Unto his honour upon the heights Elektrai we of this city prepare a
feast and new-built altar-ring, where we offer burnt sacrifice in
honour of the eight mail-clad men that are dead, whom Megara, Kreon's
daughter, bore to be sons of Herakles.

To them at the going down of the day there ariseth a flame of fire and
burneth all night continually, amid a savoury smoke hurling itself
against the upper air: and on the second day is the award of the
yearly games, a trial of strength.

Therein did this our man, his head with myrtle-wreaths made white,
show forth a double victory, after another won already among the boys,
for that he had regard unto the many counsels of him who was the pilot
of his helm[5]. And with Orseas' name I join him in my triumphal song,
and shed over them a glory of delight.


[Footnote 1: 'Many themes on which I can justly praise the clan.']

[Footnote 2: The Isthmus.]

[Footnote 3: The rod or staff carried anciently by poets and reciters
of poems.]

[Footnote 4: I. e. throwing herself on her back with feet upward. If
it is meant that she counterfeits death, then of course the parallel
with the pankratiast will only hold good to the extent of the supine
posture.]

[Footnote 5: His trainer, Orseas.]



IV.

FOR PHYLAKIDAS OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE PANKRATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

This Phylakidas was a son of Lampon, and a brother of the Pytheas for
whom the fifth Nemean was written. This ode must have been written
shortly after the battle of Salamis, probably B.C. 478, and was to
be sung at Aigina, perhaps at a festival of the goddess Theia who is
invoked at the beginning. She, according to Hesiod, was the mother
of the Sun, the Moon, and the Morning, and was also called [Greek:
Euruphaessa] and [Greek: chruse], from which latter name perhaps came
her association with gold and wealth.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mother of the Sun, Theia of many names, through thee it is that men
prize gold as mighty above all things else: for ships that strive upon
the sea and horses that run in chariots, for the honour that is of
thee, O queen, are glorified in swiftly circling struggle.

And that man also hath won longed-for glory in the strife of games,
for whose strong hand or fleet foot abundant wreaths have bound his
hair. Through God is the might of men approved.

Two things alone there are that cherish life's bloom to its utmost
sweetness amidst the fair flowers of wealth--to have good success and
to win therefore fair fame. Seek not to be as Zeus; if the portion
of these honours fall to thee, thou hast already all. The things of
mortals best befit mortality.

For thee, Phylakidas, a double glory of valour is at Isthmos stored,
and at Nemea both for thee and for Pytheas a pankratiast's crown.

Not without the sons of Aiakos will my heart indite of song: and in
company of the Graces am I come for sake of Lampon's sons to this
commonwealth of equal laws[1]. If then on the clear high road of
god-given deeds she hath set her feet, grudge not to mingle in song a
seemly draught of glory for her toil.

For even the great men of old that were good warriors have profited of
the telling of their tale, and are glorified on the lute and in the
pipe's strains manifold, through immeasurable time: and to the cunning
in words[2] they give matter by the grace of Zeus.

Thus by their worship with the blaze of burnt-offerings among
Aitolians have the mighty sons[3] of Oineus honour, and at Thebes
Iolaos the charioteer, and at Argos Perseus, and by the streams of
Eurotas Polydeukes and Kastor's spear:

But in Oinone the great souls of Aiakos and his sons, who after much
fighting twice sacked the Trojans' town, first when they went with
Herakles, and again with the sons of Atreus.

Now drive me upward still; say who slew Kyknos, and who Hektor, and
the dauntless chief of Ethiop hosts, bronze-mailed Memnon. What man
was he who with his spear smote noble Telephos by Kaïkos' banks? Even
they whose home my mouth proclaimeth to be Aigina's glorious isle:
a tower is she, builded from long ago, to tempt the climb of
high-adventuring valour.

Many arrows hath my truthful tongue in store wherewith to sound
the praises of her sons: and even but now in war might Aias' city,
Salamis, bear witness thereto in her deliverance by Aigina's seamen
amid the destroying tempest of Zeus, when death came thick as hail on
the unnumbered hosts. Yet let no boast be heard. Zeus ordereth this or
that, Zeus, lord of all.

Now in pleasant song even these honours also of the games welcome the
joy for a fair victory. Let any strive his best in such, who hath
learnt what Kleonikos' house can do. Undulled is the fame of their
long toil, nor ever was their zeal abated by any counting of the cost.

Also have I praise for Pytheas, for that he guided aright[4] the
course of Phylakidas' blows in the struggle of hands that bring limbs
low, an adversary he of cunning soul.

Take for him a crown, and bring the fleecy fillet, and speed him on
his way with this new winged hymn.


[Footnote 1: Aigina.]

[Footnote 2: Poets.]

[Footnote 3: Meleager and his brothers.]

[Footnote 4: Pytheas had given his brother example, and very probably
precept also, in the pankration.]



V.

FOR PHYLAKIDAS OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE PANKRATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

This ode seems to be of earlier date than the last, though placed
after it in our order. The occasion is similar. Probably it was sung
at a banquet at Lampon's house.

       *       *       *       *       *

As one may do amid merry revel of men, so mingle we a second time the
bowls of Muses' melody in honour of Lampon's athlete progeny.

Our first, O Zeus, was unto thee, when at Nemea we[1] won thy
excellent crown, and now is this second unto the lord[2] of Isthmos
and unto the fifty daughters of Nereus, for that Phylakidas the
youngest son is winner in the games. And be it ours to make ready yet
a third for the Saviour[3], the Olympian one, and in honour of Aigina
make libation of our honey-speaking song.

For if a man rejoice to suffer cost and toil, and achieve god-builded
excellence, and therewithal fate plant for him fair renown, already
at the farthest bounds of bliss hath such an one cast anchor, for the
glory that he hath thereby from God. With such desires prayeth the
son[4] of Kleonikos that he may fulfil them ere he meet death or hoary
eld.

Now I call on high-throned Klotho and her sister Fates to draw nigh
unto the praying of the man I love.

And upon you also, golden-charioted seed of Aiakos, I say it is clear
law to me to shed the dew of my good words, what time I set my foot[5]
upon this isle.

For innumerable hundred-foot[6] straight roads are cleft for your
fair deeds to go forth, beyond the springs of Nile, and through the
Hyperboreans' midst: neither is any town so barbarous and strange
of speech that it knoweth not the fame of Peleus, that blissful
son-in-law of gods, or of Aias son of Telamon, and of Aias' sire; whom
unto brazen war an eager ally with Tirynthian men Alkmene's son took
with him in his ships to Troy, to the place of heroes' toil, to take
vengeance for Laomedon's untruth.

There did Herakles take the city of Pergamos, and with help of Telamon
slew the nations of the Meropes, and the herdsman whose stature was as
a mountain, Alkyoneus whom he found at Phlegrai, and spared not of his
hands the terrible twanging bowstring.

But when he went to call the son of Aiakos to the voyage he found the
whole company at the feast. And as he stood there in his lion's skin,
then did Telamon their chief challenge Amphitryon's son of the mighty
spear to make initiative libation of nectar, and handed on unto him
the wine-cup rough with gold.

And Herakles stretched forth to heaven his invincible hands and spake
on this wise: 'If ever, O father Zeus, thou hast heard my prayer with
willing heart, now, even now, with strong entreaty I pray thee that
thou give this man a brave child of Eriboia's womb, that by award of
fate my friend may gain a son of body as staunch[7] as this hide that
hangeth about me, which was of the beast that I slew at Nemea, first
of all my labours; and let his soul be of like sort.'

And when he had thus spoken, the god sent forth the king of birds,
a mighty eagle, and sweet delight thrilled him within, and he spake
aloud as a seer speaketh: 'Behold, the son whom thou askest shall
be born unto thee, O Telamon:' also after the bird's name that had
appeared unto them he said that the child's name should be the mighty
Aias[8], terrible in the strife of warring hosts: so he spake, and
sate him down straightway.

But for me it were long to tell all those valiant deeds. For for
Phylakidas am I come, O Muse, a dispenser of thy triumphal songs, and
for Pytheas, and for Euthymenes[9]; therefore in Argive fashion my
tale shall be of fewest words.

Three victories have they won in the pankration of Isthmos, and others
at leafy Nemea, even these noble sons and their mother's brother: how
fair a portion of song have they brought to light! yea and they water
with the Charites' delicious dew their clan of the Psalychidai, and
have raised up the house of Themistios, and dwell here in a city which
the gods love well.

And Lampon, in that he bestoweth practice on all he doth, holdeth
in high honour the word of Hesiod which speaketh thereof[10], and
exhorteth thereunto his sons, whereby he bringeth unto his city a
general fame: and for his kind entreating of strangers is he loved, to
the just mean aspiring, to the just mean holding fast; and his tongue
departeth not from his thoughts: and among athlete men he is as the
bronze-grinding Naxian whetstone amid stones[11].

Now will I give him to drink of the holy water of Dirke, which
golden-robed Mnemosyne's deep-girdled daughters made once to spring
out of the earth, beside the well-walled gates of Kadmos.


[Footnote 1: I. e. Pytheas. See Nem. v.]

[Footnote 2: Poseidon.]

[Footnote 3: [Greek: Zeus Sotaer], to whom the third cup at a feast
was drunk. He is here invoked also to give a third victory to the
family at the Olympic games.]

[Footnote 4: Lampon.]

[Footnote 5: Figuratively said, as elsewhere.]

[Footnote 6: A hundred feet wide, seemingly.]

[Footnote 7: Not 'invulnerable.' A magic invulnerability was only
attributed to heroes by later legend.]

[Footnote 8: From [Greek: aietos] an eagle.]

[Footnote 9: Maternal uncle of Pytheas and Phylakidas.]

[Footnote 10: [Greek: melete de ergon ophellei]. Opp. 411.]

[Footnote 11: I. e. he stimulates their zeal and skill. The Naxian
whetstone seems to be emery.]



VI.

FOR STREPSIADES OF THEBES,

WINNER IN THE PANKRATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

The date of this ode is not fixed, but it has been supposed that the
battle referred to--apparently a defeat--in which the winner's uncle
was killed was the battle of Oinophyta, fought B.C. 457. But this, and
the notion that the democratic revolution at Thebes is referred to,
are only conjectures.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wherewithal of the fair deeds done in thy land, O divine Thebe, hath
thy soul had most delight? Whether when thou broughtest forth to the
light Dionysos of the flowing hair, who sitteth beside Demeter to whom
the cymbals clang? or when at midnight in a snow of gold thou didst
receive the mightiest of the gods, what time he stood at Amphitryon's
doors and beguiled his wife, to the begetting of Herakles? Or when
thou hadst honour in the wise counsels of Teiresias, or in Iolaos the
cunning charioteer, or the unwearied spears of the Spartoi? or when
out of the noise of the strong battle-cry thou sentest Adrastos home
to horse-breeding Argos, of his countless company forlorn? or when
thou madest the Dorian colony of the men of Lakedaimon stand upright
upon its feet[1], and the sons of Aigeus thy progeny took Amyklai,
according to the oracles of Pytho?

Nay, but the glory of the old time sleepeth, and mortals are unmindful
thereof, save such as married to the sounding stream of song attaineth
unto the perfect meed that wisdom[2] giveth. New triumph now lead for
Strepsiades with melodious hymn: for at Isthmos hath he borne away the
pankratiast's prize. Wondrous in strength is he, and to look upon of
goodly shape, and his valour is such as shameth not his stature.

So shineth he forth by grace of the Muses iris-haired, and to his
uncle of like name hath he given to share his crown, for albeit
bronze-shielded Ares gave him over unto death, yet remaineth there for
the valiant a recompense of renown. For let whoso amid the cloud of
war from his beloved country wardeth the bloody shower, and maketh
havoc in the enemy's host, know assuredly that for the race of his
fellow-citizens he maketh their renown wax mightily, yea when he is
dead even as while he was yet alive.

So didst thou, son[3] of Diodotos, following the praise of the warrior
Meleagros, and of Hektor, and of Amphiaraos, breathe forth the spirit
of thy fair-flowering youth amid the company of fighters in the front,
where the bravest on slenderest hopes bare up the struggle of war.

Then suffered I a pang unspeakable, but now hath the earth-grasper[4]
granted unto me a calm after the storm: I will set chaplets on my hair
and sing. Now let no jealousy of immortals mar whatever sweet thing
through a day's pursuit I follow, as it leadeth on up to old age, and
unto the term of life appointed.

For all we in like manner die, albeit our lots be diverse. If any lift
up his eye to look upon things afar off, yet is he too weak to attain
unto the bronze-paved dwelling of the gods. Thus did winged Pegasos
throw his lord Bellerophon, when he would fain enter into the heavenly
habitations and mix among the company of Zeus. Unrighteous joyance a
bitter end awaiteth.

But to us, O Loxias of the golden-flowing hair, give also at thy
Pythian games a new fair-flowering crown.


[Footnote 1: The Theban Aigidai helped the mythical 'return of the
Herakleidai.']

[Footnote 2: Wisdom of bards.]

[Footnote 3: Strepsiades the uncle.]

[Footnote 4: Poseidon.]



VII.

FOR KLEANDROS OF AIGINA,

WINNER IN THE PANKRATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

All that we can be certain of as to the date of this ode is that it
was written soon after the final expulsion of the Persians. From the
first strophe we learn that Kleandros had won a Nemean as well as an
Isthmian victory, and perhaps this ode really belongs to the former.
It was to be sung, it seems, before the house of Telesarchos the
winner's father, at Aigina.

       *       *       *       *       *

For Kleandros in his prime let some of you, ye young men, go stand
before the shining portal of his father Telesarchos, and rouse a song
of triumph, to be a glorious recompense of his toils, for that he hath
achieved reward of victory at Isthmos, and hath showed his strength in
the games of Nemea.

For him I also, albeit heavy at heart[1], am bidden to call upon the
golden Muse. Yea since we are come forth from our sore troubles let
us not fall into the desolation of crownlessness, neither nurse our
griefs; but having ease from our ills that are past mending, we will
set some pleasant thing before the people, though it follow hard on
pain: inasmuch as some god hath put away from us the Tantalos-stone
that hung above our heads, a curse intolerable to Hellas.

But now hath the passing of this terror ended my sore disquietude, and
ever it is better to look only on the thing hard by. For the guile of
time hangeth above the heads of men, and maketh the way of their life
crooked, yet if Freedom abide with them, even such things may mortals
cure.

But it is meet that a man cherish good hope: and meet also that I,
whom seven-gated Thebes reared, proffer chiefly unto Aigina the
choicest of the Graces' gifts, for that from one sire were two
daughters[2] born, youngest of the children of Asopos, and found
favour in the eyes of the king Zeus.

One by the fair stream of Dirke he set to be the queen of a city of
charioteers, and thee the other he bare to the Oinopian isle, and lay
with thee, whence to the sire of great thunderings thou didst bear the
godlike Aiakos, best of men upon the earth.

This man even among divinities became a decider of strife: and his
godlike sons and his sons' sons delighting in battle were foremost in
valour when they met in the ringing brazen melley: chaste also were
they approved, and wise of heart.

Thereof was the god's council mindful, what time for the hand of
Thetis there was strife between Zeus and glorious Poseidon, each
having desire that she should be his fair bride, for love had obtained
dominion over them.

Yet did not the wisdom of the immortal gods fulfil for them such
marriage, when they had heard a certain oracle. For Themis of wise
counsels spake in the midst of them of how it was pre-destined that
the sea-goddess should bear a royal offspring mightier than his
father, whose hand should wield a bolt more terrible than the
lightning or the dread trident, if she came ever into the bed of Zeus,
or of brethren of Zeus.

'Cease ye herefrom: let her enter a mortal's couch and see her son
fall in war, who shall be as Ares in the might of his hands, and as
the lightning in the swiftness of his feet. My counsel is that ye give
her to be the heaven-sent prize of Peleus son of Aiakos, whom the
speech of men showeth to be their most righteous, an offspring of
Iolkos' plain. Thus straightway let the message go forth to Cheiron's
cave divine, neither let the daughter of Nereus put a second time
into your hands the ballot-leaves of strife. So on the evening of the
mid-month moon shall she unbind for the hero the fair girdle of her
virginity.'

Thus spake the goddess her word to the children of Kronos, and they
bowed their everlasting brows. Nor failed her words of fruit, for they
say that to Thetis' bridals came those twain kings even with the rest.

Out of the mouths of the wise hath the young valour of Achilles
been declared to them that beheld it not. He it was who stained the
vine-clad Mysian plain with the dark blood of Telephos that he shed
thereon, and made for the sons of Atreus a safe return across the sea,
and delivered Helen, when that he had cut asunder with his spear the
sinews of Troy, even the men who kept him back as he plied the work
of slaughterous battle on the plain, the strength of Memnon and
high-hearted Hektor, and other chiefs of pride. Unto all these did
Achilles, champion of the Aiakid race, point the way to the house of
Persephone, and thereby did he glorify Aigina and the root whence he
was sprung.

Neither in death was he of songs forsaken, for at his funeral pyre and
beside his tomb stood the Helikonian maiden-choir, and poured thereon
a dirge of many melodies. For so the immortals willed, to give charge
unto the songs of goddesses over that valorous man even in his death.

And now also holdeth such charge good, and the Muses' chariot speedeth
to sound the glories of Nikokles the boxer[3]. Honour to him who in
the Isthmian vale hath won the Dorian parsley: for he even as Achilles
overcame men in battle, turning them to confusion, with hand from
which flight was vain. Him shameth not this kinsman of his father's
noble brother. Wherefore let some one of the young men his fellows
twine for Kleandros a wreath of tender myrtle for his pankratiast
victory. For the games whose name is of Alkathoos[4], and the youth of
Epidauros[5], have ere now entertained him with good hap. To praise
him is given unto the good: for in no hidden corner quenched he his
youth, unproven in honourable deeds.


[Footnote 1: Because, though the Persians had been defeated, Thebes,
Pindar's city, had not shared the glory.]

[Footnote 2: Thebe and Aigine.]

[Footnote 3: Uncle of the winner.]

[Footnote 4: A son of Pelops: he slew the lion of Kithairon.]

[Footnote 5: The Epidaurian games were in honour of Asklepios.]



FRAGMENTS.

Nearly two-thirds of the Fragments cannot be assigned to any distinct
class: the rest are divided among (1) [Greek: Epinikia], or Triumphal
Odes (such as are the odes remaining to us entire), (2) [Greek:
Hymnoi], or Hymns sung by a choir in honour of gods, (3) [Greek:
Paianes], or Hymns of a like kind but anciently addressed especially
to Apollo and Artemis for their intervention against pestilence, (4)
[Greek: Dithyramboi], or choral songs of more general compass, verging
sometimes on the drama, (5) [Greek: Prosodia], or Processional Songs,
(6) [Greek: Parthenia], or Songs for a Choir of Maidens, (7) [Greek:
Hyporchaemata], or Songs with Accompaniment of Dance, (8) [Greek:
Enkomia], or Odes sung by a [Greek: komos] in praise of some person
but not necessarily on any special occasion, (9) [Greek: Skolia], or
Songs to be sung at Banquets, (10) [Greek: Thraenoi], or Dirges.



FRAGMENT OF A DITHYRAMB,

TO BE SUNG AT ATHENS.

Hither! Olympian gods to our choice dance, and make your grace to
descend thereon and to glorify it, ye who in sacred Athens visit the
city's incensed centre-stone, and her famed market-place of splendid
ornament; receive ye violet-entwinëd crowns and drink-offerings of
spring-gathered herbs, and look on me who am come from the house of
Zeus with my bright song a second time unto the ivy-crownëd god, whom
we call Bromios, even the god of clamorous shout.

To sing the offspring[1] of the Highest and of Kadmeän mothers am I
come.

In Argive Nemea the prophet of the god overlooketh not the branch of
palm, what time with the opening of the chamber of the Hours, the
nectarous plants perceive the fragrant spring[2].

Then, then are strown over the face of the eternal earth the lovely
violet-tufts, then are roses twined in hair, then sound to the flute's
accompaniment voices of song, then sound our choice hymns unto the
honour of bright-filleted Semele ...


[Footnote 1: Dionysos, son of Zeus and of Semele, daughter of Kadmos.]

[Footnote 2: Bockh has suggested the following ingenious explanation
of this passage. In the temple of Zeus at Nemea grew a sacred palm,
and a branch of this was given, together with his crown, to a winner
in the Nemean games. Pindar had been at those games in the winter, and
means that he, like the priest of the temple, could foresee from the
tokens of the branch that spring was approaching, and with spring the
vernal Dionysia at Athens.]


FRAGMENTS OF A PROCESSION-SONG ([Greek: prosodion]),

IN HONOUR OF DELOS.

Hail! god-reared daughter of the sea, earth-shoot most dear to
bright-haired Leto's children, wide earth's immoveable marvel, who of
mortals art called Delos, but of the blessed gods in Olympus the dark
earth's far-seen star[1]... ... For of old time it[2] drifted before
the waves and stress of winds from every side; but when she[3] of
Koios set foot thereon, as the swift pains of her travailing drew
nigh, then verily from roots deep down in earth there sprang upright
four pillars with adamantine base, and on their capitals they held up
the rock: there was the goddess delivered, and looked upon her blessed
brood........


[Footnote 1: The old mythical name of Delos was Asteria.]

[Footnote 2: The island.]

[Footnote 3: Leto.]

       *       *       *       *       *


FRAGMENT OF A SONG WITH ACCOMPANIMENT OF DANCE
([Greek: huporchaema]), WRITTEN ON OCCASION OF AN ECLIPSE
OF THE SUN, PROBABLY THAT OF APRIL 30, B.C. 463.

Wherefore, O Light of the Sun, thou that seest all things and givest
bounds unto the sight of mine eyes--wherefore O star supreme hast thou
in the daytime hidden thyself, and made useless unto men the wings of
their strength and the paths that wisdom findeth, and hastest along a
way of darkness to bring on us some strange thing?

Now in the name of Zeus I pray unto thee, O holy Light, that by thy
swift steeds thou turn this marvel in the sight of all men to be for
the unimpaired good hap of Thebes. Yet if the sign which thou showest
us be of some war, or destruction of harvest, or an exceeding storm of
snow, or ruinous civil strife, or emptying of the sea upon the earth,
or freezing of the soil, or summer rains pouring in vehement flood, or
whether thou wilt drown the earth and make anew another race of men,
then will I suffer it amid the common woe of all....



FRAGMENTS.

I

FRAGMENTS OF DIRGES (thraenoi).

.... For them shineth below the strength of the sun while in our world
it is night, and the space of crimsonflowered meadows before their
city is full of the shade of frankincense-trees, and of fruits of
gold. And some in horses, and in bodily feats, and some in dice,
and some in harp-playing have delight; and among them thriveth all
fair-flowering bliss; and fragrance streameth ever through the lovely
land, as they mingle incense of every kind upon the altars of the
gods....

II.

.... BY happy lot travel all unto an end that giveth them rest from
toils. And the body indeed is subject unto the great power of death,
but there remaineth yet alive a shadow of life; for this only is from
the gods; and while the limbs stir, it sleepeth, but unto sleepers
in dreams discovereth oftentimes the judgment that draweth nigh for
sorrow or for joy..

III

But from whomsoever Persephone accepteth atonement made for an ancient
woe, their souls unto the light of the sun above she sendeth back
again in the ninth year. And from those souls spring noble kings,
and men swift and strong and in wisdom very great: and through the
after-time they are called holy heroes among men......


THE END.


================================================================================
[The World as Will and Idea Vol.1 (의지와 표상으로서의 세계 1)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of Essays of Schopenhauer
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Essays of Schopenhauer

Author: Arthur Schopenhauer

Translator: Sara Hay Goddard Dircks


        
Release date: April 1, 2004 [eBook #11945]
                Most recently updated: October 28, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/11945

Credits: Etext produced by Juliet Sutherland and PG Distributed Proofreaders
        
        HTML file produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESSAYS OF SCHOPENHAUER ***

HTML file produced by David Widger




ESSAYS OF SCHOPENHAUER:

TRANSLATED BY MRS. RUDOLF DIRCKS.

WITH AN INTRODUCTION.




CONTENTS


ON AUTHORSHIP AND STYLE
ON NOISE
ON EDUCATION
ON READING AND BOOKS
THE EMPTINESS OF EXISTENCE
ON WOMEN
THINKING FOR ONESELF
SHORT DIALOGUE ON THE INDESTRUCTIBILITY OF OUR TRUE BEING BY DEATH
RELIGION--A DIALOGUE
PSYCHOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS
METAPHYSICS OF LOVE
PHYSIOGNOMY
ON SUICIDE




PRELIMINARY.


When Schopenhauer was asked where he wished to be buried, he answered,
"Anywhere; they will find me;" and the stone that marks his grave at
Frankfort bears merely the inscription "Arthur Schopenhauer," without
even the date of his birth or death. Schopenhauer, the pessimist, had a
sufficiently optimistic conviction that his message to the world would
ultimately be listened to--a conviction that never failed him during a
lifetime of disappointments, of neglect in quarters where perhaps he
would have most cherished appreciation; a conviction that only showed
some signs of being justified a few years before his death. Schopenhauer
was no opportunist; he was not even conciliatory; he never hesitated to
declare his own faith in himself, in his principles, in his philosophy;
he did not ask to be listened to as a matter of courtesy but as a
right--a right for which he would struggle, for which he fought, and
which has in the course of time, it may be admitted, been conceded to
him.

Although everything that Schopenhauer wrote was written more or less as
evidence to support his main philosophical thesis, his unifying
philosophical principle, the essays in this volume have an interest, if
not altogether apart, at least of a sufficiently independent interest to
enable them to be considered on their own merits, without relation to
his main idea. And in dissociating them, if one may do so for a moment
(their author would have scarcely permitted it!), one feels that one
enters a field of criticism in which opinions can scarcely vary. So far
as his philosophy is concerned, this unanimity does not exist; he is one
of the best abused amongst philosophers; he has many times been
explained and condemned exhaustively, and no doubt this will be as many
times repeated. What the trend of his underlying philosophical principal
was, his metaphysical explanation of the world, is indicated in almost
all the following essays, but chiefly in the "Metaphysics of Love," to
which the reader may be referred.

These essays are a valuable criticism of life by a man who had a wide
experience of life, a man of the world, who possessed an almost inspired
faculty of observation. Schopenhauer, of all men, unmistakably observed
life at first hand. There is no academic echo in his utterances; he is
not one of a school; his voice has no formal intonation; it is deep,
full-chested, and rings out its words with all the poignancy of
individual emphasis, without bluster, but with unfailing conviction. He
was for his time, and for his country, an adept at literary form; but he
used it only as a means. Complicated as his sentences occasionally are,
he says many sharp, many brilliant, many epigrammatic things, he has the
manner of the famous essayists, he is paradoxical (how many of his
paradoxes are now truisms!); one fancies at times that one is almost
listening to a creation of Molière, but these fireworks are not merely a
literary display, they are used to illumine what he considers to be the
truth. _Rien n'est beau que le vrai; le vrai seul est aimable_, he
quotes; he was a deliberate and diligent searcher after truth, always
striving to attain the heart of things, to arrive at a knowledge of
first principles. It is, too, not without a sort of grim humour that
this psychological vivisectionist attempts to lay bare the skeleton of
the human mind, to tear away all the charming little sentiments and
hypocrisies which in the course of time become a part and parcel of
human life. A man influenced by such motives, and possessing a frank and
caustic tongue, was not likely to attain any very large share of popular
favour or to be esteemed a companionable sort of person. The fabric of
social life is interwoven with a multitude of delicate evasions, of
small hypocrisies, of matters of tinsel sentiment; social intercourse
would be impossible, if it were not so. There is no sort of social
existence possible for a person who is ingenuous enough to say always
what he thinks, and, on the whole, one may be thankful that there is
not. One naturally enough objects to form the subject of a critical
diagnosis and exposure; one chooses for one's friends the agreeable
hypocrites of life who sustain for one the illusions in which one wishes
to live. The mere conception of a plain-speaking world is calculated to
reduce one to the last degree of despair; it is the conception of the
intolerable. Nevertheless it is good for mankind now and again to have a
plain speaker, a "mar feast," on the scene; a wizard who devises for us
a spectacle of disillusionment, and lets us for a moment see things as
he honestly conceives them to be, and not as we would have them to be.
But in estimating the value of a lesson of this sort, we must not be
carried too far, not be altogether convinced. We may first take into
account the temperament of the teacher; we may ask, is his vision
perfect? We may indulge in a trifling diagnosis on our own account. And
in an examination of this sort we find that Schopenhauer stands the test
pretty well, if not with complete success. It strikes us that he suffers
perhaps a little from a hereditary taint, for we know that there is an
unmistakable predisposition to hypochondria in his family; we know, for
instance, that his paternal grandmother became practically insane
towards the end of her life, that two of her children suffered from some
sort of mental incapacity, and that a third, Schopenhauer's father, was
a man of curious temper and that he probably ended his own life. He
himself would also have attached some importance, in a consideration of
this sort, to the fact, as he might have put it, that his mother, when
she married, acted in the interests of the individual instead of
unconsciously fulfilling the will of the species, and that the offspring
of the union suffered in consequence. Still, taking all these things
into account, and attaching to them what importance they may be worth,
one is amazed at the clearness of his vision, by his vigorous and at
moments subtle perception. If he did not see life whole, what he did see
he saw with his own eyes, and then told us all about it with
unmistakable veracity, and for the most part simply, brilliantly. Too
much importance cannot be attached to this quality of seeing things for
oneself; it is the stamp of a great and original mind; it is the
principal quality of what one calls genius.

In possessing Schopenhauer the world possesses a personality the richer;
a somewhat garrulous personality it may be; a curiously whimsical and
sensitive personality, full of quite ordinary superstitions, of
extravagant vanities, selfish, at times violent, rarely generous; a man
whom during his lifetime nobody quite knew, an isolated creature,
self-absorbed, solely concerned in his elaboration of the explanation of
the world, and possessing subtleties which for the most part escaped the
perception of his fellows; at once a hermit and a boulevardier. His was
essentially a great temperament; his whole life was a life of ideas, an
intellectual life. And his work, the fruit of his life, would seem to be
standing the test of all great work--the test of time. It is not a
little curious that one so little realised in his own day, one so little
lovable and so little loved, should now speak to us from his pages with
something of the force of personal utterance, as if he were actually
with us and as if we knew him, even as we know Charles Lamb and Izaak
Walton, personalities of such a different calibre. And this man whom we
realise does not impress us unfavourably; if he is without charm, he is
surely immensely interesting and attractive; he is so strong in his
intellectual convictions, he is so free from intellectual affectations,
he is such an ingenuous egotist, so naïvely human; he is so mercilessly
honest and independent, and, at times (one may be permitted to think),
so mistaken.

R.D.




BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE.


Arthur Schopenhauer was born at No. 117 of the Heiligengeist Strasse, at
Dantzic, on February 22, 1788. His parents on both sides traced their
descent from Dutch ancestry, the great-grandfather of his mother having
occupied some ecclesiastical position at Gorcum. Dr. Gwinner in his
_Life_ does not follow the Dutch ancestry on the father's side, but
merely states that the great-grandfather of Schopenhauer at the
beginning of the eighteenth century rented a farm, the Stuthof, in the
neighbourhood of Dantzic. This ancestor, Andreas Schopenhauer, received
here on one occasion an unexpected visit from Peter the Great and
Catherine, and it is related that there being no stove in the chamber
which the royal pair selected for the night, their host, for the purpose
of heating it, set fire to several small bottles of brandy which had
been emptied on the stone floor. His son Andreas followed in the
footsteps of his father, combining a commercial career with country
pursuits. He died in 1794 at Ohra, where he had purchased an estate, and
to which he had retired to spend his closing years. His wife (the
grandmother of Arthur) survived him for some years, although shortly
after his death she was declared insane and incapable of managing her
affairs. This couple had four sons: the eldest, Michael Andreas, was
weak-minded; the second, Karl Gottfried, was also mentally weak and had
deserted his people for evil companions; the youngest son, Heinrich
Floris, possessed, however, in a considerable degree the qualities which
his brothers lacked. He possessed intelligence, a strong character, and
had great commercial sagacity; at the same time, he took a definite
interest in intellectual pursuits, reading Voltaire, of whom he was more
or less a disciple, and other French authors, possessing a keen
admiration for English political and family life, and furnishing his
house after an English fashion. He was a man of fiery temperament and
his appearance was scarcely prepossessing; he was short and stout; he
had a broad face and turned-up nose, and a large mouth. This was the
father of our philosopher.

When he was thirty-eight, Heinrich Schopenhauer married, on May 16,
1785, Johanna Henriette Trosiener, a young lady of eighteen, and
daughter of a member of the City Council of Dantzic. She was at this
time an attractive, cultivated young person, of a placid disposition,
who seems to have married more because marriage offered her a
comfortable settlement and assured position in life, than from any
passionate affection for her wooer, which, it is just to her to say, she
did not profess. Heinrich Schopenhauer was so much influenced by English
ideas that he desired that his first child should be born in England;
and thither, some two years after their marriage, the pair, after making
a _détour_ on the Continent, arrived. But after spending some weeks in
London Mrs. Schopenhauer was seized with home-sickness, and her husband
acceded to her entreaties to return to Dantzic, where a child, the
future philosopher, was shortly afterwards born. The first five years of
the child's life were spent in the country, partly at the Stuthof which
had formerly belonged to Andreas Schopenhauer, but had recently come
into the possession of his maternal grandfather.

Five years after the birth of his son, Heinrich Schopenhauer, in
consequence of the political crisis, which he seems to have taken keenly
to heart, in the affairs of the Hanseatic town of Dantzic, transferred
his business and his home to Hamburg, where in 1795 a second child,
Adele, was born. Two years later, Heinrich, who intended to train his
son for a business life, took him, with this idea, to Havre, by way of
Paris, where they spent a little time, and left him there with M.
Grégoire, a commercial connection. Arthur remained at Havre for two
years, receiving private instruction with this man's son Anthime, with
whom he struck up a strong friendship, and when he returned to Hamburg
it was found that he remembered but few words of his mother-tongue. Here
he was placed in one of the principal private schools, where he remained
for three years. Both his parents, but especially his mother, cultivated
at this time the society of literary people, and entertained at their
house Klopstock and other notable persons. In the summer following his
return home from Havre he accompanied his parents on a continental tour,
stopping amongst other places at Weimar, where he saw Schiller. His
mother, too, had considerable literary tastes, and a distinct literary
gift which, later, she cultivated to some advantage, and which brought
her in the production of accounts of travel and fiction a not
inconsiderable reputation. It is, therefore, not surprising that
literary tendencies began to show themselves in her son, accompanied by
a growing distaste for the career of commerce which his father wished
him to follow. Heinrich Schopenhauer, although deprecating these
tendencies, considered the question of purchasing a canonry for his son,
but ultimately gave up the idea on the score of expense. He then
proposed to take him on an extended trip to France, where he might meet
his young friend Anthime, and then to England, if he would give up the
idea of a literary calling, and the proposal was accepted.

In the spring of 1803, then, he accompanied his parents to London,
where, after spending some time in sight-seeing, he was placed in the
school of Mr. Lancaster at Wimbledon. Here he remained for three months,
from July to September, laying the foundation of his knowledge of the
English language, while his parents proceeded to Scotland. English
formality, and what he conceived to be English hypocrisy, did not
contrast favourably with his earlier and gayer experiences in France,
and made an extremely unfavourable impression upon his mind; which found
expression in letters to his friends and to his mother.

On returning to Hamburg after this extended excursion abroad,
Schopenhauer was placed in the office of a Hamburg senator called
Jenisch, but he was as little inclined as ever to follow a commercial
career, and secretly shirked his work so that he might pursue his
studies. A little later a somewhat unexplainable calamity occurred. When
Dantzic ceased to be a free city, and Heinrich Schopenhauer at a
considerable cost and monetary sacrifice transferred his business to
Hamburg, the event caused him much bitterness of spirit. At Hamburg his
business seems to have undergone fluctuations. Whether these further
affected his spirit is not sufficiently established, but it is certain,
however, that he developed peculiarities of manner, and that his temper
became more violent. At any rate, one day in April 1805 it was found
that he had either fallen or thrown himself into the canal from an upper
storey of a granary; it was generally concluded that it was a case of
suicide.

Schopenhauer was seventeen at the time of this catastrophe, by which he
was naturally greatly affected. Although by the death of his father the
influence which impelled him to a commercial career was removed, his
veneration for the dead man remained with him through life, and on one
occasion found expression in a curious tribute to his memory in a
dedication (which was not, however, printed) to the second edition of
_Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung._ "That I could make use of and
cultivate in a right direction the powers which nature gave me," he
concludes, "that I could follow my natural impulse and think and work
for countless others without the help of any one; for that I thank thee,
my father, thank thy activity, thy cleverness, thy thrift and care for
the future. Therefore I praise thee, my noble father. And every one who
from my work derives any pleasure, consolation, or instruction shall
hear thy name and know that if Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer had not been
the man he was, Arthur Schopenhauer would have been a hundred times
ruined."

The year succeeding her husband's death, Johanna Schopenhauer removed
with her daughter to Weimar, after having attended to the settlement of
her husband's affairs, which left her in possession of a considerable
income. At Weimar she devoted herself to the pursuit of literature, and
held twice a week a sort of salon, which was attended by Goethe, the two
Schlegels, Wieland, Heinrich Meyer, Grimm, and other literary persons of
note. Her son meanwhile continued for another year at the "dead timber
of the desk," when his mother, acting under the advice of her friend
Fernow, consented, to his great joy, to his following his literary bent.

During the next few years we find Schopenhauer devoting himself
assiduously to acquiring the equipment for a learned career; at first at
the Gymnasium at Gotha, where he penned some satirical verses on one of
the masters, which brought him into some trouble. He removed in
consequence to Weimar, where he pursued his classical studies under the
direction of Franz Passow, at whose house he lodged. Unhappily, during
his sojourn at Weimar his relations with his mother became strained. One
feels that there is a sort of autobiographical interest in his essay on
women, that his view was largely influenced by his relations with his
mother, just as one feels that his particular argument in his essay on
education is largely influenced by the course of his own training.

On his coming of age Schopenhauer was entitled to a share of the
paternal estate, a share which yielded him a yearly income of about
£150. He now entered himself at the University of Göttingen (October
1809), enrolling himself as a student of medicine, and devoting himself
to the study of the natural sciences, mineralogy, anatomy, mathematics,
and history; later, he included logic, physiology, and ethnography. He
had always been passionately devoted to music and found relaxation in
learning to play the flute and guitar. His studies at this time did not
preoccupy him to the extent of isolation; he mixed freely with his
fellows, and reckoned amongst his friends or acquaintances, F.W. Kreise,
Bunsen, and Ernst Schulze. During one vacation he went on an expedition
to Cassel and to the Hartz Mountains. It was about this time, and partly
owing to the influence of Schulze, the author of _Aenesidemus_, and then
a professor at the University of Göttingen, that Schopenhauer came to
realise his vocation as that of a philosopher.

During his holiday at Weimar he called upon Wieland, then seventy-eight
years old, who, probably prompted by Mrs. Schopenhauer, tried to
dissuade him from the vocation which he had chosen. Schopenhauer in
reply said, "Life is a difficult question; I have decided to spend my
life in thinking about it." Then, after the conversation had continued
for some little time, Wieland declared warmly that he thought that he
had chosen rightly. "I understand your nature," he said; "keep to
philosophy." And, later, he told Johanna Schopenhauer that he thought
her son would be a great man some day.

Towards the close of the summer of 1811 Schopenhauer removed to Berlin
and entered the University. He here continued his study of the natural
sciences; he also attended the lectures on the History of Philosophy by
Schleiermacher, and on Greek Literature and Antiquities by F.A. Wolf,
and the lectures on "Facts of Consciousness" and "Theory of Science" by
Fichte, for the last of whom, as we know indeed from frequent references
in his books, he had no little contempt. A year or so later, when the
news of Napoleon's disaster in Russia arrived, the Germans were thrown
into a state of great excitement, and made speedy preparations for war.
Schopenhauer contributed towards equipping volunteers for the army, but
he did not enter active service; indeed, when the result of the battle
of Lützen was known and Berlin seemed to be in danger, he fled for
safety to Dresden and thence to Weimar. A little later we find him at
Rudolstadt, whither he had proceeded in consequence of the recurrence of
differences with his mother, and remained there from June to November
1813, principally engaged in the composition of an essay, "A
Philosophical Treatise on the Fourfold Root of the Principle of
Sufficient Reason," which he offered to the University of Jena as an
exercise to qualify for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, and for
which a diploma was granted. He published this essay at his own cost
towards the end of the year, but it seems to have fallen flatly from the
press, although its arguments attracted the attention and the sympathy
of Goethe, who, meeting him on his return to Weimar in November,
discussed with him his own theory of colour. A couple of years before,
Goethe, who was opposed to the Newtonian theory of light, had brought
out his _Farbenlehre_ (colour theory). In Goethe's diary Schopenhauer's
name frequently occurs, and on the 24th November 1813 he wrote to
Knebel: "Young Schopenhauer is a remarkable and interesting man.... I
find him intellectual, but I am undecided about him as far as other
things go." The result of this association with Goethe was his _Ueber
das Sehn und die Farben_ ("On Vision and Colour"), published at Leipzig
in 1816, a copy of which he forwarded to Goethe (who had already seen
the MS.) on the 4th May of that year. A few days later Goethe wrote to
the distinguished scientist, Dr. Seebeck, asking him to read the work.
In Gwinner's _Life_ we find the copy of a letter written in English to
Sir C.L. Eastlake: "In the year 1830, as I was going to publish in Latin
the same treatise which in German accompanies this letter, I went to Dr.
Seebeck of the Berlin Academy, who is universally admitted to be the
first natural philosopher (in the English sense of the word meaning
physiker) of Germany; he is the discoverer of thermo-electricity and of
several physical truths. I questioned him on his opinion on the
controversy between Goethe and Newton; he was extremely cautious and
made me promise that I should not print and publish anything of what he
might say, and at last, being hard pressed by me, he confessed that
indeed Goethe was perfectly right and Newton wrong, but that he had no
business to tell the world so. He has died since, the old coward!"

In May 1814 Schopenhauer removed from Weimar to Dresden, in consequence
of the recurrence of domestic differences with his mother. This was the
final break between the pair, and he did not see her again during the
remaining twenty-four years of her life, although they resumed
correspondence some years before her death. It were futile to attempt to
revive the dead bones of the cause of these unfortunate differences
between Johanna Schopenhauer and her son. It was a question of opposing
temperaments; both and neither were at once to blame. There is no reason
to suppose that Schopenhauer was ever a conciliatory son, or a
companionable person to live with; in fact, there is plenty to show that
he possessed trying and irritating qualities, and that he assumed an
attitude of criticism towards his mother that could not in any
circumstances be agreeable. On the other hand, Anselm Feuerbach in his
_Memoirs_ furnishes us with a scarcely prepossessing picture of Mrs.
Schopenhauer: "Madame Schopenhauer," he writes, "a rich widow. Makes
profession of erudition. Authoress. Prattles much and well,
intelligently; without heart and soul. Self-complacent, eager after
approbation, and constantly smiling to herself. God preserve us from
women whose mind has shot up into mere intellect."

Schopenhauer meanwhile was working out his philosophical system, the
idea of his principal philosophical work. "Under my hands," he wrote in
1813, "and still more in my mind grows a work, a philosophy which will
be an ethics and a metaphysics in one:--two branches which hitherto have
been separated as falsely as man has been divided into soul and body.
The work grows, slowly and gradually aggregating its parts like the
child in the womb. I became aware of one member, one vessel, one part
after another. In other words, I set each sentence down without anxiety
as to how it will fit into the whole; for I know it has all sprung from
a single foundation. It is thus that an organic whole originates, and
that alone will live.... Chance, thou ruler of this sense-world! Let me
live and find peace for yet a few years, for I love my work as the
mother her child. When it is matured and has come to birth, then exact
from me thy duties, taking interest for the postponement. But, if I sink
before the time in this iron age, then grant that these miniature
beginnings, these studies of mine, be given to the world as they are and
for what they are: some day perchance will arise a kindred spirit, who
can frame the members together and 'restore' the fragment of
antiquity."[1]

By March 1817 he had completed the preparatory work of his system, and
began to put the whole thing together; a year later _Die Welt als Wille
und Vorstellung: vier Bücher, nebst einem Anhange, der die Kritik der
Kantischen Philosophie enthält_ ("The World as Will and Idea; four
books, with an appendix containing a criticism on the philosophy of
Kant"). Some delay occurring in the publication, Schopenhauer wrote one
of his characteristically abusive letters to Brockhaus, his publisher,
who retorted "that he must decline all further correspondence with one
whose letters, in their divine coarseness and rusticity, savoured more
of the cabman than of the philosopher," and concluded with a hope that
his fears that the work he was printing would be good for nothing but
waste paper, might not be realised.[2] The work appeared about the end
of December 1818 with 1819 on the title-page. Schopenhauer had meanwhile
proceeded in September to Italy, where he revised the final proofs. So
far as the reception of the work was concerned there was reason to
believe that the fears of Brockhaus would be realised, as, in fact, they
came practically to be. But in the face of this general want of
appreciation, Schopenhauer had some crumbs of consolation. His sister
wrote to him in March (he was then staying at Naples) that Goethe "had
received it with great joy, immediately cut the thick book, and began
_instantly_ to read it. An hour later he sent me a note to say that he
thanked you very much and thought that the whole book was good. He
pointed out the most important passages, read them to us, and was
greatly delighted.... You are the only author whom Goethe has ever read
seriously, it seems to me, and I rejoice." Nevertheless the book did not
sell. Sixteen years later Brockhaus informed Schopenhauer that a large
number of copies had been sold at waste paper price, and that he had
even then a few in stock. Still, during the years 1842-43, Schopenhauer
was contemplating the issue of a second edition and making revisions for
that purpose; when he had completed the work he took it to Brockhaus,
and agreed to leave the question of remuneration open. In the following
year the second edition was issued (500 copies of the first volume, and
750 of the second), and for this the author was to receive no
remuneration. "Not to my contemporaries," says Schopenhauer with fine
conviction in his preface to this edition, "not to my compatriots--to
mankind I commit my now completed work, in the confidence that it will
not be without value for them, even if this should be late recognised,
as is commonly the lot of what is good. For it cannot have been for the
passing generation, engrossed with the delusion of the moment, that my
mind, almost against my will, has uninterruptedly stuck to its work
through the course of a long life. And while the lapse of time has not
been able to make me doubt the worth of my work, neither has the lack of
sympathy; for I constantly saw the false and the bad, and finally the
absurd and senseless, stand in universal admiration and honour, and I
bethought myself that if it were not the case, those who are capable of
recognising the genuine and right are so rare that we may look for them
in vain for some twenty years, then those who are capable of producing
it could not be so few that their works afterwards form an exception to
the perishableness of earthly things; and thus would be lost the
reviving prospect of posterity which every one who sets before himself a
high aim requires to strengthen him."[3]

When Schopenhauer started for Italy Goethe had provided him with a
letter of introduction to Lord Byron, who was then staying at Venice,
but Schopenhauer never made use of the letter; he said that he hadn't
the courage to present himself. "Do you know," he says in a letter,
"three great pessimists were in Italy at the same time--Byron, Leopardi,
and myself! And yet not one of us has made the acquaintance of the
other." He remained in Italy until June 1819, when he proceeded to
Milan, where he received distressing news from his sister to the effect
that a Dantzic firm, in which she and her mother had invested all their
capital, and in which he himself had invested a little, had become
bankrupt. Schopenhauer immediately proposed to share his own income with
them. But later, when the defaulting firm offered to its creditors a
composition of thirty per cent, Schopenhauer would accept nothing less
than seventy per cent in the case of immediate payment, or the whole if
the payment were deferred; and he was so indignant at his mother and
sister falling in with the arrangement of the debtors, that he did not
correspond with them again for eleven years. With reference to this
affair he wrote: "I can imagine that from your point of view my
behaviour may seem hard and unfair. That is a mere illusion which
disappears as soon as you reflect that all I want is merely not to have
taken from me what is most rightly and incontestably mine, what,
moreover, my whole happiness, my freedom, my learned leisure depend
upon;--a blessing which in this world people like me enjoy so rarely
that it would be almost as unconscientious as cowardly not to defend it
to the uttermost and maintain it by every exertion. You say, perhaps,
that if all your creditors were of this way of thinking, I too should
come badly off. But if all men thought as I do, there would be much more
thinking done, and in that case probably there would be neither
bankruptcies, nor wars, nor gaming tables."[4]

In July 1819, when he was at Heidelberg, the idea occurred to him of
turning university lecturer, and took practical shape the following
summer, when he delivered a course of lectures on philosophy at the
Berlin University. But the experiment was not a success; the course was
not completed through the want of attendance, while Hegel at the same
time and place was lecturing to a crowded and enthusiastic audience.
This failure embittered him, and during the next few years there is
little of any moment in his life to record. There was one incident,
however, to which his detractors would seem to have attached more
importance than it was worth, but which must have been sufficiently
disturbing to Schopenhauer--we refer to the Marquet affair. It appears
on his returning home one day he found three women gossiping outside his
door, one of whom was a seamstress who occupied another room in the
house. Their presence irritated Schopenhauer (whose sensitiveness in
such matters may be estimated from his essay "On Noise"), who, finding
them occupying the same position on another occasion, requested them to
go away, but the seamstress replied that she was an honest person and
refused to move. Schopenhauer disappeared into his apartments and
returned with a stick. According to his own account, he offered his arm
to the woman in order to take her out; but she would not accept it, and
remained where she was. He then threatened to put her out, and carried
his threat into execution by seizing her round the waist and putting her
out. She screamed, and attempted to return. Schopenhauer now pushed her
out; the woman fell, and raised the whole house. This woman, Caroline
Luise Marquet, brought an action against him for damages, alleging that
he had kicked and beaten her. Schopenhauer defended his own case, with
the result that the action was dismissed. The woman appealed, and
Schopenhauer, who was contemplating going to Switzerland, did not alter
his plans, so that the appeal was heard during his absence, the judgment
reversed, and he was mulcted in a fine of twenty thalers. But the
unfortunate business did not end here. Schopenhauer proceeded from
Switzerland to Italy, and did not return to Berlin until May 1825.
Caroline Marquet renewed her complaints before the courts, stating that
his ill-usage had occasioned a fever through which she had lost the
power of one of her arms, that her whole system was entirely shaken, and
demanding a monthly allowance as compensation. She won her case; the
defendant had to pay three hundred thalers in costs and contribute sixty
thalers a year to her maintenance while she lived. Schopenhauer on
returning to Berlin did what he could to get the judgment reversed, but
unsuccessfully. The woman lived for twenty years; he inscribed on her
death certificate, "_Obit anus, obit onus"_

The idea of marriage seems to have more or less possessed Schopenhauer
about this time, but he could not finally determine to take the step.
There is sufficient to show in the following essays in what light he
regarded women. Marriage was a debt, he said, contracted in youth and
paid off in old age. Married people have the whole burden of life to
bear, while the unmarried have only half, was a characteristically
selfish apothegm. Had not all the true philosophers been
celibates--Descartes, Leibnitz, Malebranche, Spinoza, and Kant? The
classic writers were of course not to be considered, because with them
woman occupied a subordinate position. Had not all the great poets
married, and with disastrous consequences? Plainly, Schopenhauer was not
the person to sacrifice the individual to the will of the species.

In August 1831 he made a fortuitous expedition to
Frankfort-on-the-Main--an expedition partly prompted by the outbreak of
cholera at Berlin at the time, and partly by the portent of a dream (he
was credulous in such matters) which at the beginning of the year had
intimated his death. Here, however, he practically remained until his
death, leading a quiet, mechanically regular life and devoting his
thoughts to the development of his philosophic ideas, isolated at first,
but as time went on enjoying somewhat greedily the success which had
been denied him in his earlier days. In February 1839 he had a moment of
elation when he heard from the Scientific Society of Drontheim that he
had won the prize for the best essay on the question, "Whether free will
could be proved from the evidence of consciousness," and that he had
been elected a member of the Society; and a corresponding moment of
despondency when he was informed by the Royal Danish Academy of the
Sciences at Copenhagen, in a similar competition, that his essay on
"Whether the source and foundation of ethics was to be sought in an
intuitive moral idea, and in the analysis of other derivative moral
conceptions, or in some other principle of knowledge," had failed,
partly on the ground of the want of respect which it showed to the
opinions of the chief philosophers. He published these essays in 1841
under the title of "The Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics," and ten
years later _Parerga und Paralipomena_ the composition of which had
engaged his attention for five or six years. The latter work, which
proved to be his most popular, was refused by three publishers, and when
eventually it was accepted by Hayn of Berlin, the author only received
ten free copies of his work as payment. It is from this book that all
except one of the following essays have been selected; the exception is
"The Metaphysics of Love," which appears in the supplement of the third
book of his principal work. The second edition of _Die Welt als Wille
und Vorstellung_ appeared in 1844, and was received with growing
appreciation. Hitherto he had been chiefly known in Frankfort as the son
of the celebrated Johanna Schopenhauer; now he came to have a following
which, if at first small in numbers, were sufficiently enthusiastic, and
proved, indeed, so far as his reputation was concerned, helpful. Artists
painted his portrait; a bust of him was made by Elizabeth Ney. In the
April number of the _Westminster Review_ for 1853 John Oxenford, in an
article entitled "Iconoclasm in German Philosophy," heralded in England
his recognition as a writer and thinker; three years later Saint-René
Taillandier, in the _Revue des Deux Mondes_, did a similar service for
him in France. One of his most enthusiastic admirers was Richard Wagner,
who in 1854 sent him a copy of his _Der Ring der Nibelungen_, with the
inscription "In admiration and gratitude." The Philosophical Faculty of
the University of Leipzic offered a prize for an exposition and
criticism of his philosophical system. Two Frenchmen, M. Foucher de
Careil and M. Challemel Lacour, who visited Schopenhauer during his last
days, have given an account of their impressions of the interview, the
latter in an article entitled, "Un Bouddhiste Contemporain en
Allemagne," which appeared in the _Revue des Deux Mondes_ for March
15th, 1870. M. Foucher de Careil gives a charming picture of him:--"Quand je le vis, pour la première fois, en 1859, à la table de
    l'hôtel d'Angleterre, à Francfort, c'était déjà un vieillard, à
    l'oeil d'un bleu vif et limpide, à la lèvre mince et légèrement
    sarcastique, autour de laquelle errait un fin sourire, et dont le
    vaste front, estompé de deux touffes de cheveux blancs sur les
    côtés, relevait d'un cachet de noblesse et de distinction la
    physionomie petillante d'esprit et de malice. Les habits, son jabot
    de dentelle, sa cravate blanche rappelaient un vieillard de la fin
    du règne de Louis XV; ses manières étaient celles d'un homme de
    bonne compagnie. Habituellement réservé et d'un naturel craintif
    jusqu'à la méfiance, il ne se livrait qu'avec ses intimes ou les
    étrangers de passage à Francfort. Ses mouvements étaient vifs et
    devenaient d'une pétulance extraordinaire dans la conversation; il
    fuyait les discussions et les vains combats de paroles, mais c'était
    pour mieux jouir du charme d'une causerie intime. Il possédait et
    parlait avec une égale perfection quatre langues: le français,
    l'anglais, l'allemand, l'italien et passablement l'espagnol. Quand
    il causait, la verve du vieillard brodait sur le canevas un peu
    lourd de l'allemand ses brilliantes arabesques latines, grecques,
    françaises, anglaises, italiennes. C'était un entrain, une précision
    et des sailles, une richesse de citations, une exactitude de détails
    qui faisait couler les heures; et quelquefois le petit cercle de ses
    intimes l'écoutait jusqu'à minuit, sans qu'un moment de fatigue se
    fût peint sur ses traits ou que le feu de son regard se fût un
    instant amorti. Sa parole nette et accentuée captivait l'auditoire:
    elle peignait et analysait tout ensemble; une sensibilité délicate
    en augmentait le feu; elle était exacte et précise sur toutes sortes
    de sujets."

Schopenhauer died on the 20th September 1860, in his seventy-third year,
peacefully, alone as he had lived, but not without warning. One day in
April, taking his usual brisk walk after dinner, he suffered from
palpitation of the heart, he could scarcely breathe. These symptoms
developed during the next few months, and Dr. Gwinner advised him to
discontinue his cold baths and to breakfast in bed; but Schopenhauer,
notwithstanding his early medical training, was little inclined to
follow medical advice. To Dr. Gwinner, on the evening of the 18th
September, when he expressed a hope that he might be able to go to
Italy, he said that it would be a pity if he died now, as he wished to
make several important additions to his _Parerga_; he spoke about his
works and of the warm recognition with which they had been welcomed in
the most remote places. Dr. Gwinner had never before found him so eager
and gentle, and left him reluctantly, without, however, the least
premonition that he had seen him for the last time. On the second
morning after this interview Schopenhauer got up as usual, and had his
cold bath and breakfast. His servant had opened the window to let in the
morning air and had then left him. A little later Dr. Gwinner arrived
and found him reclining in a corner of the sofa; his face wore its
customary expression; there was no sign of there having been any
struggle with death. There had been no struggle with death; he had died,
as he had hoped he would die, painlessly, easily.


In preparing the above notice the writer has to acknowledge her
indebtedness to Dr. Gwinner's _Life_ and Professor Wallace's little work
on the same subject, as well as to the few other authorities that have
been available.--THE TRANSLATOR.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Wallace's _Life_, pp. 95, 96.

[2] Wallace, p. 108.

[3] Haldane and Kemp's _The World as Will and Idea_.

[4] Wallace, p. 145.




ESSAYS OF SCHOPENHAUER.




ON AUTHORSHIP AND STYLE.


There are, first of all, two kinds of authors: those who write for the
subject's sake, and those who write for writing's sake. The first kind
have had thoughts or experiences which seem to them worth communicating,
while the second kind need money and consequently write for money. They
think in order to write, and they may be recognised by their spinning
out their thoughts to the greatest possible length, and also by the way
they work out their thoughts, which are half-true, perverse, forced, and
vacillating; then also by their love of evasion, so that they may seem
what they are not; and this is why their writing is lacking in
definiteness and clearness.

Consequently, it is soon recognised that they write for the sake of
filling up the paper, and this is the case sometimes with the best
authors; for example, in parts of Lessing's _Dramaturgie_, and even in
many of Jean Paul's romances. As soon as this is perceived the book
should be thrown away, for time is precious. As a matter of fact, the
author is cheating the reader as soon as he writes for the sake of
filling up paper; because his pretext for writing is that he has
something to impart. Writing for money and preservation of copyright
are, at bottom, the ruin of literature. It is only the man who writes
absolutely for the sake of the subject that writes anything worth
writing. What an inestimable advantage it would be, if, in every branch
of literature, there existed only a few but excellent books! This can
never come to pass so long as money is to be made by writing. It seems
as if money lay under a curse, for every author deteriorates directly he
writes in any way for the sake of money. The best works of great men all
come from the time when they had to write either for nothing or for very
little pay. This is confirmed by the Spanish proverb: _honra y provecho
no caben en un saco_ (Honour and money are not to be found in the same
purse). The deplorable condition of the literature of to-day, both in
Germany and other countries, is due to the fact that books are written
for the sake of earning money. Every one who is in want of money sits
down and writes a book, and the public is stupid enough to buy it. The
secondary effect of this is the ruin of language.

A great number of bad authors eke out their existence entirely by the
foolishness of the public, which only will read what has just been
printed. I refer to journalists, who have been appropriately so-called.
In other words, it would be "day labourer."

       *       *       *       *       *

Again, it may be said that there are three kinds of authors. In the
first place, there are those who write without thinking. They write from
memory, from reminiscences, or even direct from other people's books.
This class is the most numerous. In the second, those who think whilst
they are writing. They think in order to write; and they are numerous.
In the third place, there are those who have thought before they begin
to write. They write solely because they have thought; and they are
rare.

Authors of the second class, who postpone their thinking until they
begin to write, are like a sportsman who goes out at random--he is not
likely to bring home very much. While the writing of an author of the
third, the rare class, is like a chase where the game has been captured
beforehand and cooped up in some enclosure from which it is afterwards
set free, so many at a time, into another enclosure, where it is not
possible for it to escape, and the sportsman has now nothing to do but
to aim and fire--that is to say, put his thoughts on paper. This is the
kind of sport which yields something.

But although the number of those authors who really and seriously think
before they write is small, only extremely few of them think about _the
subject itself_; the rest think only about the books written on this
subject, and what has been said by others upon it, I mean. In order to
think, they must have the more direct and powerful incentive of other
people's thoughts. These become their next theme, and therefore they
always remain under their influence and are never, strictly speaking,
original. On the contrary, the former are roused to thought through the
_subject itself_, hence their thinking is directed immediately to it. It
is only among them that we find the authors whose names become immortal.
Let it be understood that I am speaking here of writers of the higher
branches of literature, and not of writers on the method of distilling
brandy.

It is only the writer who takes the material on which he writes direct
out of his own head that is worth reading. Book manufacturers,
compilers, and the ordinary history writers, and others like them, take
their material straight out of books; it passes into their fingers
without its having paid transit duty or undergone inspection when it was
in their heads, to say nothing of elaboration. (How learned many a man
would be if he knew everything that was in his own books!) Hence their
talk is often of such a vague nature that one racks one's brains in vain
to understand of _what_ they are really thinking. They are not thinking
at all. The book from which they copy is sometimes composed in the same
way: so that writing of this kind is like a plaster cast of a cast of a
cast, and so on, until finally all that is left is a scarcely
recognisable outline of the face of Antinous. Therefore, compilations
should be read as seldom as possible: it is difficult to avoid them
entirely, since compendia, which contain in a small space knowledge that
has been collected in the course of several centuries, are included in
compilations.

No greater mistake can be made than to imagine that what has been
written latest is always the more correct; that what is written later on
is an improvement on what was written previously; and that every change
means progress. Men who think and have correct judgment, and people who
treat their subject earnestly, are all exceptions only. Vermin is the
rule everywhere in the world: it is always at hand and busily engaged in
trying to improve in its own way upon the mature deliberations of the
thinkers. So that if a man wishes to improve himself in any subject he
must guard against immediately seizing the newest books written upon it,
in the assumption that science is always advancing and that the older
books have been made use of in the compiling of the new. They have, it
is true, been used; but how? The writer often does not thoroughly
understand the old books; he will, at the same time, not use their exact
words, so that the result is he spoils and bungles what has been said in
a much better and clearer way by the old writers; since they wrote from
their own lively knowledge of the subject. He often leaves out the best
things they have written, their most striking elucidations of the
matter, their happiest remarks, because he does not recognise their
value or feel how pregnant they are. It is only what is stupid and
shallow that appeals to him. An old and excellent book is frequently
shelved for new and bad ones; which, written for the sake of money, wear
a pretentious air and are much eulogised by the authors' friends. In
science, a man who wishes to distinguish himself brings something new to
market; this frequently consists in his denouncing some principle that
has been previously held as correct, so that he may establish a wrong
one of his own. Sometimes his attempt is successful for a short time,
when a return is made to the old and correct doctrine. These innovators
are serious about nothing else in the world than their own priceless
person, and it is this that they wish to make its mark. They bring this
quickly about by beginning a paradox; the sterility of their own heads
suggests their taking the path of negation; and truths that have long
been recognised are now denied--for instance, the vital power, the
sympathetic nervous system, _generatio equivoca_, Bichat's distinction
between the working of the passions and the working of intelligence, or
they return to crass atomism, etc., etc. Hence _the course of science is
often retrogressive_.

To this class of writers belong also those translators who, besides
translating their author, at the same time correct and alter him, a
thing that always seems to me impertinent. Write books yourself which
are worth translating and leave the books of other people as they are.
One should read, if it is possible, the real authors, the founders and
discoverers of things, or at any rate the recognised great masters in
every branch of learning, and buy second-hand _books_ rather than read
their _contents_ in new ones.

It is true that _inventis aliquid addere facile est_, therefore a man,
after having studied the principles of his subject, will have to make
himself acquainted with the more recent information written upon it. In
general, the following rule holds good here as elsewhere, namely: what
is new is seldom good; because a good thing is only new for a short
time.

What the address is to a letter the _title_ should be to a book--that
is, its immediate aim should be to bring the book to that part of the
public that will be interested in its contents. Therefore, the title
should be effective, and since it is essentially short, it should be
concise, laconic, pregnant, and if possible express the contents in a
word. Therefore a title that is prolix, or means nothing at all, or that
is indirect or ambiguous, is bad; so is one that is false and
misleading: this last may prepare for the book the same fate as that
which awaits a wrongly addressed letter. The worst titles are those that
are stolen, such titles that is to say that other books already bear;
for in the first place they are a plagiarism, and in the second a most
convincing proof of an absolute want of originality. A man who has not
enough originality to think out a new title for his book will be much
less capable of giving it new contents. Akin to these are those titles
which have been imitated, in other words, half stolen; for instance, a
long time after I had written "On Will in Nature," Oersted wrote "On
Mind in Nature."

       *       *       *       *       *

A book can never be anything more than the impression of its author's
thoughts. The value of these thoughts lies either in the _matter about
which_ he has thought, or in the _form_ in which he develops his
matter--that is to say, _what_ he has thought about it.

The matter of books is very various, as also are the merits conferred on
books on account of their matter. All matter that is the outcome of
experience, in other words everything that is founded on fact, whether
it be historical or physical, taken by itself and in its widest sense,
is included in the term matter. It is the _motif_ that gives its
peculiar character to the book, so that a book can be important whoever
the author may have been; while with form the peculiar character of a
book rests with the author of it. The subjects may be of such a nature
as to be accessible and well known to everybody; but the form in which
they are expounded, _what_ has been thought about them, gives the book
its value, and this depends upon the author. Therefore if a book, from
this point of view, is excellent and without a rival, so also is its
author. From this it follows that the merit of a writer worth reading is
all the greater the less he is dependent on matter--and the better known
and worn out this matter, the greater will be his merit. The three great
Grecian tragedians, for instance, all worked at the same subject.

So that when a book becomes famous one should carefully distinguish
whether it is so on account of its matter or its form.

Quite ordinary and shallow men are able to produce books of very great
importance because of their _matter_, which was accessible to them
alone. Take, for instance, books which give descriptions of foreign
countries, rare natural phenomena, experiments that have been made,
historical events of which they were witnesses, or have spent both time
and trouble in inquiring into and specially studying the authorities for
them.

On the other hand, it is on _form_ that we are dependent, where the
matter is accessible to every one or very well known; and it is what has
been thought about the matter that will give any value to the
achievement; it will only be an eminent man who will be able to write
anything that is worth reading. For the others will only think what is
possible for every other man to think. They give the impress of their
own mind; but every one already possesses the original of this
impression.

However, the public is very much more interested in matter than in form,
and it is for this very reason that it is behindhand in any high degree
of culture. It is most laughable the way the public reveals its liking
for matter in poetic works; it carefully investigates the real events or
personal circumstances of the poet's life which served to give the
_motif_ of his works; nay, finally, it finds these more interesting than
the works themselves; it reads more about Goethe than what has been
written by Goethe, and industriously studies the legend of Faust in
preference to Goethe's _Faust_ itself. And when Bürger said that "people
would make learned expositions as to who Leonora really was," we see
this literally fulfilled in Goethe's case, for we now have many learned
expositions on Faust and the Faust legend. They are and will remain of a
purely material character. This preference for matter to form is the
same as a man ignoring the shape and painting of a fine Etruscan vase in
order to make a chemical examination of the clay and colours of which it
is made. The attempt to be effective by means of the matter used,
thereby ministering to this evil propensity of the public, is absolutely
to be censured in branches of writing where the merit must lie expressly
in the form; as, for instance, in poetical writing. However, there are
numerous bad dramatic authors striving to fill the theatre by means of
the matter they are treating. For instance, they place on the stage any
kind of celebrated man, however stripped of dramatic incidents his life
may have been, nay, sometimes without waiting until the persons who
appear with him are dead.

The distinction between matter and form, of which I am here speaking, is
true also in regard to conversation. It is chiefly intelligence,
judgment, wit, and vivacity that enable a man to converse; they give
form to the conversation. However, the _matter_ of the conversation must
soon come into notice--in other words, _that_ about which one can talk
to the man, namely, his knowledge. If this is very small, it will only
be his possessing the above-named formal qualities in a quite
exceptionally high degree that will make his conversation of any value,
for his matter will be restricted to things concerning humanity and
nature, which are known generally. It is just the reverse if a man is
wanting in these formal qualities, but has, on the other hand, knowledge
of such a kind that it lends value to his conversation; this value,
however, will then entirely rest on the matter of his conversation, for,
according to the Spanish proverb, _mas sabe el necio en su casa, que el
sabio en la agena_.

A thought only really lives until it has reached the boundary line of
words; it then becomes petrified and dies immediately; yet it is as
everlasting as the fossilised animals and plants of former ages. Its
existence, which is really momentary, may be compared to a crystal the
instant it becomes crystallised.

As soon as a thought has found words it no longer exists in us or is
serious in its deepest sense.

When it begins to exist for others it ceases to live in us; just as a
child frees itself from its mother when it comes into existence. The
poet has also said:

  "Ihr müsst mich nicht durch Widerspruch verwirren!
  _Sobald man spricht, beginnt man schon zu irren_."

The pen is to thought what the stick is to walking, but one walks most
easily without a stick, and thinks most perfectly when no pen is at
hand. It is only when a man begins to get old that he likes to make use
of a stick and his pen.

A hypothesis that has once gained a position in the mind, or been born
in it, leads a life resembling that of an organism, in so far as it
receives from the outer world matter only that is advantageous and
homogeneous to it; on the other hand, matter that is harmful and
heterogeneous to it is either rejected, or if it must be received, cast
off again entirely.

Abstract and indefinite terms should be employed in satire only as they
are in algebra, in place of concrete and specified quantities. Moreover,
it should be used as sparingly as the dissecting knife on the body of a
living man. At the risk of forfeiting his life it is an unsafe
experiment.

For a work to become _immortal_ it must possess so many excellences that
it will not be easy to find a man who understands and values them _all_;
so that there will be in all ages men who recognise and appreciate some
of these excellences; by this means the credit of the work will be
retained throughout the long course of centuries and ever-changing
interests, for, as it is appreciated first in this sense, then in that,
the interest is never exhausted.

An author like this, in other words, an author who has a claim to live
on in posterity, can only be a man who seeks in vain his like among his
contemporaries over the wide world, his marked distinction making him a
striking contrast to every one else. Even if he existed through several
generations, like the wandering Jew, he would still occupy the same
position; in short, he would be, as Ariosto has put it, _lo fece natura,
e poi ruppe lo stampo_. If this were not so, one would not be able to
understand why his thoughts should not perish like those of other men.

In almost every age, whether it be in literature or art, we find that if
a thoroughly wrong idea, or a fashion, or a manner is in vogue, it is
admired. Those of ordinary intelligence trouble themselves inordinately
to acquire it and put it in practice. An intelligent man sees through it
and despises it, consequently he remains out of the fashion. Some years
later the public sees through it and takes the sham for what it is
worth; it now laughs at it, and the much-admired colour of all these
works of fashion falls off like the plaster from a badly-built wall: and
they are in the same dilapidated condition. We should be glad and not
sorry when a fundamentally wrong notion of which we have been secretly
conscious for a long time finally gains a footing and is proclaimed both
loudly and openly. The falseness of it will soon be felt and eventually
proclaimed equally loudly and openly. It is as if an abscess had burst.

The man who publishes and edits an article written by an anonymous
critic should be held as immediately responsible for it as if he had
written it himself; just as one holds a manager responsible for bad work
done by his workmen. In this way the fellow would be treated as he
deserves to be--namely, without any ceremony.

An anonymous writer is a literary fraud against whom one should
immediately cry out, "Wretch, if you do not wish to admit what it is you
say against other people, hold your slanderous tongue."

An anonymous criticism carries no more weight than an anonymous letter,
and should therefore be looked upon with equal mistrust. Or do we wish
to accept the assumed name of a man, who in reality represents a
_société anonyme_, as a guarantee for the veracity of his friends?

The little honesty that exists among authors is discernible in the
unconscionable way they misquote from the writings of others. I find
whole passages in my works wrongly quoted, and it is only in my
appendix, which is absolutely lucid, that an exception is made. The
misquotation is frequently due to carelessness, the pen of such people
has been used to write down such trivial and banal phrases that it goes
on writing them out of force of habit. Sometimes the misquotation is due
to impertinence on the part of some one who wants to improve upon my
work; but a bad motive only too often prompts the misquotation--it is
then horrid baseness and roguery, and, like a man who commits forgery,
he loses the character for being an honest man for ever.

Style is the physiognomy of the mind. It is a more reliable key to
character than the physiognomy of the body. To imitate another person's
style is like wearing a mask. However fine the mask, it soon becomes
insipid and intolerable because it is without life; so that even the
ugliest living face is better. Therefore authors who write in Latin and
imitate the style of the old writers essentially wear a mask; one
certainly hears what they say, but one cannot watch their
physiognomy--that is to say their style. One observes, however, the
style in the Latin writings of men _who think for themselves_, those who
have not deigned to imitate, as, for instance, Scotus Erigena, Petrarch,
Bacon, Descartes, Spinoza, etc.

Affectation in style is like making grimaces. The language in which a
man writes is the physiognomy of his nation; it establishes a great many
differences, beginning from the language of the Greeks down to that of
the Caribbean islanders.

We should seek for the faults in the style of another author's works, so
that we may avoid committing the same in our own.

In order to get a provisional estimate of the value of an author's
productions it is not exactly necessary to know the matter on which he
has thought or what it is he has thought about it,--this would compel
one to read the whole of his works,--but it will be sufficient to know
_how_ he has thought. His _style_ is an exact expression of _how_ he has
thought, of the essential state and general _quality_ of his thoughts.
It shows the _formal_ nature--which must always remain the same--of all
the thoughts of a man, whatever the subject on which he has thought or
what it is he has said about it. It is the dough out of which all his
ideas are kneaded, however various they may be. When Eulenspiegel was
asked by a man how long he would have to walk before reaching the next
place, and gave the apparently absurd answer _Walk_, his intention was
to judge from the man's walking how far he would go in a given time. And
so it is when I have read a few pages of an author, I know about how far
he can help me.

In the secret consciousness that this is the condition of things, every
mediocre writer tries to mask his own natural style. This instantly
necessitates his giving up all idea of being _naïve_, a privilege which
belongs to superior minds sensible of their superiority, and therefore
sure of themselves. For instance, it is absolutely impossible for men of
ordinary intelligence to make up their minds to write as they think;
they resent the idea of their work looking too simple. It would always
be of some value, however. If they would only go honestly to work and in
a simple way express the few and ordinary ideas they have really
thought, they would be readable and even instructive in their own
sphere. But instead of that they try to appear to have thought much more
deeply than is the case. The result is, they put what they have to say
into forced and involved language, create new words and prolix periods
which go round the thought and cover it up. They hesitate between the
two attempts of communicating the thought and of concealing it. They
want to make it look grand so that it has the appearance of being
learned and profound, thereby giving one the idea that there is much
more in it than one perceives at the moment. Accordingly, they sometimes
put down their thoughts in bits, in short, equivocal, and paradoxical
sentences which appear to mean much more than they say (a splendid
example of this kind of writing is furnished by Schelling's treatises on
Natural Philosophy); sometimes they express their thoughts in a crowd of
words and the most intolerable diffuseness, as if it were necessary to
make a sensation in order to make the profound meaning of their phrases
intelligible--while it is quite a simple idea if not a trivial one
(examples without number are supplied in Fichte's popular works and in
the philosophical pamphlets of a hundred other miserable blockheads that
are not worth mentioning), or else they endeavour to use a certain style
in writing which it has pleased them to adopt--for example, a style that
is so thoroughly _Kat' e'xochae'u_ profound and scientific, where one is
tortured to death by the narcotic effect of long-spun periods that are
void of all thought (examples of this are specially supplied by those
most impertinent of all mortals, the Hegelians in their Hegel newspaper
commonly known as _Jahrbücher der wissenschaftlichen Literatur)_; or
again, they aim at an intellectual style where it seems then as if they
wish to go crazy, and so on. All such efforts whereby they try to
postpone the _nascetur ridiculus mus_ make it frequently difficult to
understand what they really mean. Moreover, they write down words, nay,
whole periods, which mean nothing in themselves, in the hope, however,
that some one else will understand something from them. Nothing else is
at the bottom of all such endeavours but the inexhaustible attempt which
is always venturing on new paths, to sell words for thoughts, and by
means of new expressions, or expressions used in a new sense, turns of
phrases and combinations of all kinds, to produce the appearance of
intellect in order to compensate for the want of it which is so
painfully felt. It is amusing to see how, with this aim in view, first
this mannerism and then that is tried; these they intend to represent
the mask of intellect: this mask may possibly deceive the inexperienced
for a while, until it is recognised as being nothing but a dead mask,
when it is laughed at and exchanged for another.

We find a writer of this kind sometimes writing in a dithyrambic style,
as if he were intoxicated; at other times, nay, on the very next page,
he will be high-sounding, severe, and deeply learned, prolix to the last
degree of dulness, and cutting everything very small, like the late
Christian Wolf, only in a modern garment. The mask of unintelligibility
holds out the longest; this is only in Germany, however, where it was
introduced by Fichte, perfected by Schelling, and attained its highest
climax finally in Hegel, always with the happiest results. And yet
nothing is easier than to write so that no one can understand; on the
other hand, nothing is more difficult than to express learned ideas so
that every one must understand them. All the arts I have cited above are
superfluous if the writer really possesses any intellect, for it allows
a man to show himself as he is and verifies for all time what Horace
said: _Scribendi recte sapere est et principium et fons_.

But this class of authors is like certain workers in metal, who try a
hundred different compositions to take the place of gold, which is the
only metal that can never have a substitute. On the contrary, there is
nothing an author should guard against more than the apparent endeavour
to show more intellect than he has; because this rouses the suspicion in
the reader that he has very little, since a man always affects
something, be its nature what it may, that he does not really possess.
And this is why it is praise to an author to call him naïve, for it
signifies that he may show himself as he is. In general, naïveté
attracts, while anything that is unnatural everywhere repels. We also
find that every true thinker endeavours to express his thoughts as
purely, clearly, definitely, and concisely as ever possible. This is why
simplicity has always been looked upon as a token, not only of truth,
but also of genius. Style receives its beauty from the thought
expressed, while with those writers who only pretend to think it is
their thoughts that are said to be fine because of their style. Style is
merely the silhouette of thought; and to write in a vague or bad style
means a stupid or confused mind.

Hence, the first rule--nay, this in itself is almost sufficient for a
good style--is this, _that the author should have something to say_. Ah!
this implies a great deal. The neglect of this rule is a fundamental
characteristic of the philosophical, and generally speaking of all the
reflective authors in Germany, especially since the time of Fichte. It
is obvious that all these writers wish _to appear_ to have something to
say, while they have nothing to say. This mannerism was introduced by
the pseudo-philosophers of the Universities and may be discerned
everywhere, even among the first literary notabilities of the age. It is
the mother of that forced and vague style which seems to have two, nay,
many meanings, as well as of that prolix and ponderous style, _le stile
empesé_; and of that no less useless bombastic style, and finally of
that mode of concealing the most awful poverty of thought under a babble
of inexhaustible chatter that resembles a clacking mill and is just as
stupefying: one may read for hours together without getting hold of a
single clearly defined and definite idea. The _Halleschen_, afterwards
called the _Deutschen Jahrbücher_, furnishes almost throughout excellent
examples of this style of writing. The Germans, by the way, from force
of habit read page after page of all kinds of such verbiage without
getting any definite idea of what the author really means: they think it
all very proper and do not discover that he is writing merely for the
sake of writing. On the other hand, a good author who is rich in ideas
soon gains the reader's credit of having really and truly _something to
say_; and this gives the intelligent reader patience to follow him
attentively. An author of this kind will always express himself in the
simplest and most direct manner, for the very reason that he really has
something to say; because he wishes to awaken in the reader the same
idea he has in his own mind and no other. Accordingly he will be able to
say with Boileau--

  "Ma pensée au grand jour partout s'offre et s'expose,
  Et mon vers, bien ou mal, dit toujours quelque chose;"

while of those previously described writers it may be said, in the words
of the same poet, _et qui parlant beaucoup ne disent jamais rien_. It is
also a characteristic of such writers to avoid, if it is possible,
expressing themselves _definitely_, so that they may be always able in
case of need to get out of a difficulty; this is why they always choose
the more _abstract_ expressions: while people of intellect choose the
more _concrete_; because the latter bring the matter closer to view,
which is the source of all evidence. This preference for abstract
expressions may be confirmed by numerous examples: a specially
ridiculous example is the following. Throughout German literature of the
last ten years we find "to condition" almost everywhere used in place of
"to cause" or "to effect." Since it is more abstract and indefinite it
says less than it implies, and consequently leaves a little back door
open to please those whose secret consciousness of their own incapacity
inspires them with a continual fear of all _definite_ expressions. While
with other people it is merely the effect of that national tendency to
immediately imitate everything that is stupid in literature and wicked
in life; this is shown in either case by the quick way in which it
spreads. The Englishman depends on his own judgment both in what he
writes and what he does, but this applies less to the German than to any
other nation. In consequence of the state of things referred to, the
words "to cause" and "to effect" have almost entirely disappeared from
the literature of the last ten years, and people everywhere talk of "to
condition." The fact is worth mentioning because it is
characteristically ridiculous. Everyday authors are only half conscious
when they write, a fact which accounts for their want of intellect and
the tediousness of their writings; they do not really themselves
understand the meaning of their own words, because they take ready-made
words and learn them. Hence they combine whole phrases more than
words--_phrases banales_. This accounts for that obviously
characteristic want of clearly defined thought; in fact, they lack the
die that stamps their thoughts, they have no clear thought of their own;
in place of it we find an indefinite, obscure interweaving of words,
current phrases, worn-out terms of speech, and fashionable expressions.
The result is that their foggy kind of writing is like print that has
been done with old type. On the other hand, intelligent people _really_
speak to us in their writings, and this is why they are able to both
move and entertain us. It is only intelligent writers who place
individual words together with a full consciousness of their use and
select them with deliberation. Hence their style of writing bears the
same relation to that of those authors described above, as a picture
that is really painted does to one that has been executed with stencil.
In the first instance every word, just as every stroke of the brush, has
some special significance, while in the other everything is done
mechanically. The same distinction may be observed in music. For it is
the omnipresence of intellect that always and everywhere characterises
the works of the genius; and analogous to this is Lichtenberg's
observation, namely, that Garrick's soul was omnipresent in all the
muscles of his body. With regard to the tediousness of the writings
referred to above, it is to be observed in general that there are two
kinds of tediousness--an objective and a subjective. The _objective_
form of tediousness springs from the deficiency of which we have been
speaking--that is to say, where the author has no perfectly clear
thought or knowledge to communicate. For if a writer possesses any clear
thought or knowledge it will be his aim to communicate it, and he will
work with this end in view; consequently the ideas he furnishes are
everywhere clearly defined, so that he is neither diffuse, unmeaning,
nor confused, and consequently not tedious. Even if his fundamental idea
is wrong, yet in such a case it will be clearly thought out and well
pondered; in other words, it is at least formally correct, and the
writing is always of some value. While, for the same reason, a work that
is objectively _tedious_ is at all times without value. Again,
_subjective_ tediousness is merely relative: this is because the reader
is not interested in the subject of the work, and that what he takes an
interest in is of a very limited nature. The most excellent work may
therefore be tedious subjectively to this or that person, just as, _vice
vers�_, the worst work may be subjectively diverting to this or that
person: because he is interested in either the subject or the writer of
the book.

It would be of general service to German authors if they discerned that
while a man should, if possible, think like a great mind, he should
speak the same language as every other person. Men should use common
words to say uncommon things, but they do the reverse. We find them
trying to envelop trivial ideas in grand words and to dress their very
ordinary thoughts in the most extraordinary expressions and the most
outlandish, artificial, and rarest phrases. Their sentences perpetually
stalk about on stilts. With regard to their delight in bombast, and to
their writing generally in a grand, puffed-up, unreal, hyperbolical, and
acrobatic style, their prototype is Pistol, who was once impatiently
requested by Falstaff, his friend, to "say what you have to say, _like a
man of this world_!"[5]

There is no expression in the German language exactly corresponding to
_stile empesé_; but the thing itself is all the more prevalent. When
combined with unnaturalness it is in works what affected gravity,
grandness, and unnaturalness are in social intercourse; and it is just
as intolerable. Poverty of intellect is fond of wearing this dress; just
as stupid people in everyday life are fond of assuming gravity and
formality.

A man who writes in this _preziös_ style is like a person who dresses
himself up to avoid being mistaken for or confounded with the mob; a
danger which a _gentleman_, even in his worst clothes, does not run.
Hence just as a plebeian is recognised by a certain display in his dress
and his _tiré à quatre épingles_, so is an ordinary writer recognised by
his style.

If a man has something to say that is worth saying, he need not envelop
it in affected expressions, involved phrases, and enigmatical
innuendoes; but he may rest assured that by expressing himself in a
simple, clear, and naïve manner he will not fail to produce the right
effect. A man who makes use of such artifices as have been alluded to
betrays his poverty of ideas, mind, and knowledge.

Nevertheless, it is a mistake to attempt to write exactly as one speaks.
Every style of writing should bear a certain trace of relationship with
the monumental style, which is, indeed, the ancestor of all styles; so
that to write as one speaks is just as faulty as to do the reverse, that
is to say, to try and speak as one writes. This makes the author
pedantic, and at the same time difficult to understand.

Obscurity and vagueness of expression are at all times and everywhere a
very bad sign. In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred they arise from
vagueness of thought, which, in its turn, is almost always fundamentally
discordant, inconsistent, and therefore wrong. When a right thought
springs up in the mind it strives after clearness of expression, and it
soon attains it, for clear thought easily finds its appropriate
expression. A man who is capable of thinking can express himself at all
times in clear, comprehensible, and unambiguous words. Those writers who
construct difficult, obscure, involved, and ambiguous phrases most
certainly do not rightly know what it is they wish to say: they have
only a dull consciousness of it, which is still struggling to put itself
into thought; they also often wish to conceal from themselves and other
people that in reality they have nothing to say. Like Fichte, Schelling,
and Hegel, they wish to appear to know what they do not know, to think
what they do not think, and to say what they do not say.

Will a man, then, who has something real to impart endeavour to say it
in a clear or an indistinct way? Quintilian has already said, _plerumque
accidit ut faciliora sint ad intelligendum et lucidiora multo, quae a
doctissimo quoque dicuntur.... Erit ergo etiam obscurior, quo quisque
deterior_.

A man's way of expressing himself should not be _enigmatical_, but he
should know whether he has something to say or whether he has not. It is
an uncertainty of expression which makes German writers so dull. The
only exceptional cases are those where a man wishes to express something
that is in some respect of an illicit nature. As anything that is
far-fetched generally produces the reverse of what the writer has aimed
at, so do words serve to make thought comprehensible; but only up to a
certain point. If words are piled up beyond this point they make the
thought that is being communicated more and more obscure. To hit that
point is the problem of style and a matter of discernment; for every
superfluous word prevents its purpose being carried out. Voltaire means
this when he says: _l'adjectif est l'ennemi du substantif_. (But, truly,
many authors try to hide their poverty of thought under a superfluity of
words.)

Accordingly, all prolixity and all binding together of unmeaning
observations that are not worth reading should be avoided. A writer must
be sparing with the reader's time, concentration, and patience; in this
way he makes him believe that what he has before him is worth his
careful reading, and will repay the trouble he has spent upon it. It is
always better to leave out something that is good than to write down
something that is not worth saying. Hesiod's πλέον ἡμισυ πάντος[6]
finds its right application. In fact, not to say everything! _Le secret
pour être ennuyeux, c'est de tout dire_. Therefore, if possible, the
quintessence only! the chief matter only! nothing that the reader would
think for himself. The use of many words in order to express little
thought is everywhere the infallible sign of mediocrity; while to clothe
much thought in a few words is the infallible sign of distinguished
minds.

Truth that is naked is the most beautiful, and the simpler its
expression the deeper is the impression it makes; this is partly because
it gets unobstructed hold of the hearer's mind without his being
distracted by secondary thoughts, and partly because he feels that here
he is not being corrupted or deceived by the arts of rhetoric, but that
the whole effect is got from the thing itself. For instance, what
declamation on the emptiness of human existence could be more impressive
than Job's: _Homo, natus de muliere, brevi vivit tempore, repletus
multis miseriis, qui, tanquam flos, egreditur et conteritur, et fugit
velut umbra_. It is for this very reason that the naïve poetry of Goethe
is so incomparably greater than the rhetorical of Schiller. This is also
why many folk-songs have so great an effect upon us. An author should
guard against using all unnecessary rhetorical adornment, all useless
amplification, and in general, just as in architecture he should guard
against an excess of decoration, all superfluity of expression--in other
words, he must aim at _chastity_ of style. Everything that is redundant
has a harmful effect. The law of simplicity and naïveté applies to all
fine art, for it is compatible with what is most sublime.

True brevity of expression consists in a man only saying what is worth
saying, while avoiding all diffuse explanations of things which every
one can think out for himself; that is, it consists in his correctly
distinguishing between what is necessary and what is superfluous. On the
other hand, one should never sacrifice clearness, to say nothing of
grammar, for the sake of being brief. To impoverish the expression of a
thought, or to obscure or spoil the meaning of a period for the sake of
using fewer words shows a lamentable want of judgment. And this is
precisely what that false brevity nowadays in vogue is trying to do, for
writers not only leave out words that are to the purpose, but even
grammatical and logical essentials.[7]

_Subjectivity_, which is an error of style in German literature, is,
through the deteriorated condition of literature and neglect of old
languages, becoming more common. By _subjectivity_ I mean when a writer
thinks it sufficient for himself to know what he means and wants to say,
and it is left to the reader to discover what is meant. Without
troubling himself about his reader, he writes as if he were holding a
monologue; whereas it should be a dialogue, and, moreover, a dialogue in
which he must express himself all the more clearly as the questions of
the reader cannot be heard. And it is for this very reason that style
should not be subjective but objective, and for it to be objective the
words must be written in such a way as to directly compel the reader to
think precisely the same as the author thought. This will only be the
case when the author has borne in mind that thoughts, inasmuch as they
follow the law of gravity, pass more easily from head to paper than from
paper to head. Therefore the journey from paper to head must be helped
by every means at his command. When he does this his words have a purely
objective effect, like that of a completed oil painting; while the
subjective style is not much more certain in its effect than spots on
the wall, and it is only the man whose fantasy is accidentally aroused
by them that sees figures; other people only see blurs. The difference
referred to applies to every style of writing as a whole, and it is also
often met with in particular instances; for example, I read in a book
that has just been published: _I have not written to increase the number
of existing books_. This means exactly the opposite of what the writer
had in view, and is nonsense into the bargain.

A man who writes carelessly at once proves that he himself puts no great
value on his own thoughts. For it is only by being convinced of the
truth and importance of our thoughts that there arises in us the
inspiration necessary for the inexhaustible patience to discover the
clearest, finest, and most powerful expression for them; just as one
puts holy relics or priceless works of art in silvern or golden
receptacles. It was for this reason that the old writers--whose
thoughts, expressed in their own words, have lasted for thousands of
years and hence bear the honoured title of classics--wrote with
universal care. Plato, indeed, is said to have written the introduction
to his _Republic_ seven times with different modifications. On the other
hand, the Germans are conspicuous above all other nations for neglect of
style in writing, as they are for neglect of dress, both kinds of
slovenliness which have their source in the German national character.
Just as neglect of dress betrays contempt for the society in which a man
moves, so does a hasty, careless, and bad style show shocking disrespect
for the reader, who then rightly punishes it by not reading the book.

FOOTNOTES:

[5] Schopenhauer here gives an example of this bombastic style which
would be of little interest to English readers.--TRANSLATOR.

[6] _Opera et dies_, v. 40.

[7] Schopenhauer here at length points out various common errors in the
writing and speaking of German which would lose significance in a
translation.--TR.




ON NOISE.


Kant has written a treatise on _The Vital Powers_; but I should like to
write a dirge on them, since their lavish use in the form of knocking,
hammering, and tumbling things about has made the whole of my life a
daily torment. Certainly there are people, nay, very many, who will
smile at this, because they are not sensitive to noise; it is precisely
these people, however, who are not sensitive to argument, thought,
poetry or art, in short, to any kind of intellectual impression: a fact
to be assigned to the coarse quality and strong texture of their brain
tissues. On the other hand, in the biographies or in other records of
the personal utterances of almost all great writers, I find complaints
of the pain that noise has occasioned to intellectual men. For example,
in the case of Kant, Goethe, Lichtenberg, Jean Paul; and indeed when no
mention is made of the matter it is merely because the context did not
lead up to it. I should explain the subject we are treating in this way:
If a big diamond is cut up into pieces, it immediately loses its value
as a whole; or if an army is scattered or divided into small bodies, it
loses all its power; and in the same way a great intellect has no more
power than an ordinary one as soon as it is interrupted, disturbed,
distracted, or diverted; for its superiority entails that it
concentrates all its strength on one point and object, just as a concave
mirror concentrates all the rays of light thrown upon it. Noisy
interruption prevents this concentration. This is why the most eminent
intellects have always been strongly averse to any kind of disturbance,
interruption and distraction, and above everything to that violent
interruption which is caused by noise; other people do not take any
particular notice of this sort of thing. The most intelligent of all the
European nations has called "Never interrupt" the eleventh commandment.
But noise is the most impertinent of all interruptions, for it not only
interrupts our own thoughts but disperses them. Where, however, there is
nothing to interrupt, noise naturally will not be felt particularly.
Sometimes a trifling but incessant noise torments and disturbs me for a
time, and before I become distinctly conscious of it I feel it merely as
the effort of thinking becomes more difficult, just as I should feel a
weight on my foot; then I realise what it is.

But to pass from _genus_ to _species_, the truly infernal cracking of
whips in the narrow resounding streets of a town must be denounced as
the most unwarrantable and disgraceful of all noises. It deprives life
of all peace and sensibility. Nothing gives me so clear a grasp of the
stupidity and thoughtlessness of mankind as the tolerance of the
cracking of whips. This sudden, sharp crack which paralyses the brain,
destroys all meditation, and murders thought, must cause pain to any one
who has anything like an idea in his head. Hence every crack must
disturb a hundred people applying their minds to some activity, however
trivial it may be; while it disjoints and renders painful the
meditations of the thinker; just like the executioner's axe when it
severs the head from the body. No sound cuts so sharply into the brain
as this cursed cracking of whips; one feels the prick of the whip-cord
in one's brain, which is affected in the same way as the _mimosa pudica_
is by touch, and which lasts the same length of time. With all respect
for the most holy doctrine of utility, I do not see why a fellow who is
removing a load of sand or manure should obtain the privilege of killing
in the bud the thoughts that are springing up in the heads of about ten
thousand people successively. (He is only half-an-hour on the road.)

Hammering, the barking of dogs, and the screaming of children are
abominable; but it is _only_ the cracking of a whip that is the true
murderer of thought. Its object is to destroy every favourable moment
that one now and then may have for reflection. If there were no other
means of urging on an animal than by making this most disgraceful of all
noises, one would forgive its existence. But it is quite the contrary:
this cursed cracking of whips is not only unnecessary but even useless.
The effect that it is intended to have on the horse mentally becomes
quite blunted and ineffective; since the constant abuse of it has
accustomed the horse to the crack, he does not quicken his pace for it.
This is especially noticeable in the unceasing crack of the whip which
comes from an empty vehicle as it is being driven at its slowest rate to
pick up a fare. The slightest touch with the whip would be more
effective. Allowing, however, that it were absolutely necessary to
remind the horse of the presence of the whip by continually cracking it,
a crack that made one hundredth part of the noise would be sufficient.
It is well known that animals in regard to hearing and seeing notice the
slightest indications, even indications that are scarcely perceptible to
ourselves. Trained dogs and canary birds furnish astonishing examples of
this. Accordingly, this cracking of whips must be regarded as something
purely wanton; nay, as an impudent defiance, on the part of those who
work with their hands, offered to those who work with their heads. That
such infamy is endured in a town is a piece of barbarity and injustice,
the more so as it could be easily removed by a police notice requiring
every whip cord to have a knot at the end of it. It would do no harm to
draw the proletariat's attention to the classes above him who work with
their heads; for he has unbounded fear of any kind of head work. A
fellow who rides through the narrow streets of a populous town with
unemployed post-horses or cart-horses, unceasingly cracking with all his
strength a whip several yards long, instantly deserves to dismount and
receive five really good blows with a stick. If all the philanthropists
in the world, together with all the legislators, met in order to bring
forward their reasons for the total abolition of corporal punishment, I
would not be persuaded to the contrary.

But we can see often enough something that is even still worse. I mean a
carter walking alone, and without any horses, through the streets
incessantly cracking his whip. He has become so accustomed to the crack
in consequence of its unwarrantable toleration. Since one looks after
one's body and all its needs in a most tender fashion, is the thinking
mind to be the only thing that never experiences the slightest
consideration or protection, to say nothing of respect? Carters,
sack-bearers (porters), messengers, and such-like, are the beasts of
burden of humanity; they should be treated absolutely with justice,
fairness, forbearance and care, but they ought not to be allowed to
thwart the higher exertions of the human race by wantonly making a
noise. I should like to know how many great and splendid thoughts these
whips have cracked out of the world. If I had any authority, I should
soon produce in the heads of these carters an inseparable _nexus
idearum_ between cracking a whip and receiving a whipping.

Let us hope that those nations with more intelligence and refined
feelings will make a beginning, and then by force of example induce the
Germans to do the same.[8] Meanwhile, hear what Thomas Hood says of them
(_Up the Rhine)_: "_For a musical people they are the most noisy I ever
met with_" That they are so is not due to their being more prone to
making a noise than other people, but to their insensibility, which
springs from obtuseness; they are not disturbed by it in reading or
thinking, because they do not think; they only smoke, which is their
substitute for thought. The general toleration of unnecessary noise, for
instance, of the clashing of doors, which is so extremely ill-mannered
and vulgar, is a direct proof of the dulness and poverty of thought that
one meets with everywhere. In Germany it seems as though it were planned
that no one should think for noise; take the inane drumming that goes on
as an instance. Finally, as far as the literature treated of in this
chapter is concerned, I have only one work to recommend, but it is an
excellent one: I mean a poetical epistle in _terzo rimo_ by the famous
painter Bronzino, entitled "_De' Romori: a Messer Luca Martini_" It
describes fully and amusingly the torture to which one is put by the
many kinds of noises of a small Italian town. It is written in
tragicomic style. This epistle is to be found in _Opere burlesche del
Berni, Aretino ed altri,_ vol. ii. p. 258, apparently published in
Utrecht in 1771.

The nature of our intellect is such that _ideas_ are said to spring by
abstraction from _observations_, so that the latter are in existence
before the former. If this is really what takes place, as is the case
with a man who has merely his own experience as his teacher and book, he
knows quite well which of his observations belong to and are represented
by each of his ideas; he is perfectly acquainted with both, and
accordingly he treats everything correctly that comes before his notice.
We might call this the natural mode of education.

On the other hand, an artificial education is having one's head crammed
full of ideas, derived from hearing others talk, from learning and
reading, before one has anything like an extensive knowledge of the
world as it is and as one sees it. The observations which produce all
these ideas are said to come later on with experience; but until then
these ideas are applied wrongly, and accordingly both things and men are
judged wrongly, seen wrongly, and treated wrongly. And so it is that
education perverts the mind; and this is why, after a long spell of
learning and reading, we enter the world, in our youth, with views that
are partly simple, partly perverted; consequently we comport ourselves
with an air of anxiety at one time, at another of presumption. This is
because our head is full of ideas which we are now trying to make use
of, but almost always apply wrongly. This is the result of ὑστερον
προτερον (putting the cart before the horse), since we are directly
opposing the natural development of our mind by obtaining ideas first
and observations last; for teachers, instead of developing in a boy his
faculties of discernment and judgment, and of thinking for himself,
merely strive to stuff his head full of other people's thoughts.
Subsequently, all the opinions that have sprung from misapplied ideas
have to be rectified by a lengthy experience; and it is seldom that they
are completely rectified. This is why so few men of learning have such
sound common sense as is quite common among the illiterate.

       *       *       *       *       *

From what has been said, the principal point in education is that _one's
knowledge of the world begins at the right end;_ and the attainment of
which might be designated as the aim of all education. But, as has been
pointed out, this depends principally on the observation of each thing
preceding the idea one forms of it; further, that narrow ideas precede
broader; so that the whole of one's instruction is given in the order
that the ideas themselves during formation must have followed. But
directly this order is not strictly adhered to, imperfect and
subsequently wrong ideas spring up; and finally there arises a perverted
view of the world in keeping with the nature of the individual--a view
such as almost every one holds for a long time, and most people to the
end of their lives. If a man analyses his own character, he will find
that it was not until he reached a very ripe age, and in some cases
quite unexpectedly, that he was able to rightly and clearly understand
many matters of a quite simple nature.

Previously, there had been an obscure point in his knowledge of the
world which had arisen through his omitting something in his early
education, whether he had been either artificially educated by men or
just naturally by his own experience. Therefore one should try to find
out the strictly natural course of knowledge, so that by keeping
methodically to it children may become acquainted with the affairs of
the world, without getting false ideas into their heads, which
frequently cannot be driven out again. In carrying this out, one must
next take care that children do not use words with which they connect no
clear meaning. Even children have, as a rule, that unhappy tendency of
being satisfied with words instead of wishing to understand things, and
of learning words by heart, so that they may make use of them when they
are in a difficulty. This tendency clings to them afterwards, so that
the knowledge of many learned men becomes mere verbosity.

However, the principal thing must always be to let one's observations
precede one's ideas, and not the reverse as is usually and unfortunately
the case; which may be likened to a child coming into the world with its
feet foremost, or a rhyme begun before thinking of its reason. While the
child's mind has made a very few observations one inculcates it with
ideas and opinions, which are, strictly speaking, prejudices. His
observations and experience are developed through this ready-made
apparatus instead of his ideas being developed out of his own
observations. In viewing the world one sees many things from many sides,
consequently this is not such a short or quick way of learning as that
which makes use of abstract ideas, and quickly comes to a decision about
everything; therefore preconceived ideas will not be rectified until
late, or it may be they are never rectified. For, when a man's view
contradicts his ideas, he will reject at the outset what it renders
evident as one-sided, nay, he will deny it and shut his eyes to it, so
that his preconceived ideas may remain unaffected. And so it happens
that many men go through life full of oddities, caprices, fancies, and
prejudices, until they finally become fixed ideas. He has never
attempted to abstract fundamental ideas from his own observations and
experience, because he has got everything ready-made from other people;
and it is for this very reason that he and countless others are so
insipid and shallow. Instead of such a system, the natural system of
education should be employed in educating children. No idea should be
impregnated but what has come through the medium of observations, or at
any rate been verified by them. A child would have fewer ideas, but they
would be well-grounded and correct. It would learn to measure things
according to its own standard and not according to another's. It would
then never acquire a thousand whims and prejudices which must be
eradicated by the greater part of subsequent experience and education.
Its mind would henceforth be accustomed to thoroughness and clearness;
the child would rely on its own judgment, and be free from prejudices.
And, in general, children should not get to know life, in any aspect
whatever, from the copy before they have learnt it from the original.
Instead, therefore, of hastening to place mere books in their hands, one
should make them gradually acquainted with things and the circumstances
of human life, and above everything one should take care to guide them
to a clear grasp of reality, and to teach them to obtain their ideas
directly from the real world, and to form them in keeping with it--but
not to get them from elsewhere, as from books, fables, or what others
have said--and then later to make use of such ready-made ideas in real
life. The result will be that their heads are full of chimeras and that
some will have a wrong comprehension of things, and others will
fruitlessly endeavour to remodel the world according to those chimeras,
and so get on to wrong paths both in theory and practice. For it is
incredible how much harm is done by false notions which have been
implanted early in life, only to develop later on into prejudices; the
later education which we get from the world and real life must be
employed in eradicating these early ideas. And this is why, as is
related by Diogenes Laertius, Antisthenes gave the following answer:
έρωτηθεις τι των μαθηματων ἀναγκαιοτατον, έφη, "το κακα ἀπομαθειν."
(_Interrogatus quaenam esset disciplina maxime necessaria, Mala, inquit,
dediscere_.)

       *       *       *       *       *

Children should be kept from all kinds of instruction that may make
errors possible until their sixteenth year, that is to say, from
philosophy, religion, and general views of every description; because it
is the errors that are acquired in early days that remain, as a rule,
ineradicable, and because the faculty of judgment is the last to arrive
at maturity. They should only be interested in such things that make
errors impossible, such as mathematics, in things which are not very
dangerous, such as languages, natural science, history, and so forth; in
general, the branches of knowledge which are to be taken up at any age
must be within reach of the intellect at that age and perfectly
comprehensible to it. Childhood and youth are the time for collecting
data and getting to know specially and thoroughly individual and
particular things. On the other hand, all judgment of a general nature
must at that time be suspended, and final explanations left alone. One
should leave the faculty of judgment alone, as it only comes with
maturity and experience, and also take care that one does not anticipate
it by inculcating prejudice, when it will be crippled for ever.

On the contrary, the memory is to be specially exercised, as it has its
greatest strength and tenacity in youth; however, what has to be
retained must be chosen with the most careful and scrupulous
consideration. For as it is what we have learnt well in our youth that
lasts, we should take the greatest possible advantage of this precious
gift. If we picture to ourselves how deeply engraven on our memory the
people are whom we knew during the first twelve years of our life, and
how indelibly imprinted are also the events of that time, and most of
the things that we then experienced, heard, or learnt, the idea of
basing education on this susceptibility and tenacity of the youthful
mind will seem natural; in that the mind receives its impressions
according to a strict method and a regular system. But because the years
of youth that are assigned to man are only few, and the capacity for
remembering, in general, is always limited (and still more so the
capacity for remembering of the individual), everything depends on the
memory being filled with what is most essential and important in any
department of knowledge, to the exclusion of everything else. This
selection should be made by the most capable minds and masters in every
branch of knowledge after the most mature consideration, and the result
of it established. Such a selection must be based on a sifting of
matters which are necessary and important for a man to know in general,
and also for him to know in a particular profession or calling.
Knowledge of the first kind would have to be divided into graduated
courses, like an encyclopædia, corresponding to the degree of general
culture which each man has attained in his external circumstances; from
a course restricted to what is necessary for primary instruction up to
the matter contained in every branch of the philosophical faculty.
Knowledge of the second kind would, however, be reserved for him who had
really mastered the selection in all its branches. The whole would give
a canon specially devised for intellectual education, which naturally
would require revision every ten years. By such an arrangement the
youthful power of the memory would be put to the best advantage, and it
would furnish the faculty of judgment with excellent material when it
appeared later on.

       *       *       *       *       *

What is meant by maturity of knowledge is that state of perfection to
which any one individual is able to bring it, when an exact
correspondence has been effected between the whole of his abstract ideas
and his own personal observations: whereby each of his ideas rests
directly or indirectly on a basis of observation, which alone gives it
any real value; and likewise he is able to place every observation that
he makes under the right idea corresponding to it.

_Maturity_ of knowledge is the work of experience alone, and
consequently of time. For the knowledge we acquire from our own
observation is, as a rule, distinct from that we get through abstract
ideas; the former is acquired in the natural way, while the latter comes
through good and bad instruction and what other people have told to us.
Consequently, in youth there is generally little harmony and connection
between our ideas, which mere expressions have fixed, and our real
knowledge, which has been acquired by observation. Later they both
gradually approach and correct each other; but maturity of knowledge
does not exist until they have become quite incorporated. This maturity
is quite independent of that other kind of perfection, the standard of
which may be high or low, I mean the perfection to which the capacities
of an individual may be brought; it is not based on a correspondence
between the abstract and intuitive knowledge, but on the degree of
intensity of each.


The most necessary thing for the practical man is the attainment of an
exact and thorough knowledge of _what is really going on in the world;_
but it is also the most irksome, for a man may continue studying until
old age without having learnt all that is to be learnt; while one can
master the most important things in the sciences in one's youth. In
getting such a knowledge of the world, it is as a novice that the boy
and youth have the first and most difficult lessons to learn; but
frequently even the matured man has still much to learn. The study is of
considerable difficulty in itself, but it is made doubly difficult by
_novels_, which depict the ways of the world and of men who do not exist
in real life. But these are accepted with the credulity of youth, and
become incorporated with the mind; so that now, in the place of purely
negative ignorance, a whole framework of wrong ideas, which are
positively wrong, crops up, subsequently confusing the schooling of
experience and representing the lesson it teaches in a false light. If
the youth was previously in the dark, he will now be led astray by a
will-o'-the-wisp: and with a girl this is still more frequently the
case. They have been deluded into an absolutely false view of life by
reading novels, and expectations have been raised that can never be
fulfilled. This generally has the most harmful effect on their whole
lives. Those men who had neither time nor opportunity to read novels in
their youth, such as those who work with their hands, have decided
advantage over them. Few of these novels are exempt from reproach--nay,
whose effect is contrary to bad. Before all others, for instance, _Gil
Blas_ and the other works of Le Sage (or rather their Spanish
originals); further, _The Vicar of Wakefield_, and to some extent the
novels of Walter Scott. _Don Quixote_ may be regarded as a satirical
presentation of the error in question.

FOOTNOTES:

[8] According to a notice from the Munich Society for the Protection of
Animals, the superfluous whipping and cracking were strictly forbidden
in Nuremberg in December 1858.




ON READING AND BOOKS.


Ignorance is degrading only when it is found in company with riches.
Want and penury restrain the poor man; his employment takes the place of
knowledge and occupies his thoughts: while rich men who are ignorant
live for their pleasure only, and resemble a beast; as may be seen
daily. They are to be reproached also for not having used wealth and
leisure for that which lends them their greatest value.

When we read, another person thinks for us: we merely repeat his mental
process. It is the same as the pupil, in learning to write, following
with his pen the lines that have been pencilled by the teacher.
Accordingly, in reading, the work of thinking is, for the greater part,
done for us. This is why we are consciously relieved when we turn to
reading after being occupied with our own thoughts. But, in reading, our
head is, however, really only the arena of some one else's thoughts. And
so it happens that the person who reads a great deal--that is to say,
almost the whole day, and recreates himself by spending the intervals in
thoughtless diversion, gradually loses the ability to think for himself;
just as a man who is always riding at last forgets how to walk. Such,
however, is the case with many men of learning: they have read
themselves stupid. For to read in every spare moment, and to read
constantly, is more paralysing to the mind than constant manual work,
which, at any rate, allows one to follow one's own thoughts. Just as a
spring, through the continual pressure of a foreign body, at last loses
its elasticity, so does the mind if it has another person's thoughts
continually forced upon it. And just as one spoils the stomach by
overfeeding and thereby impairs the whole body, so can one overload and
choke the mind by giving it too much nourishment. For the more one reads
the fewer are the traces left of what one has read; the mind is like a
tablet that has been written over and over. Hence it is impossible to
reflect; and it is only by reflection that one can assimilate what one
has read if one reads straight ahead without pondering over it later,
what has been read does not take root, but is for the most part lost.
Indeed, it is the same with mental as with bodily food: scarcely the
fifth part of what a man takes is assimilated; the remainder passes off
in evaporation, respiration, and the like.

From all this it may be concluded that thoughts put down on paper are
nothing more than footprints in the sand: one sees the road the man has
taken, but in order to know what he saw on the way, one requires his
eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

No literary quality can be attained by reading writers who possess it:
be it, for example, persuasiveness, imagination, the gift of drawing
comparisons, boldness or bitterness, brevity or grace, facility of
expression or wit, unexpected contrasts, a laconic manner, naïveté, and
the like. But if we are already gifted with these qualities--that is to
say, if we possess them _potentia_--we can call them forth and bring
them to consciousness; we can discern to what uses they are to be put;
we can be strengthened in our inclination, nay, may have courage, to use
them; we can judge by examples the effect of their application and so
learn the correct use of them; and it is only after we have accomplished
all this that we _actu_ possess these qualities. This is the only way in
which reading can form writing, since it teaches us the use to which we
can put our own natural gifts; and in order to do this it must be taken
for granted that these qualities are in us. Without them we learn
nothing from reading but cold, dead mannerisms, and we become mere
imitators.

       *       *       *       *       *

The health officer should, in the interest of one's eyes, see that the
smallness of print has a fixed minimum, which must not be exceeded. When
I was in Venice in 1818, at which time the genuine Venetian chain was
still being made, a goldsmith told me that those who made the _catena
fina_ turned blind at thirty.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the strata of the earth preserve in rows the beings which lived in
former times, so do the shelves of a library preserve in a like manner
the errors of the past and expositions concerning them. Like those
creatures, they too were full of life in their time and made a great
deal of noise; but now they are stiff and fossilised, and only of
interest to the literary palaeontologist.

       *       *       *       *       *

According to Herodotus, Xerxes wept at the sight of his army, which was
too extensive for him to scan, at the thought that a hundred years hence
not one of all these would be alive. Who would not weep at the thought
in looking over a big catalogue that of all these books not one will be
in existence in ten years' time?

It is the same in literature as in life. Wherever one goes one
immediately comes upon the incorrigible mob of humanity. It exists
everywhere in legions; crowding, soiling everything, like flies in
summer. Hence the numberless bad books, those rank weeds of literature
which extract nourishment from the corn and choke it.

They monopolise the time, money, and attention which really belong to
good books and their noble aims; they are written merely with a view to
making money or procuring places. They are not only useless, but they do
positive harm. Nine-tenths of the whole of our present literature aims
solely at taking a few shillings out of the public's pocket, and to
accomplish this, author, publisher, and reviewer have joined forces.

There is a more cunning and worse trick, albeit a profitable one.
_Littérateurs_, hack-writers, and productive authors have succeeded,
contrary to good taste and the true culture of the age, in bringing the
world _elegante_ into leading-strings, so that they have been taught to
read _a tempo_ and all the same thing--namely, _the newest books_ order
that they may have material for conversation in their social circles.
Bad novels and similar productions from the pen of writers who were once
famous, such as Spindler, Bulwer, Eugène Sue, and so on, serve this
purpose. But what can be more miserable than the fate of a reading
public of this kind, that feels always impelled to read the latest
writings of extremely commonplace authors who write for money only, and
therefore exist in numbers? And for the sake of this they merely know by
name the works of the rare and superior writers, of all ages and
countries.

Literary newspapers, since they print the daily smatterings of
commonplace people, are especially a cunning means for robbing from the
aesthetic public the time which should be devoted to the genuine
productions of art for the furtherance of culture.

Hence, in regard to our subject, the art of _not_ reading is highly
important. This consists in not taking a book into one's hand merely
because it is interesting the great public at the time--such as
political or religious pamphlets, novels, poetry, and the like, which
make a noise and reach perhaps several editions in their first and last
years of existence. Remember rather that the man who writes for fools
always finds a large public: and only read for a limited and definite
time exclusively the works of great minds, those who surpass other men
of all times and countries, and whom the voice of fame points to as
such. These alone really educate and instruct.

One can never read too little of bad, or too much of good books: bad
books are intellectual poison; they destroy the mind.

In order to read what is good one must make it a condition never to read
what is bad; for life is short, and both time and strength limited.

       *       *       *       *       *

Books are written sometimes about this, sometimes about that great
thinker of former times, and the public reads these books, but not the
works of the man himself. This is because it wants to read only what has
just been printed, and because _similis simili gaudet_, and it finds the
shallow, insipid gossip of some stupid head of to-day more homogeneous
and agreeable than the thoughts of great minds. I have to thank fate,
however, that a fine epigram of A.B. Schlegel, which has since been my
guiding star, came before my notice as a youth:

  "Leset fleizig die Alten, die wahren eigentlich Alten
  Was die Neuen davon sagen bedeutet nicht viel."

Oh, how like one commonplace mind is to another! How they are all
fashioned in one form! How they all think alike under similar
circumstances, and never differ! This is why their views are so personal
and petty. And a stupid public reads the worthless trash written by
these fellows for no other reason than that it has been printed to-day,
while it leaves the works of great thinkers undisturbed on the
bookshelves.

Incredible are the folly and perversity of a public that will leave
unread writings of the noblest and rarest of minds, of all times and all
countries, for the sake of reading the writings of commonplace persons
which appear daily, and breed every year in countless numbers like
flies; merely because these writings have been printed to-day and are
still wet from the press. It would be better if they were thrown on one
side and rejected the day they appeared, as they must be after the lapse
of a few years. They will then afford material for laughter as
illustrating the follies of a former time.

It is because people will only read what is _the newest_ instead of what
is the best of all ages, that writers remain in the narrow circle of
prevailing ideas, and that the age sinks deeper and deeper in its own
mire.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are at all times two literatures which, although scarcely known to
each other, progress side by side--the one real, the other merely
apparent. The former grows into literature that _lasts_. Pursued by
people who live _for_ science or poetry, it goes its way earnestly and
quietly, but extremely slowly; and it produces in Europe scarcely a
dozen works in a century, which, however, are _permanent_. The other
literature is pursued by people who live _on_ science or poetry; it goes
at a gallop amid a great noise and shouting of those taking part, and
brings yearly many thousand works into the market. But after a few years
one asks, Where are they? where is their fame, which was so great
formerly? This class of literature may be distinguished as fleeting, the
other as permanent.

       *       *       *       *       *

It would be a good thing to buy books if one could also buy the time to
read them; but one usually confuses the purchase of books with the
acquisition of their contents. To desire that a man should retain
everything he has ever read, is the same as wishing him to retain in his
stomach all that he has ever eaten. He has been bodily nourished on what
he has eaten, and mentally on what he has read, and through them become
what he is. As the body assimilates what is homogeneous to it, so will a
man _retain_ what _interests_ him; in other words, what coincides with
his system of thought or suits his ends. Every one has aims, but very
few have anything approaching a system of thought. This is why such
people do not take an objective interest in anything, and why they learn
nothing from what they read: they remember nothing about it.

_Repetitio est mater studiorum_. Any kind of important book should
immediately be read twice, partly because one grasps the matter in its
entirety the second time, and only really understands the beginning when
the end is known; and partly because in reading it the second time one's
temper and mood are different, so that one gets another impression; it
may be that one sees the matter in another light.

Works are the quintessence of a mind, and are therefore always of by far
greater value than conversation, even if it be the conversation of the
greatest mind. In every essential a man's works surpass his conversation
and leave it far behind. Even the writings of an ordinary man may be
instructive, worth reading, and entertaining, for the simple reason that
they are the quintessence of that man's mind--that is to say, the
writings are the result and fruit of his whole thought and study; while
we should be dissatisfied with his conversation. Accordingly, it is
possible to read books written by people whose conversation would give
us no satisfaction; so that the mind will only by degrees attain high
culture by finding entertainment almost entirely in books, and not in
men.

There is nothing that so greatly recreates the mind as the works of the
old classic writers. Directly one has been taken up, even if it is only
for half-an-hour, one feels as quickly refreshed, relieved, purified,
elevated, and strengthened as if one had refreshed oneself at a mountain
stream. Is this due to the perfections of the old languages, or to the
greatness of the minds whose works have remained unharmed and untouched
for centuries? Perhaps to both combined. This I know, directly we stop
learning the old languages (as is at present threatening) a new class of
literature will spring up, consisting of writing that is more barbaric,
stupid, and worthless than has ever yet existed; that, in particular,
the German language, which possesses some of the beauties of the old
languages, will be systematically spoilt and stripped by these worthless
contemporary scribblers, until, little by little, it becomes
impoverished, crippled, and reduced to a miserable jargon.

Half a century is always a considerable time in the history of the
universe, for the matter which forms it is always shifting; something is
always taking place. But the same length of time in literature often
goes for nothing, because nothing has happened; unskilful attempts don't
count; so that we are exactly where we were fifty years previously.

To illustrate this: imagine the progress of knowledge among mankind in
the form of a planet's course. The false paths the human race soon
follows after any important progress has been made represent the
epicycles in the Ptolemaic system; after passing through any one of them
the planet is just where it was before it entered it. The great minds,
however, which really bring the race further on its course, do not
accompany it on the epicycles which it makes every time. This explains
why posthumous fame is got at the expense of contemporary fame, and
_vice versâ_. We have an instance of such an epicycle in the philosophy
of Fichte and Schelling, crowned by Hegel's caricature of it. This
epicycle issued from the limit to which philosophy had been finally
brought by Kant, where I myself took it up again later to carry it
further. In the interim the false philosophers I have mentioned, and
some others, passed through their epicycle, which has just been
terminated; hence the people who accompanied them are conscious of being
exactly at the point from which they started.

This condition of things shows why the scientific, literary, and
artistic spirit of the age is declared bankrupt about every thirty
years. During that period the errors have increased to such an extent
that they fall under the weight of their absurdity; while at the same
time the opposition to them has become stronger. At this point there is
a crash, which is followed by an error in the opposite direction. To
show the course that is taken in its periodical return would be the true
practical subject of the history of literature; little notice is taken
of it, however. Moreover, through the comparative shortness of such
periods, the data of remote times are with difficulty collected; hence
the matter can be most conveniently observed in one's own age. An
example of this taken from physical science is found in Werter's
Neptunian geology. But let me keep to the example already quoted above,
for it is nearest to us. In German philosophy Kant's brilliant period
was immediately followed by another period, which aimed at being
imposing rather than convincing. Instead of being solid and clear, it
aimed at being brilliant and hyperbolical, and, in particular,
unintelligible; instead of seeking truth, it intrigued. Under these
circumstances philosophy could make no progress. Ultimately the whole
school and its method became bankrupt. For the audacious, sophisticated
nonsense on the one hand, and the unconscionable praise on the other of
Hegel and his fellows, as well as the apparent object of the whole
affair, rose to such a pitch that in the end the charlatanry of the
thing was obvious to everybody; and when, in consequence of certain
revelations, the protection that had been given it by the upper classes
was withdrawn, it was talked about by everybody. This most miserable of
all the philosophies that have ever existed dragged down with it into
the abyss of discredit the systems of Fichte and Schelling, which had
preceded it. So that the absolute philosophical futility of the first
half of the century following upon Kant in Germany is obvious; and yet
the Germans boast of their gift for philosophy compared with foreigners,
especially since an English writer, with malicious irony, called them _a
nation of thinkers_.

Those who want an example of the general scheme of epicycles taken from
the history of art need only look at the School of Sculpture which
flourished in the last century under Bernini, and especially at its
further cultivation in France. This school represented commonplace
nature instead of antique beauty, and the manners of a French minuet
instead of antique simplicity and grace. It became bankrupt when, under
Winckelmann's direction, a return was made to the antique school.
Another example is supplied in the painting belonging to the first
quarter of this century. Art was regarded merely as a means and
instrument of mediaeval religious feeling, and consequently
ecclesiastical subjects alone were chosen for its themes. These,
however, were treated by painters who were wanting in earnestness of
faith, and in their delusion they took for examples Francesco Francia,
Pietro Perugino, Angelico da Fiesole, and others like them, even holding
them in greater esteem than the truly great masters who followed. In
view of this error, and because in poetry an analogous effort had at the
same time met with favour, Goethe wrote his parable _Pfaffenspiel_. This
school, reputedly capricious, became bankrupt, and was followed by a
return to nature, which made itself known in _genre_ pictures and scenes
of life of every description, even though it strayed sometimes into
vulgarity.

It is the same with the progress of the human mind in the _history of
literature_, which is for the most part like the catalogue of a cabinet
of deformities; the spirit in which they keep the longest is pigskin. We
do not need to look there for the few who have been born shapely; they
are still alive, and we come across them in every part of the world,
like immortals whose youth is ever fresh. They alone form what I have
distinguished as _real_ literature, the history of which, although poor
in persons, we learn from our youth up out of the mouths of educated
people, and not first of all from compilations. As a specific against
the present prevailing monomania for reading literary histories, so that
one may be able to chatter about everything without really knowing
anything, let me refer you to a passage from Lichtenberg which is well
worth reading (vol. ii. p. 302 of the old edition).

But I wish some one would attempt a _tragical history of literature_,
showing how the greatest writers and artists have been treated during
their lives by the various nations which have produced them and whose
proudest possessions they are. It would show us the endless fight which
the good and genuine works of all periods and countries have had to
carry on against the perverse and bad. It would depict the martyrdom of
almost all those who truly enlightened humanity, of almost all the great
masters in every kind of art; it would show us how they, with few
exceptions, were tormented without recognition, without any to share
their misery, without followers; how they existed in poverty and misery
whilst fame, honour, and riches fell to the lot of the worthless; it
would reveal that what happened to them happened to Esau, who, while
hunting the deer for his father, was robbed of the blessing by Jacob
disguised in his brother's coat; and how through it all the love of
their subject kept them up, until at last the trying fight of such a
teacher of the human race is ended, the immortal laurel offered to him,
and the time come when it can be said of him

  "Der schwere Panzer wird zum Flügelkleide
  Kurz ist der Schmerz, unendlich ist die Freude."




THE EMPTINESS OF EXISTENCE.


This emptiness finds its expression in the whole form of existence, in
the infiniteness of Time and Space as opposed to the finiteness of the
individual in both; in the flitting present as the only manner of real
existence; in the dependence and relativity of all things; in constantly
Becoming without Being; in continually wishing without being satisfied;
in an incessant thwarting of one's efforts, which go to make up life,
until victory is won. _Time_, and the _transitoriness_ of all things,
are merely the form under which the will to live, which as the
thing-in-itself is imperishable, has revealed to Time the futility of
its efforts. Time is that by which at every moment all things become as
nothing in our hands, and thereby lose all their true value.

       *       *       *       *       *

What _has been_ exists no more; and exists just as little as that which
has _never_ been. But everything that exists _has been_ in the next
moment. Hence something belonging to the present, however unimportant it
may be, is superior to something important belonging to the past; this
is because the former is a _reality_ and related to the latter as
something is to nothing.

A man to his astonishment all at once becomes conscious of existing
after having been in a state of non-existence for many thousands of
years, when, presently again, he returns to a state of non-existence for
an equally long time. This cannot possibly be true, says the heart; and
even the crude mind, after giving the matter its consideration, must
have some sort of presentiment of the ideality of time. This ideality of
time, together with that of space, is the key to every true system of
metaphysics, because it finds room for quite another order of things
than is to be found in nature. This is why Kant is so great.

Of every event in our life it is only for a moment that we can say that
it _is_; after that we must say for ever that it _was_. Every evening
makes us poorer by a day. It would probably make us angry to see this
short space of time slipping away, if we were not secretly conscious in
the furthest depths of our being that the spring of eternity belongs to
us, and that in it we are always able to have life renewed.

Reflections of the nature of those above may, indeed, establish the
belief that to enjoy the present, and to make this the purpose of one's
life, is the greatest _wisdom_; since it is the present alone that is
real, everything else being only the play of thought. But such a purpose
might just as well be called the greatest _folly_, for that which in the
next moment exists no more, and vanishes as completely as a dream, can
never be worth a serious effort.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our existence is based solely on the ever-fleeting present. Essentially,
therefore, it has to take the form of continual motion without there
ever being any possibility of our finding the rest after which we are
always striving. It is the same as a man running downhill, who falls if
he tries to stop, and it is only by his continuing to run on that he
keeps on his legs; it is like a pole balanced on one's finger-tips, or
like a planet that would fall into its sun as soon as it stopped
hurrying onwards. Hence unrest is the type of existence.

In a world like this, where there is no kind of stability, no
possibility of anything lasting, but where everything is thrown into a
restless whirlpool of change, where everything hurries on, flies, and is
maintained in the balance by a continual advancing and moving, it is
impossible to imagine happiness. It cannot dwell where, as Plato says,
_continual Becoming and never Being_ is all that takes place. First of
all, no man is happy; he strives his whole life long after imaginary
happiness, which he seldom attains, and if he does, then it is only to
be disillusioned; and as a rule he is shipwrecked in the end and enters
the harbour dismasted. Then it is all the same whether he has been happy
or unhappy in a life which was made up of a merely ever-changing present
and is now at an end.

Meanwhile it surprises one to find, both in the world of human beings
and in that of animals, that this great, manifold, and restless motion
is sustained and kept going by the medium of two simple impulses--hunger
and the instinct of sex, helped perhaps a little by boredom--and that
these have the power to form the _primum mobile_ of so complex a
machinery, setting in motion the variegated show!

Looking at the matter a little closer, we see at the very outset that
the existence of inorganic matter is being constantly attacked by
chemical forces which eventually annihilates it. While organic existence
is only made possible by continual change of matter, to keep up a
perpetual supply of which it must consequently have help from without.
Therefore organic life is like balancing a pole on one's hand; it must
be kept in continual motion, and have a constant supply of matter of
which it is continually and endlessly in need. Nevertheless it is only
by means of this organic life that consciousness is possible.

Accordingly this is a _finite existence_, and its antithesis would be an
_infinite_, neither exposed to any attack from without nor in want of
help from without, and hence ἀεί ὡσαύτως ὄν, in eternal rest; οὔτε
γιγνόμενον, οὔτε ἀπολλύμενον, without change, without time, and without
diversity; the negative knowledge of which is the fundamental note of
Plato's philosophy. The denial of the will to live reveals the way to
such a state as this.

       *       *       *       *       *

The scenes of our life are like pictures in rough mosaic, which have no
effect at close quarters, but must be looked at from a distance in order
to discern their beauty. So that to obtain something we have desired is
to find out that it is worthless; we are always living in expectation of
better things, while, at the same time, we often repent and long for
things that belong to the past. We accept the present as something that
is only temporary, and regard it only as a means to accomplish our aim.
So that most people will find if they look back when their life is at an
end, that they have lived their lifelong _ad interim_, and they will be
surprised to find that something they allowed to pass by unnoticed and
unenjoyed was just their life--that is to say, it was the very thing in
the expectation of which they lived. And so it may be said of man in
general that, befooled by hope, he dances into the arms of death.

Then again, there is the insatiability of each individual will; every
time it is satisfied a new wish is engendered, and there is no end to
its eternally insatiable desires.

This is because the Will, taken in itself, is the lord of worlds; since
everything belongs to it, it is not satisfied with a portion of
anything, but only with the whole, which, however, is endless. Meanwhile
it must excite our pity when we consider how extremely little this lord
of the world receives, when it makes its appearance as an individual;
for the most part only just enough to maintain the body. This is why man
is so very unhappy.

In the present age, which is intellectually impotent and remarkable for
its veneration of what is bad in every form--a condition of things which
is quite in keeping with the coined word "Jetztzeit" (present time), as
pretentious as it is cacophonic--the pantheists make bold to say that
life is, as they call it, "an end-in itself." If our existence in this
world were an end-in-itself, it would be the most absurd end that was
ever determined; even we ourselves or any one else might have imagined
it.

Life presents itself next as a task, the task, that is, of subsisting
_de gagner sa vie_. If this is solved, then that which has been won
becomes a burden, and involves the second task of its being got rid of
in order to ward off boredom, which, like a bird of prey, is ready to
fall upon any life that is secure from want.

So that the first task is to win something, and the second, after the
something has been won, to forget about it, otherwise it becomes a
burden.

That human life must be a kind of mistake is sufficiently clear from the
fact that man is a compound of needs, which are difficult to satisfy;
moreover, if they are satisfied, all he is granted is a state of
painlessness, in which he can only give himself up to boredom. This is a
precise proof that existence in itself has no value, since boredom is
merely the feeling of the emptiness of life. If, for instance, life, the
longing for which constitutes our very being, had in itself any positive
and real value, boredom could not exist; mere existence in itself would
supply us with everything, and therefore satisfy us. But our existence
would not be a joyous thing unless we were striving after something;
distance and obstacles to be overcome then represent our aim as
something that would satisfy us--an illusion which vanishes when our aim
has been attained; or when we are engaged in something that is of a
purely intellectual nature, when, in reality, we have retired from the
world, so that we may observe it from the outside, like spectators at a
theatre. Even sensual pleasure itself is nothing but a continual
striving, which ceases directly its aim is attained. As soon as we are
not engaged in one of these two ways, but thrown back on existence
itself, we are convinced of the emptiness and worthlessness of it; and
this it is we call boredom. That innate and ineradicable craving for
what is out of the common proves how glad we are to have the natural and
tedious course of things interrupted. Even the pomp and splendour of the
rich in their stately castles is at bottom nothing but a futile attempt
to escape the very essence of existence, _misery_.

       *       *       *       *       *

That the most perfect manifestation of the _will to live_, which
presents itself in the extremely subtle and complicated machinery of the
human organism, must fall to dust and finally deliver up its whole being
to dissolution, is the naïve way in which Nature, invariably true and
genuine, declares the whole striving of the will in its very essence to
be of no avail. If it were of any value in itself, something
unconditioned, its end would not be non-existence. This is the dominant
note of Goethe's beautiful song:

  "Hoch auf dem alten Thurme steht
  Des Helden edler Geist."

That man is nothing but a phenomenon, that he is
not-the-thing-in-itself--I mean that he is not ὄντως ὄν--is proved by
the fact that _death is a necessity_.

And how different the beginning of our life is to the end! The former is
made up of deluded hopes, sensual enjoyment, while the latter is pursued
by bodily decay and the odour of death.

The road dividing the two, as far as our well-being and enjoyment of
life are concerned, is downhill; the dreaminess of childhood, the
joyousness of youth, the troubles of middle age, the infirmity and
frequent misery of old age, the agonies of our last illness, and finally
the struggle with death--do all these not make one feel that existence
is nothing but a mistake, the consequences of which are becoming
gradually more and more obvious?

It would be wisest to regard life as a _desengaño_, a delusion; that
everything is intended to be so is sufficiently clear.

Our life is of a microscopical nature; it is an indivisible point which,
drawn out by the powerful lenses of Time and Space, becomes considerably
magnified.

Time is an element in our brain which by the means of duration gives a
semblance of reality to the _absolutely empty existence_ of things and
ourselves.

How foolish it is for a man to regret and deplore his having made no use
of past opportunities, which might have secured him this or that
happiness or enjoyment! What is there left of them now? Only the ghost
of a remembrance! And it is the same with everything that really falls
to our lot. So that the _form of time_ itself, and how much is reckoned
on it, is a definite way of proving to us the vanity of all earthly
enjoyment.

Our existence, as well as that of all animals, is not one that lasts, it
is only temporary, merely an _existentia fluxa_, which may be compared
to a water-mill in that it is constantly changing.

It is true that the _form_ of the body lasts for a time, but only on
condition that the matter is constantly changing, that the old matter is
thrown off and new added. And it is the chief work of all living
creatures to secure a constant supply of suitable matter. At the same
time, they are conscious that their existence is so fashioned as to last
only for a certain time, as has been said. This is why they attempt,
when they are taking leave of life, to hand it over to some one else who
will take their place. This attempt takes the form of the sexual
instinct in self-consciousness, and in the consciousness of other things
presents itself objectively--that is, in the form of genital instinct.
This instinct may be compared to the threading of a string of pearls;
one individual succeeding another as rapidly as the pearls on the
thread. If we, in imagination, hasten on this succession, we shall see
that the matter is constantly changing in the whole row just as it is
changing in each pearl, while it retains the same form: we will then
realise that we have only a quasi-existence. That it is only Ideas which
exist, and the shadow-like nature of the thing corresponding to them, is
the basis of Plato's teachings.

That we are nothing but _phenomena_ as opposed to the thing-in-itself is
confirmed, exemplified, and made clear by the fact that the _conditio
sine qua non_ of our existence is a continual flowing off and flowing to
of matter which, as nourishment, is a constant need. So that we resemble
such phenomena as smoke, fire, or a jet of water, all of which die out
or stop directly there is no supply of matter. It may be said then that
the _will to live_ presents itself in the form of _pure phenomena_ which
end _in nothing_. This nothingness, however, together with the
phenomena, remain within the boundary of the _will to live_ and are
based on it. I admit that this is somewhat obscure.

If we try to get a general view of humanity at a glance, we shall see
everywhere a constant fighting and mighty struggling for life and
existence; that mental and bodily strength is taxed to the utmost, and
opposed by threatening and actual dangers and woes of every kind.

And if we consider the price that is paid for all this, existence, and
life itself, it will be found that there has been an interval when
existence was free from pain, an interval, however, which was
immediately followed by boredom, and which in its turn was quickly
terminated by fresh cravings.

That boredom is immediately followed by fresh needs is a fact which is
also true of the cleverer order of animals, because life has _no true
and genuine value_ in itself, but is kept _in motion_ merely through the
medium of needs and illusion. As soon as there are no needs and illusion
we become conscious of the absolute barrenness and emptiness of
existence.

If one turns from contemplating the course of the world at large, and in
particular from the ephemeral and mock existence of men as they follow
each other in rapid succession, to the _detail_ of _life_, how like a
comedy it seems!

It impresses us in the same way as a drop of water, crowded with
_infusoria_, seen through a microscope, or a little heap of cheese-mites
that would otherwise be invisible. Their activity and struggling with
each other in such little space amuse us greatly. And it is the same in
the little span of life--great and earnest activity produces a comic
effect.

No man has ever felt perfectly happy in the present; if he had it would
have intoxicated him.




ON WOMEN.


These few words of Jouy, _Sans les femmes le commencement de notre vie
seroit privé de secours, le milieu de plaisirs et la fin de
consolation_, more exactly express, in my opinion, the true praise of
woman than Schiller's poem, _Würde der Frauen_, which is the fruit of
much careful thought and impressive because of its antithesis and use of
contrast. The same thing is more pathetically expressed by Byron in
_Sardanapalus_, Act i, Sc. 2:--

                                "The very first
  Of human life must spring from woman's breast,
  Your first small words are taught you from her lips,
  Your first tears quench'd by her, and your last sighs
  Too often breathed out in a woman's hearing,
  When men have shrunk from the ignoble care
  Of watching the last hour of him who led them."

Both passages show the right point of view for the appreciation of
women.

One need only look at a woman's shape to discover that she is not
intended for either too much mental or too much physical work. She pays
the debt of life not by what she does but by what she suffers--by the
pains of child-bearing, care for the child, and by subjection to man, to
whom she should be a patient and cheerful companion. The greatest
sorrows and joys or great exhibition of strength are not assigned to
her; her life should flow more quietly, more gently, and less
obtrusively than man's, without her being essentially happier or
unhappier.

       *       *       *       *       *

Women are directly adapted to act as the nurses and educators of our
early childhood, for the simple reason that they themselves are
childish, foolish, and short-sighted--in a word, are big children all
their lives, something intermediate between the child and the man, who
is a man in the strict sense of the word. Consider how a young girl will
toy day after day with a child, dance with it and sing to it; and then
consider what a man, with the very best intentions in the world, could
do in her place.

       *       *       *       *       *

With girls, Nature has had in view what is called in a dramatic sense a
"striking effect," for she endows them for a few years with a richness
of beauty and a, fulness of charm at the expense of the rest of their
lives; so that they may during these years ensnare the fantasy of a man
to such a degree as to make him rush into taking the honourable care of
them, in some kind of form, for a lifetime--a step which would not
seem sufficiently justified if he only considered the matter.
Accordingly, Nature has furnished woman, as she has the rest of her
creatures, with the weapons and implements necessary for the protection
of her existence and for just the length of time that they will be of
service to her; so that Nature has proceeded here with her usual
economy. Just as the female ant after coition loses her wings, which
then become superfluous, nay, dangerous for breeding purposes, so for
the most part does a woman lose her beauty after giving birth to one or
two children; and probably for the same reasons.

Then again we find that young girls in their hearts regard their
domestic or other affairs as secondary things, if not as a mere jest.
Love, conquests, and all that these include, such as dressing, dancing,
and so on, they give their serious attention.

       *       *       *       *       *

The nobler and more perfect a thing is, the later and slower is it in
reaching maturity. Man reaches the maturity of his reasoning and mental
faculties scarcely before he is eight-and-twenty; woman when she is
eighteen; but hers is reason of very narrow limitations. This is why
women remain children all their lives, for they always see only what is
near at hand, cling to the present, take the appearance of a thing for
reality, and prefer trifling matters to the most important. It is by
virtue of man's reasoning powers that he does not live in the present
only, like the brute, but observes and ponders over the past and future;
and from this spring discretion, care, and that anxiety which we so
frequently notice in people. The advantages, as well as the
disadvantages, that this entails, make woman, in consequence of her
weaker reasoning powers, less of a partaker in them. Moreover, she is
intellectually short-sighted, for although her intuitive understanding
quickly perceives what is near to her, on the other hand her circle of
vision is limited and does not embrace anything that is remote; hence
everything that is absent or past, or in the future, affects women in a
less degree than men. This is why they have greater inclination for
extravagance, which sometimes borders on madness. Women in their hearts
think that men are intended to earn money so that they may spend it, if
possible during their husband's lifetime, but at any rate after his
death.

As soon as he has given them his earnings on which to keep house they
are strengthened in this belief. Although all this entails many
disadvantages, yet it has this advantage--that a woman lives more in the
present than a man, and that she enjoys it more keenly if it is at all
bearable. This is the origin of that cheerfulness which is peculiar to
woman and makes her fit to divert man, and in case of need, to console
him when he is weighed down by cares. To consult women in matters of
difficulty, as the Germans used to do in old times, is by no means a
matter to be overlooked; for their way of grasping a thing is quite
different from ours, chiefly because they like the shortest way to the
point, and usually keep their attention fixed upon what lies nearest;
while we, as a rule, see beyond it, for the simple reason that it lies
under our nose; it then becomes necessary for us to be brought back to
the thing in order to obtain a near and simple view. This is why women
are more sober in their judgment than we, and why they see nothing more
in things than is really there; while we, if our passions are roused,
slightly exaggerate or add to our imagination.

It is because women's reasoning powers are weaker that they show more
sympathy for the unfortunate than men, and consequently take a kindlier
interest in them. On the other hand, women are inferior to men in
matters of justice, honesty, and conscientiousness. Again, because their
reasoning faculty is weak, things clearly visible and real, and
belonging to the present, exercise a power over them which is rarely
counteracted by abstract thoughts, fixed maxims, or firm resolutions, in
general, by regard for the past and future or by consideration for what
is absent and remote. Accordingly they have the first and principal
qualities of virtue, but they lack the secondary qualities which are
often a necessary instrument in developing it. Women may be compared in
this respect to an organism that has a liver but no gall-bladder.[9] So
that it will be found that the fundamental fault in the character of
women is that they have no "_sense of justice_." This arises from their
deficiency in the power of reasoning already referred to, and
reflection, but is also partly due to the fact that Nature has not
destined them, as the weaker sex, to be dependent on strength but on
cunning; this is why they are instinctively crafty, and have an
ineradicable tendency to lie. For as lions are furnished with claws and
teeth, elephants with tusks, boars with fangs, bulls with horns, and the
cuttlefish with its dark, inky fluid, so Nature has provided woman for
her protection and defence with the faculty of dissimulation, and all
the power which Nature has given to man in the form of bodily strength
and reason has been conferred on woman in this form. Hence,
dissimulation is innate in woman and almost as characteristic of the
very stupid as of the clever. Accordingly, it is as natural for women to
dissemble at every opportunity as it is for those animals to turn to
their weapons when they are attacked; and they feel in doing so that in
a certain measure they are only making use of their rights. Therefore a
woman who is perfectly truthful and does not dissemble is perhaps an
impossibility. This is why they see through dissimulation in others so
easily; therefore it is not advisable to attempt it with them. From the
fundamental defect that has been stated, and all that it involves,
spring falseness, faithlessness, treachery, ungratefulness, and so on.
In a court of justice women are more often found guilty of perjury than
men. It is indeed to be generally questioned whether they should be
allowed to take an oath at all. From time to time there are repeated
cases everywhere of ladies, who want for nothing, secretly pocketing and
taking away things from shop counters.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nature has made it the calling of the young, strong, and handsome men to
look after the propagation of the human race; so that the species may
not degenerate. This is the firm will of Nature, and it finds its
expression in the passions of women. This law surpasses all others in
both age and power. Woe then to the man who sets up rights and interests
in such a way as to make them stand in the way of it; for whatever he
may do or say, they will, at the first significant onset, be
unmercifully annihilated. For the secret, unformulated, nay, unconscious
but innate moral of woman is: _We are justified in deceiving those who,
because they care a little for us_,--_that is to say for the
individual_,--_imagine they have obtained rights over the species. The
constitution, and consequently the welfare of the species, have been put
into our hands and entrusted to our care through the medium of the next
generation which proceeds from us; let us fulfil our duties
conscientiously_.

But women are by no means conscious of this leading principle _in
abstracto_, they are only conscious of it _in concreto_, and have no
other way of expressing it than in the manner in which they act when the
opportunity arrives. So that their conscience does not trouble them so
much as we imagine, for in the darkest depths of their hearts they are
conscious that in violating their duty towards the individual they have
all the better fulfilled it towards the species, whose claim upon them
is infinitely greater. (A fuller explanation of this matter may be found
in vol. ii., ch. 44, in my chief work, _Die Welt als Wille und
Vorstellung_.)

Because women in truth exist entirely for the propagation of the race,
and their destiny ends here, they live more for the species than for the
individual, and in their hearts take the affairs of the species more
seriously than those of the individual. This gives to their whole being
and character a certain frivolousness, and altogether a certain tendency
which is fundamentally different from that of man; and this it is which
develops that discord in married life which is so prevalent and almost
the normal state.

It is natural for a feeling of mere indifference to exist between men,
but between women it is actual enmity. This is due perhaps to the fact
that _odium figulinum_ in the case of men, is limited to their everyday
affairs, but with women embraces the whole sex; since they have only one
kind of business. Even when they meet in the street, they look at each
other like Guelphs and Ghibellines. And it is quite evident when two
women first make each other's acquaintance that they exhibit more
constraint and dissimulation than two men placed in similar
circumstances. This is why an exchange of compliments between two women
is much more ridiculous than between two men. Further, while a man will,
as a rule, address others, even those inferior to himself, with a
certain feeling of consideration and humanity, it is unbearable to see
how proudly and disdainfully a lady of rank will, for the most part,
behave towards one who is in a lower rank (not employed in her service)
when she speaks to her. This may be because differences of rank are much
more precarious with women than with us, and consequently more quickly
change their line of conduct and elevate them, or because while a
hundred things must be weighed in our case, there is only one to be
weighed in theirs, namely, with which man they have found favour; and
again, because of the one-sided nature of their vocation they stand in
closer relationship to each other than men do; and so it is they try to
render prominent the differences of rank.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is only the man whose intellect is clouded by his sexual instinct
that could give that stunted, narrow-shouldered, broad-hipped, and
short-legged race the name of _the fair sex_; for the entire beauty of
the sex is based on this instinct. One would be more justified in
calling them the _unaesthetic sex_ than the beautiful. Neither for
music, nor for poetry, nor for fine art have they any real or true sense
and susceptibility, and it is mere mockery on their part, in their
desire to please, if they affect any such thing.

This makes them incapable of taking a purely objective interest in
anything, and the reason for it is, I fancy, as follows. A man strives
to get _direct_ mastery over things either by understanding them or by
compulsion. But a woman is always and everywhere driven to _indirect_
mastery, namely through a man; all her _direct_ mastery being limited to
him alone. Therefore it lies in woman's nature to look upon everything
only as a means for winning man, and her interest in anything else is
always a simulated one, a mere roundabout way to gain her ends,
consisting of coquetry and pretence. Hence Rousseau said, _Les femmes,
en général, n'aiment aucun art, ne se connoissent à aucun et n'ont aucun
génie_ (Lettre à d'Alembert, note xx.). Every one who can see through a
sham must have found this to be the case. One need only watch the way
they behave at a concert, the opera, or the play; the childish
simplicity, for instance, with which they keep on chattering during the
finest passages in the greatest masterpieces. If it is true that the
Greeks forbade women to go to the play, they acted in a right way; for
they would at any rate be able to hear something. In our day it would be
more appropriate to substitute _taceat mulier in theatro_ for _taceat
mulier in ecclesia_; and this might perhaps be put up in big letters on
the curtain.

Nothing different can be expected of women if it is borne in mind that
the most eminent of the whole sex have never accomplished anything in
the fine arts that is really great, genuine, and original, or given to
the world any kind of work of permanent value. This is most striking in
regard to painting, the technique of which is as much within their reach
as within ours; this is why they pursue it so industriously. Still, they
have not a single great painting to show, for the simple reason that
they lack that objectivity of mind which is precisely what is so
directly necessary in painting. They always stick to what is subjective.
For this reason, ordinary women have no susceptibility for painting at
all: for _natura non facet saltum_. And Huarte, in his book which has
been famous for three hundred years, _Examen de ingenios para las
scienzias_, contends that women do not possess the higher capacities.
Individual and partial exceptions do not alter the matter; women are and
remain, taken altogether, the most thorough and incurable philistines;
and because of the extremely absurd arrangement which allows them to
share the position and title of their husbands they are a constant
stimulus to his _ignoble_ ambitions. And further, it is because they are
philistines that modern society, to which they give the tone and where
they have sway, has become corrupted. As regards their position, one
should be guided by Napoleon's maxim, _Les femmes n'ont pas de rang_;
and regarding them in other things, Chamfort says very truly: _Elles
sont faites pour commercer avec nos faiblesses avec notre folie, mais
non avec notre raison. Il existe entre elles et les hommes des
sympathies d'épiderme et très-peu de sympathies d'esprit d'âme et de
caractère_. They are the _sexus sequior_, the second sex in every
respect, therefore their weaknesses should be spared, but to treat women
with extreme reverence is ridiculous, and lowers us in their own eyes.
When nature divided the human race into two parts, she did not cut it
exactly through the middle! The difference between the positive and
negative poles, according to polarity, is not merely qualitative but
also quantitative. And it was in this light that the ancients and people
of the East regarded woman; they recognised her true position better
than we, with our old French ideas of gallantry and absurd veneration,
that highest product of Christian-Teutonic stupidity. These ideas have
only served to make them arrogant and imperious, to such an extent as to
remind one at times of the holy apes in Benares, who, in the
consciousness of their holiness and inviolability, think they can do
anything and everything they please.

In the West, the woman, that is to say the "lady," finds herself in a
_fausse position_; for woman, rightly named by the ancients _sexus
sequior_, is by no means fit to be the object of our honour and
veneration, or to hold her head higher than man and to have the same
rights as he. The consequences of this _fausse position_ are
sufficiently clear. Accordingly, it would be a very desirable thing if
this Number Two of the human race in Europe were assigned her natural
position, and the lady-grievance got rid of, which is not only ridiculed
by the whole of Asia, but would have been equally ridiculed by Greece
and Rome. The result of this would be that the condition of our social,
civil, and political affairs would be incalculably improved. The Salic
law would be unnecessary; it would be a superfluous truism. The European
lady, strictly speaking, is a creature who should not exist at all; but
there ought to be housekeepers, and young girls who hope to become such;
and they should be brought up not to be arrogant, but to be domesticated
and submissive. It is exactly because there are _ladies_ in Europe that
women of a lower standing, that is to say, the greater majority of the
sex, are much more unhappy than they are in the East. Even Lord Byron
says (_Letters and Papers_, by Thomas Moore, vol. ii. p. 399), _Thought
of the state of women under the ancient Greeks--convenient enough.
Present state, a remnant of the barbarism of the chivalric and feudal
ages--artificial and unnatural. They ought to mind home--and be well fed
and clothed--but not mixed in society. Well educated, too, in
religion--but to read neither poetry nor politics--nothing but books of
piety and cookery. Music--drawing--dancing--also a little gardening and
ploughing now and then. I have seen them mending the roads in Epirus
with good success. Why not, as well as hay-making and milking_?

       *       *       *       *       *

In our part of the world, where monogamy is in force, to marry means to
halve one's rights and to double one's duties. When the laws granted
woman the same rights as man, they should also have given her a
masculine power of reason. On the contrary, just as the privileges and
honours which the laws decree to women surpass what Nature has meted out
to them, so is there a proportional decrease in the number of women who
really share these privileges; therefore the remainder are deprived of
their natural rights in so far as the others have been given more than
Nature accords.

For the unnatural position of privilege which the institution of
monogamy, and the laws of marriage which accompany it, assign to the
woman, whereby she is regarded throughout as a full equivalent of the
man, which she is not by any means, cause intelligent and prudent men to
reflect a great deal before they make so great a sacrifice and consent
to so unfair an arrangement. Therefore, whilst among polygamous nations
every woman finds maintenance, where monogamy exists the number of
married women is limited, and a countless number of women who are
without support remain over; those in the upper classes vegetate as
useless old maids, those in the lower are reduced to very hard work of a
distasteful nature, or become prostitutes, and lead a life which is as
joyless as it is void of honour. But under such circumstances they
become a necessity to the masculine sex; so that their position is
openly recognised as a special means for protecting from seduction those
other women favoured by fate either to have found husbands, or who hope
to find them. In London alone there are 80,000 prostitutes. Then what
are these women who have come too quickly to this most terrible end but
human sacrifices on the altar of monogamy? The women here referred to
and who are placed in this wretched position are the inevitable
counterbalance to the European lady, with her pretensions and arrogance.
Hence polygamy is a real benefit to the female sex, taking it _as a
whole_. And, on the other hand, there is no reason why a man whose wife
suffers from chronic illness, or remains barren, or has gradually become
too old for him, should not take a second. Many people become converts
to Mormonism for the precise reasons that they condemn the unnatural
institution of monogamy. The conferring of unnatural rights upon women
has imposed unnatural duties upon them, the violation of which, however,
makes them unhappy. For example, many a man thinks marriage unadvisable
as far as his social standing and monetary position are concerned,
unless he contracts a brilliant match. He will then wish to win a woman
of his own choice under different conditions, namely, under those which
will render safe her future and that of her children. Be the conditions
ever so just, reasonable, and adequate, and she consents by giving up
those undue privileges which marriage, as the basis of civil society,
alone can bestow, she must to a certain extent lose her honour and lead
a life of loneliness; since human nature makes us dependent on the
opinion of others in a way that is completely out of proportion to its
value. While, if the woman does not consent, she runs the risk of being
compelled to marry a man she dislikes, or of shrivelling up into an old
maid; for the time allotted to her to find a home is very short. In view
of this side of the institution of monogamy, Thomasius's profoundly
learned treatise, _de Concubinatu_, is well worth reading, for it shows
that, among all nations, and in all ages, down to the Lutheran
Reformation, concubinage was allowed, nay, that it was an institution,
in a certain measure even recognised by law and associated with no
dishonour. And it held this position until the Lutheran Reformation,
when it was recognised as another means for justifying the marriage of
the clergy; whereupon the Catholic party did not dare to remain
behindhand in the matter.

It is useless to argue about polygamy, it must be taken as a fact
existing everywhere, the _mere regulation_ of which is the problem to be
solved. Where are there, then, any real monogamists? We all live, at any
rate for a time, and the majority of us always, in polygamy.
Consequently, as each man needs many women, nothing is more just than to
let him, nay, make it incumbent upon him to provide for many women. By
this means woman will be brought back to her proper and natural place as
a subordinate being, and _the lady_, that monster of European
civilisation and Christian-Teutonic stupidity, with her ridiculous claim
to respect and veneration, will no longer exist; there will still be
_women_, but no _unhappy women_, of whom Europe is at present full. The
Mormons' standpoint is right.

       *       *       *       *       *

In India no woman is ever independent, but each one stands under the
control of her father or her husband, or brother or son, in accordance
with the law of Manu.

It is certainly a revolting idea that widows should sacrifice themselves
on their husband's dead body; but it is also revolting that the money
which the husband has earned by working diligently for all his life, in
the hope that he was working for his children, should be wasted on her
paramours. _Medium tenuere beati_. The first love of a mother, as that
of animals and men, is purely _instinctive_, and consequently ceases
when the child is no longer physically helpless. After that, the first
love should be reinstated by a love based on habit and reason; but this
often does not appear, especially where the mother has not loved the
father. The love of a father for his children is of a different nature
and more sincere; it is founded on a recognition of his own inner self
in the child, and is therefore metaphysical in its origin.

In almost every nation, both of the new and old world, and even among
the Hottentots, property is inherited by the male descendants alone; it
is only in Europe that one has departed from this. That the property
which men have with difficulty acquired by long-continued struggling and
hard work should afterwards come into the hands of women, who, in their
want of reason, either squander it within a short time or otherwise
waste it, is an injustice as great as it is common, and it should be
prevented by limiting the right of women to inherit. It seems to me that
it would be a better arrangement if women, be they widows or daughters,
only inherited the money for life secured by mortgage, but not the
property itself or the capital, unless there lacked male descendants. It
is men who make the money, and not women; therefore women are neither
justified in having unconditional possession of it nor capable of
administrating it. Women should never have the free disposition of
wealth, strictly so-called, which they may inherit, such as capital,
houses, and estates. They need a guardian always; therefore they should
not have the guardianship of their children under any circumstances
whatever. The vanity of women, even if it should not be greater than
that of men, has this evil in it, that it is directed on material
things--that is to say, on their personal beauty and then on tinsel,
pomp, and show. This is why they are in their right element in society.
This it is which makes them inclined to be _extravagant_, especially
since they possess little reasoning power. Accordingly, an ancient
writer says, Γυνη το συνολον ἐστι δαπανηρον φυσει.[10] Men's vanity, on
the other hand, is often directed on non-material advantages, such as
intellect, learning, courage, and the like. Aristotle explains in the
_Politics_[11] the great disadvantages which the Spartans brought upon
themselves by granting too much to their women, by allowing them the
right of inheritance and dowry, and a great amount of freedom; and how
this contributed greatly to the fall of Sparta. May it not be that the
influence of women in France, which has been increasing since Louis
XIII.'s time, was to blame for that gradual corruption of the court and
government which led to the first Revolution, of which all subsequent
disturbances have been the result? In any case, the false position of
the female sex, so conspicuously exposed by the existence of the "lady,"
is a fundamental defect in our social condition, and this defect,
proceeding from the very heart of it, must extend its harmful influence
in every direction. That woman is by nature intended to obey is shown by
the fact that every woman who is placed in the unnatural position of
absolute independence at once attaches herself to some kind of man, by
whom she is controlled and governed; this is because she requires a
master. If she, is young, the man is a lover; if she is old, a priest.

FOOTNOTES:

[9] Let me refer to what I have said in my treatise on _The Foundation
of Morals_, §71.

[10] Brunck's _Gnomici poetae graeci_ v. 115.

[11] Bk. I., ch. 9.




THINKING FOR ONESELF.


The largest library in disorder is not so useful as a smaller but
orderly one; in the same way the greatest amount of knowledge, if it has
not been worked out in one's own mind, is of less value than a much
smaller amount that has been fully considered. For it is only when a man
combines what he knows from all sides, and compares one truth with
another, that he completely realises his own knowledge and gets it into
his power. A man can only think over what he knows, therefore he should
learn something; but a man only knows what he has pondered.

A man can apply himself of his own free will to reading and learning,
while he cannot to thinking. Thinking must be kindled like a fire by a
draught and sustained by some kind of interest in the subject. This
interest may be either of a purely objective nature or it may be merely
subjective. The latter exists in matters concerning us personally, but
objective interest is only to be found in heads that think by nature,
and to whom thinking is as natural as breathing; but they are very rare.
This is why there is so little of it in most men of learning.

The difference between the effect that thinking for oneself and that
reading has on the mind is incredibly great; hence it is continually
developing that original difference in minds which induces one man to
think and another to read. Reading forces thoughts upon the mind which
are as foreign and heterogeneous to the bent and mood in which it may be
for the moment, as the seal is to the wax on which it stamps its
imprint. The mind thus suffers total compulsion from without; it has
first this and first that to think about, for which it has at the time
neither instinct nor liking.

On the other hand, when a man thinks for himself he follows his own
impulse, which either his external surroundings or some kind of
recollection has determined at the moment. His visible surroundings do
not leave upon his mind _one_ single definite thought as reading does,
but merely supply him with material and occasion to think over what is
in keeping with his nature and present mood. This is why _much_ reading
robs the mind of all elasticity; it is like keeping a spring under a
continuous, heavy weight. If a man does not want to think, the safest
plan is to take up a book directly he has a spare moment.

This practice accounts for the fact that learning makes most men more
stupid and foolish than they are by nature, and prevents their writings
from being a success; they remain, as Pope has said,

  "For ever reading, never to be read."--_Dunciad_ iii. 194.

Men of learning are those who have read the contents of books. Thinkers,
geniuses, and those who have enlightened the world and furthered the
race of men, are those who have made direct use of the book of the
world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Indeed, it is only a man's own fundamental thoughts that have truth and
life in them. For it is these that he really and completely understands.
To read the thoughts of others is like taking the remains of some one
else's meal, like putting on the discarded clothes of a stranger.

The thought we read is related to the thought which rises in us, as the
fossilised impress of a prehistoric plant is to a plant budding out in
spring.

       *       *       *       *       *

Reading is merely a substitute for one's own thoughts. A man allows his
thoughts to be put into leading-strings.

Further, many books serve only to show how many wrong paths there are,
and how widely a man may stray if he allows himself to be led by them.
But he who is guided by his genius, that is to say, he who thinks for
himself, who thinks voluntarily and rightly, possesses the compass
wherewith to find the right course. A man, therefore, should only read
when the source of his own thoughts stagnates; which is often the case
with the best of minds.

It is sin against the Holy Spirit to frighten away one's own original
thoughts by taking up a book. It is the same as a man flying from Nature
to look at a museum of dried plants, or to study a beautiful landscape
in copperplate. A man at times arrives at a truth or an idea after
spending much time in thinking it out for himself, linking together his
various thoughts, when he might have found the same thing in a book; it
is a hundred times more valuable if he has acquired it by thinking it
out for himself. For it is only by his thinking it out for himself that
it enters as an integral part, as a living member into the whole system
of his thought, and stands in complete and firm relation with it; that
it is fundamentally understood with all its consequences, and carries
the colour, the shade, the impress of his own way of thinking; and comes
at the very moment, just as the necessity for it is felt, and stands
fast and cannot be forgotten. This is the perfect application, nay,
interpretation of Goethe's

  "Was du ererbt von deinen V�tern hast
   Erwirb es um es zu besitzen."

The man who thinks for himself learns the authorities for his opinions
only later on, when they serve merely to strengthen both them and
himself; while the book-philosopher starts from the authorities and
other people's opinions, therefrom constructing a whole for himself; so
that he resembles an automaton, whose composition we do not understand.
The other man, the man who thinks for himself, on the other hand, is
like a living man as made by nature. His mind is impregnated from
without, which then bears and brings forth its child. Truth that has
been merely learned adheres to us like an artificial limb, a false
tooth, a waxen nose, or at best like one made out of another's flesh;
truth which is acquired by thinking for oneself is like a natural
member: it alone really belongs to us. Here we touch upon the difference
between the thinking man and the mere man of learning. Therefore the
intellectual acquirements of the man who thinks for himself are like a
fine painting that stands out full of life, that has its light and shade
correct, the tone sustained, and perfect harmony of colour. The
intellectual attainments of the merely learned man, on the contrary,
resemble a big palette covered with every colour, at most systematically
arranged, but without harmony, relation, and meaning.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Reading_ is thinking with some one else's head instead of one's own.
But to think for oneself is to endeavour to develop a coherent whole, a
system, even if it is not a strictly complete one. Nothing is more
harmful than, by dint of continual reading, to strengthen the current of
other people's thoughts. These thoughts, springing from different minds,
belonging to different systems, bearing different colours, never flow
together of themselves into a unity of thought, knowledge, insight, or
conviction, but rather cram the head with a Babylonian confusion of
tongues; consequently the mind becomes overcharged with them and is
deprived of all clear insight and almost disorganised. This condition of
things may often be discerned in many men of learning, and it makes them
inferior in sound understanding, correct judgment, and practical tact to
many illiterate men, who, by the aid of experience, conversation, and a
little reading, have acquired a little knowledge from without, and made
it always subordinate to and incorporated it with their own thoughts.

The scientific _thinker_ also does this to a much greater extent.
Although he requires much knowledge and must read a great deal, his mind
is nevertheless strong enough to overcome it all, to assimilate it, to
incorporate it with the system of his thoughts, and to subordinate it to
the organic relative unity of his insight, which is vast and
ever-growing. By this means his own thought, like the bass in an organ,
always takes the lead in everything, and is never deadened by other
sounds, as is the case with purely antiquarian minds; where all sorts of
musical passages, as it were, run into each other, and the fundamental
tone is entirely lost.

       *       *       *       *       *

The people who have spent their lives in reading and acquired their
wisdom out of books resemble those who have acquired exact information
of a country from the descriptions of many travellers. These people can
relate a great deal about many things; but at heart they have no
connected, clear, sound knowledge of the condition of the country. While
those who have spent their life in thinking are like the people who have
been to that country themselves; they alone really know what it is they
are saying, know the subject in its entirety, and are quite at home in
it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ordinary book-philosopher stands in the same relation to a man who
thinks for himself as an eye-witness does to the historian; he speaks
from his own direct comprehension of the subject.

Therefore all who think for themselves hold at bottom much the same
views; when they differ it is because they hold different points of
view, but when these do not alter the matter they all say the same
thing. They merely express what they have grasped from an objective
point of view. I have frequently hesitated to give passages to the
public because of their paradoxical nature, and afterwards to my joyful
surprise have found the same thoughts expressed in the works of great
men of long ago.

The book-philosopher, on the other hand, relates what one man has said
and another man meant, and what a third has objected to, and so on. He
compares, weighs, criticises, and endeavours to get at the truth of the
thing, and in this way resembles the critical historian. For instance,
he will try to find out whether Leibnitz was not for some time in his
life a follower of Spinoza, etc. The curious student will find striking
examples of what I mean in Herbart's _Analytical Elucidation of Morality
and Natural Right_, and in his _Letters on Freedom_. It surprises us
that such a man should give himself so much trouble; for it is evident
that if he had fixed his attention on the matter he would soon have
attained his object by thinking a little for himself.

But there is a small difficulty to overcome; a thing of this kind does
not depend upon our own will. One can sit down at any time and read, but
not--think. It is with thoughts as with men: we cannot always summon
them at pleasure, but must wait until they come. Thought about a subject
must come of its own accord by a happy and harmonious union of external
motive with mental temper and application; and it is precisely that
which never seems to come to these people.

One has an illustration of this in matters that concern our personal
interest. If we have to come to a decision on a thing of this kind we
cannot sit down at any particular moment and thrash out the reasons and
arrive at a decision; for often at such a time our thoughts cannot be
fixed, but will wander off to other things; a dislike to the subject is
sometimes responsible for this. We should not use force, but wait until
the mood appears of itself; it frequently comes unexpectedly and even
repeats itself; the different moods which possess us at the different
times throwing another light on the matter. It is this long process
which is understood by _a ripe resolution_. For the task of making up
our mind must be distributed; much that has been previously overlooked
occurs to us; the aversion also disappears, for, after examining the
matter closer, it seems much more tolerable than it was at first sight.

And in theory it is just the same: a man must wait for the right moment;
even the greatest mind is not always able to think for itself at all
times. Therefore it is advisable for it to use its spare moments in
reading, which, as has been said, is a substitute for one's own thought;
in this way material is imported to the mind by letting another think
for us, although it is always in a way which is different from our own.
For this reason a man should not read too much, in order that his mind
does not become accustomed to the substitute, and consequently even
forget the matter in question; that it may not get used to walking in
paths that have already been trodden, and by following a foreign course
of thought forget its own. Least of all should a man for the sake of
reading entirely withdraw his attention from the real world: as the
impulse and temper which lead one to think for oneself proceed oftener
from it than from reading; for it is the visible and real world in its
primitiveness and strength that is the natural subject of the thinking
mind, and is able more easily than anything else to rouse it. After
these considerations it will not surprise us to find that the thinking
man can easily be distinguished from the book-philosopher by his marked
earnestness, directness, and originality, the personal conviction of all
his thoughts and expressions: the book-philosopher, on the other hand,
has everything second-hand; his ideas are like a collection of old rags
obtained anyhow; he is dull and pointless, resembling a copy of a copy.
His style, which is full of conventional, nay, vulgar phrases and
current terms, resembles a small state where there is a circulation of
foreign money because it coins none of its own.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mere experience can as little as reading take the place of thought. Mere
empiricism bears the same relation to thinking as eating to digestion
and assimilation. When experience boasts that it alone, by its
discoveries, has advanced human knowledge, it is as though the mouth
boasted that it was its work alone to maintain the body.

The works of all really capable minds are distinguished from all other
works by a character of decision and definiteness, and, in consequence,
of lucidity and clearness. This is because minds like these know
definitely and clearly what they wish to express--whether it be in
prose, in verse, or in music. Other minds are wanting in this decision
and clearness, and therefore may be instantly recognised.

The characteristic sign of a mind of the highest standard is the
directness of its judgment. Everything it utters is the result of
thinking for itself; this is shown everywhere in the way it gives
expression to its thoughts. Therefore it is, like a prince, an imperial
director in the realm of intellect. All other minds are mere delegates,
as may be seen by their style, which has no stamp of its own.

Hence every true thinker for himself is so far like a monarch; he is
absolute, and recognises nobody above him. His judgments, like the
decrees of a monarch, spring from his own sovereign power and proceed
directly from himself. He takes as little notice of authority as a
monarch does of a command; nothing is valid unless he has himself
authorised it. On the other hand, those of vulgar minds, who are swayed
by all kinds of current opinions, authorities, and prejudices, are like
the people which in silence obey the law and commands.

       *       *       *       *       *

The people who are so eager and impatient to settle disputed questions,
by bringing forward authorities, are really glad when they can place the
understanding and insight of some one else in the field in place of
their own, which are deficient. Their number is legion. For, as Seneca
says, "_Unusquisque mavult credere, quam judicare._"

The weapon they commonly use in their controversies is that of
authorities: they strike each other with it, and whoever is drawn into
the fray will do well not to defend himself with reason and arguments;
for against a weapon of this kind they are like horned Siegfrieds,
immersed in a flood of incapacity for thinking and judging. They will
bring forward their authorities as an _argumentum ad verecundiam_ and
then cry _victoria_.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the realm of reality, however fair, happy, and pleasant it may prove
to be, we always move controlled by the law of gravity, which we must be
unceasingly overcoming. While in the realm of thought we are disembodied
spirits, uncontrolled by the law of gravity and free from penury.

This is why there is no happiness on earth like that which at the
propitious moment a fine and fruitful mind finds in itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

The presence of a thought is like the presence of our beloved. We
imagine we shall never forget this thought, and that this loved one
could never be indifferent to us. But out of sight out of mind! The
finest thought runs the risk of being irrevocably forgotten if it is not
written down, and the dear one of being forsaken if we do not marry her.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are many thoughts which are valuable to the man who thinks them;
but out of them only a few which possess strength to produce either
repercussion or reflex action, that is, to win the reader's sympathy
after they have been written down. It is what a man has thought out
directly _for himself_ that alone has true value. Thinkers may be
classed as follows: those who, in the first place, think for themselves,
and those who think directly for others. The former thinkers are the
genuine, _they think for themselves_ in both senses of the word; they
are the true _philosophers_; they alone are in earnest. Moreover, the
enjoyment and happiness of their existence consist in thinking. The
others are the _sophists_; they wish to _seem_, and seek their happiness
in what they hope to get from other people; their earnestness consists
in this. To which of these two classes a man belongs is soon seen by his
whole method and manner. Lichtenberg is an example of the first class,
while Herder obviously belongs to the second.

       *       *       *       *       *

When one considers how great and how close to us the _problem of
existence_ is,--this equivocal, tormented, fleeting, dream-like
existence--so great and so close that as soon as one perceives it, it
overshadows and conceals all other problems and aims;--and when one sees
how all men--with a few and rare exceptions--are not clearly conscious
of the problem, nay, do not even seem to see it, but trouble themselves
about everything else rather than this, and live on taking thought only
for the present day and the scarcely longer span of their own personal
future, while they either expressly give the problem up or are ready to
agree with it, by the aid of some system of popular metaphysics, and are
satisfied with this;--when one, I say, reflects upon this, so may one be
of the opinion that man is a _thinking being_ only in a very remote
sense, and not feel any special surprise at any trait of thoughtlessness
or folly; but know, rather, that the intellectual outlook of the normal
man indeed surpasses that of the brute,--whose whole existence resembles
a continual present without any consciousness of the future or the
past--but, however, not to such an extent as one is wont to suppose.

And corresponding to this, we find in the conversation of most men that
their thoughts are cut up as small as chaff, making it impossible for
them to spin out the thread of their discourse to any length. If this
world were peopled by really thinking beings, noise of every kind would
not be so universally tolerated, as indeed the most horrible and aimless
form of it is.[12] If Nature had intended man to think she would not
have given him ears, or, at any rate, she would have furnished them with
air-tight flaps like the bat, which for this reason is to be envied.
But, in truth, man is like the rest, a poor animal, whose powers are
calculated only to maintain him during his existence; therefore he
requires to have his ears always open to announce of themselves, by
night as by day, the approach of the pursuer.

FOOTNOTES:

[12] See Essay on Noise, p. 28.




SHORT DIALOGUE ON

THE INDESTRUCTIBILITY OF OUR TRUE BEING BY DEATH.


_Thrasymachos._ Tell me briefly, what shall I be after my death? Be
clear and precise.

_Philalethes._ Everything and nothing.

_Thras._ That is what I expected. You solve the problem by a
contradiction. That trick is played out.

_Phil._ To answer transcendental questions in language that is made for
immanent knowledge must assuredly lead to a contradiction.

_Thras._ What do you call transcendental knowledge, and what immanent?
It is true these expressions are known to me, for my professor used
them, but only as predicates of God, and as his philosophy had
exclusively to do with God, their use was quite appropriate. For
instance, if God was in the world, He was immanent; if He was somewhere
outside it, He was transcendent. That is clear and comprehensible. One
knows how things stand. But your old-fashioned Kantian doctrine is no
longer understood. There has been quite a succession of great men in the
metropolis of German learning----

_Phil. (aside)._ German philosophical nonsense!

_Thras._----such as the eminent Schleiermacher and that gigantic mind
Hegel; and to-day we have left all that sort of thing behind, or rather
we are so far ahead of it that it is out of date and known no more.
Therefore, what good is it?

_Phil._ Transcendental knowledge is that which, going beyond the
boundary of possible experience, endeavours to determine the nature of
things as they are in themselves; while immanent knowledge keeps itself
within the boundary of possible experience, therefore it can only apply
to phenomena. As an individual, with your death there will be an end of
you. But your individuality is not your true and final being, indeed it
is rather the mere expression of it; it is not the thing-in-itself but
only the phenomenon presented in the form of time, and accordingly has
both a beginning and an end. Your being in itself, on the contrary,
knows neither time, nor beginning, nor end, nor the limits of a given
individuality; hence no individuality can be without it, but it is there
in each and all. So that, in the first sense, after death you become
nothing; in the second, you are and remain everything. That is why I
said that after death you would be all and nothing. It is difficult to
give you a more exact answer to your question than this and to be brief
at the same time; but here we have undoubtedly another contradiction;
this is because your life is in time and your immortality in eternity.
Hence your immortality may be said to be something that is
indestructible and yet has no endurance--which is again contradictory,
you see. This is what happens when transcendental knowledge is brought
within the boundary of immanent knowledge; in doing this some sort of
violence is done to the latter, since it is used for things for which it
was not intended.

_Thras._ Listen; without I retain my individuality I shall not give a
_sou_ for your immortality.

_Phil._ Perhaps you will allow me to explain further. Suppose I
guarantee that you will retain your individuality, on condition,
however, that you spend three months in absolute unconsciousness before
you awaken.

_Thras._ I consent to that.

_Phil._ Well then, as we have no idea of time when in a perfectly
unconscious state, it is all the same to us when we are dead whether
three months or ten thousand years pass away in the world of
consciousness. For in the one case, as in the other, we must accept on
faith and trust what we are told when we awake. Accordingly it will be
all the same to you whether your individuality is restored to you after
the lapse of three months or ten thousand years.

_Thras._ At bottom, that cannot very well be denied.

_Phil._ But if, at the end of those ten thousand years, some one has
quite forgotten to waken you, I imagine that you would have become
accustomed to that long state of non-existence, following such a very
short existence, and that the misfortune would not be very great.
However, it is quite certain that you would know nothing about it. And
again, it would fully console you to know that the mysterious power
which gives life to your present phenomenon had never ceased for one
moment during the ten thousand years to produce other phenomena of a
like nature and to give them life.

_Thras._ Indeed! And so it is in this way that you fancy you can
quietly, and without my knowing, cheat me of my individuality? But you
cannot cozen me in this way. I have stipulated for the retaining of my
individuality, and neither mysterious forces nor phenomena can console
me for the loss of it. It is dear to me, and I shall not let it go.

_Phil._ That is to say, you regard your individuality as something so
very delightful, excellent, perfect, and incomparable that there is
nothing better than it; would you not exchange it for another, according
to what is told us, that is better and more lasting?

_Thras._ Look here, be my individuality what it may, it is myself,

  "For God is God, and I am I."

I--I--I want to exist! That is what I care about, and not an existence
which has to be reasoned out first in order to show that it is mine.

_Phil._ Look what you are doing! When you say, _I--I--I want to exist_
you alone do not say this, but everything, absolutely everything, that
has only a vestige of consciousness. Consequently this desire of yours
is just that which is _not_ individual but which is common to all
without distinction. It does not proceed from individuality, but from
_existence_ in general; it is the essential in everything that exists,
nay, it is _that_ whereby anything has existence at all; accordingly it
is concerned and satisfied only with existence _in general_ and not with
any definite individual existence; this is not its aim. It has the
appearance of being so because it can attain consciousness only in an
individual existence, and consequently looks as if it were entirely
concerned with that. This is nothing but an illusion which has entangled
the individual; but by reflection, it can be dissipated and we ourselves
set free. It is only _indirectly_ that the individual has this great
longing for existence; it is the will to live in general that has this
longing directly and really, a longing that is one and the same in
everything. Since, then, existence itself is the free work of the will,
nay, the mere reflection of it, existence cannot be apart from will, and
the latter will be provisionally satisfied with existence in general, in
so far, namely, as that which is eternally dissatisfied can be
satisfied. The will is indifferent to individuality; it has nothing to
do with it, although it appears to, because the individual is _only_
directly conscious of will in himself. From this it is to be gathered
that the individual carefully guards his own existence; moreover, if
this were not so, the preservation of the species would not be assured.
From all this it follows that individuality is not a state of perfection
but of limitation; so that to be freed from it is not loss but rather
gain. Don't let this trouble you any further, it will, forsooth, appear
to you both childish and extremely ridiculous when you completely and
thoroughly recognise what you are, namely, that your own existence is
the universal will to live.

_Thras._ You are childish yourself and extremely ridiculous, and so are
all philosophers; and when a sedate man like myself lets himself in for
a quarter of an hour's talk with such fools, it is merely for the sake
of amusement and to while away the time. I have more important matters
to look to now; so, adieu!




RELIGION.

A DIALOGUE.


_Demopheles._ Between ourselves, dear old friend, I am sometimes
dissatisfied with you in your capacity as philosopher; you talk
sarcastically about religion, nay, openly ridicule it. The religion of
every one is sacred to him, and so it should be to you.

_Philalethes. Nego consequentiam!_ I don't see at all why I should have
respect for lies and frauds because other people are stupid. I respect
truth everywhere, and it is precisely for that reason that I cannot
respect anything that is opposed to it. My maxim is, _Vigeat veritas, et
pereat mundus_, the same as the lawyer's _Fiat justitia, et pereat
mundus._ Every profession ought to have an analogous device.

_Demop._ Then that of the medical profession would be, _Fiant pilulae,
et pereat mundus_, which would be the easiest to carry out.

_Phil._ Heaven forbid! Everything must be taken _cum grano salis_.

_Demop._ Exactly; and it is just for that reason that I want you to
accept religion _cum grano salis_, and to see that the needs of the
people must be met according to their powers of comprehension. Religion
affords the only means of proclaiming and making the masses of crude
minds and awkward intelligences, sunk in petty pursuits and material
work, feel the high import of life. For the ordinary type of man,
primarily, has no thought for anything else but what satisfies his
physical needs and longings, and accordingly affords him a little
amusement and pastime. Founders of religion and philosophers come into
the world to shake him out of his torpidity and show him the high
significance of existence: philosophers for the few, the emancipated;
founders of religion for the many, humanity at large. For φιλοσοφον
πληθος ἀδυνατον εἰναι, as your friend Plato has said, and you should not
forget it. Religion is the metaphysics of the people, which by all means
they must keep; and hence it must be eternally respected, for to
discredit it means taking it away. Just as there is popular poetry,
popular wisdom in proverbs, so too there must be popular metaphysics;
for mankind requires most certainly _an interpretation of life_, and it
must be in keeping with its power of comprehension. So that this
interpretation is at all times an allegorical investiture of the truth,
and it fulfils, as far as practical life and our feelings are
concerned--that is to say, as a guidance in our affairs, and as a
comfort and consolation in suffering and death--perhaps just as much as
truth itself could, if we possessed it. Don't be hurt at its unpolished,
baroque, and apparently absurd form, for you, with your education and
learning, cannot imagine the roundabout ways that must be used in order
to make people in their crude state understand deep truths. The various
religions are only various forms in which the people grasp and
understand the truth, which in itself they could not grasp, and which is
inseparable from these forms. Therefore, my dear fellow, don't be
displeased if I tell you that to ridicule these forms is both
narrow-minded and unjust.

_Phil._ But is it not equally narrow-minded and unjust to require that
there shall be no other metaphysics but this one cut out to meet the
needs and comprehension of the people? that its teachings shall be the
boundary of human researches and the standard of all thought, so that
the metaphysics of the few, the emancipated, as you call them, must aim
at confirming, strengthening, and interpreting the metaphysics of the
people? That is, that the highest faculties of the human mind must
remain unused and undeveloped, nay, be nipped in the bud, so that their
activity may not thwart the popular metaphysics? And at bottom are not
the claims that religion makes just the same? Is it right to have
tolerance, nay, gentle forbearance, preached by what is intolerance and
cruelty itself? Let me remind you of the heretical tribunals,
inquisitions, religious wars and crusades, of Socrates' cup of poison,
of Bruno's and Vanini's death in the flames. And is all this to-day
something belonging to the past? What can stand more in the way of
genuine philosophical effort, honest inquiry after truth, the noblest
calling of the noblest of mankind, than this conventional system of
metaphysics invested with a monopoly from the State, whose principles
are inculcated so earnestly, deeply, and firmly into every head in
earliest youth as to make them, unless the mind is of miraculous
elasticity, become ineradicable? The result is that the basis of healthy
reasoning is once and for all deranged--in other words, its feeble
capacity for thinking for itself, and for unbiassed judgment in regard
to everything to which it might be applied, is for ever paralysed and
ruined.

_Demop,_ Which really means that the people have gained a conviction
which they will not give up in order to accept yours in its place.

_Phil._ Ah! if it were only conviction based on insight, one would then
be able to bring forward arguments and fight the battle with equal
weapons. But religions admittedly do not lend themselves to conviction
after argument has been brought to bear, but to belief as brought about
by revelation. The capacity for belief is strongest in childhood;
therefore one is most careful to take possession of this tender age. It
is much more through this than through threats and reports of miracles
that the doctrines of belief take root. If in early childhood certain
fundamental views and doctrines are preached with unusual solemnity and
in a manner of great earnestness, the like of which has never been seen
before, and if, too, the possibility of a doubt about them is either
completely ignored or only touched upon in order to show that doubt is
the first step to everlasting perdition; the result is that the
impression will be so profound that, as a rule, that is to say in almost
every case, a man will be almost as incapable of doubting the truth of
those doctrines as he is of doubting his own existence. Hence it is
scarcely one in many thousands that has the strength of mind to honestly
and seriously ask himself--is that true? Those who are able to do this
have been more appropriately styled strong minds, _esprits forts_, than
is imagined. For the commonplace mind, however, there is nothing so
absurd or revolting but what, if inoculated in this way, the firmest
belief in it will take root. If, for example, the killing of a heretic
or an infidel were an essential matter for the future salvation of the
soul, almost every one would make it the principal object of his life,
and in dying get consolation and strength from the remembrance of his
having succeeded; just as, in truth, in former times almost every
Spaniard looked upon an _auto da fé_ as the most pious of acts and one
most pleasing to God.

We have an analogy to this in India in the _Thugs_, a religious body
quite recently suppressed by the English, who executed numbers of them.
They showed their regard for religion and veneration for the goddess
Kali by assassinating at every opportunity their own friends and
fellow-travellers, so that they might obtain their possessions, and they
were seriously convinced that thereby they had accomplished something
that was praiseworthy and would contribute to their eternal welfare. The
power of religious dogma, that has been inculcated early, is so great
that it destroys conscience, and finally all compassion and sense of
humanity. But if you wish to see with your own eyes, and close at hand,
what early inoculation of belief does, look at the English. Look at this
nation, favoured by nature before all others, endowed before all others
with reason, intelligence, power of judgment, and firmness of character;
look at these people degraded, nay, made despicable among all others by
their stupid ecclesiastical superstition, which among their other
capacities appears like a fixed idea, a monomania. For this they have to
thank the clergy in whose hands education is, and who take care to
inculcate all the articles, of belief at the earliest age in such a way
as to result in a kind of partial paralysis of the brain; this then
shows itself throughout their whole life in a silly bigotry, making even
extremely intelligent and capable people among them degrade themselves
so that they become quite an enigma to us. If we consider how essential
to such a masterpiece is inoculation of belief in the tender age of
childhood, the system of missions appears no longer merely as the height
of human importunity, arrogance, and impertinence, but also of
absurdity; in so far as it does not confine itself to people who are
still in the stage of _childhood_, such as the Hottentots, Kaffirs,
South Sea Islanders, and others like them, among whom it has been really
successful. While, on the other hand, in India the Brahmans receive the
doctrines of missionaries either with a smile of condescending approval
or refuse them with a shrug of their shoulders; and among these people
in general, notwithstanding the most favourable circumstances, the
missionaries' attempts at conversion are usually wrecked. An authentic
report in vol. xxi. of the _Asiatic Journal_ of 1826 shows that after so
many years of missionary activity in the whole of India (of which the
English possessions alone amount to one hundred and fifteen million
inhabitants) there are not more than three hundred living converts to be
found; and at the same time it is admitted that the Christian converts
are distinguished for their extreme immorality. There are only three
hundred venal and bribed souls out of so many millions. I cannot see
that it has gone better with Christianity in India since then, although
the missionaries are now trying, contrary to agreement, to work on the
children's minds in schools exclusively devoted to secular English
instruction, in order to smuggle in Christianity, against which,
however, the Hindoos are most jealously on their guard. For, as has been
said, childhood is the time, and not manhood, to sow the seeds of
belief, especially where an earlier belief has taken root. An acquired
conviction, however, that is assumed by matured converts serves,
generally, as only the mask for some kind of personal interest. And it
is the feeling that this could hardly be otherwise that makes a man, who
changes his religion at maturity, despised by most people everywhere; a
fact which reveals that they do not regard religion as a matter of
reasoned conviction but merely as a belief inoculated in early
childhood, before it has been put to any test. That they are right in
looking at religion in this way is to be gathered from the fact that it
is not only the blind, credulous masses, but also the clergy of every
religion, who, as such, have studied its sources, arguments, dogmas and
differences, who cling faithfully and zealously as a body to the
religion of their fatherland; consequently it is the rarest thing in the
world for a priest to change from one religion or creed to another. For
instance, we see that the Catholic clergy are absolutely convinced of
the truth of all the principles of their Church, and that the
Protestants are also of theirs, and that both defend the principles of
their confession with like zeal. And yet the conviction is the outcome
merely of the country in which each is born: the truth of the Catholic
dogma is perfectly clear to the clergy of South Germany, the Protestant
to the clergy of North Germany. If, therefore, these convictions rest on
objective reasons, these reasons must be climatic and thrive like
plants, some only here, some only there. The masses everywhere, however,
accept on trust and faith the convictions of those who are _locally
convinced_.

_Demop._ That doesn't matter, for essentially it makes no difference.
For instance, Protestantism in reality is more suited to the north,
Catholicism to the south.

_Phil._ So it appears. Still, I take a higher point of view, and have
before me a more important object, namely, the progress of the knowledge
of truth among the human race. It is a frightful condition of things
that, wherever a man is born, certain propositions are inculcated in his
earliest youth, and he is assured that under penalty of forfeiting
eternal salvation he may never entertain any doubt about them; in so
far, that is, as they are propositions which influence the foundation of
all our other knowledge and accordingly decide for ever our point of
view, and if they are false, upset it for ever. Further, as the
influences drawn from these propositions make inroads everywhere into
the entire system of our knowledge, the whole of human knowledge is
through and through affected by them. This is proved by every
literature, and most conspicuously by that of the Middle Age, but also,
in too great an extent, by that of the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries. We see how paralysed even the minds of the first rank of all
those epochs were by such false fundamental conceptions; and how
especially all insight into the true substance and working of Nature was
hemmed in on every side. During the whole of the Christian period Theism
lay like a kind of oppressive nightmare on all intellectual effort, and
on philosophical effort in particular, hindering and arresting all
progress. For the men of learning of those epochs, God, devil, angels,
demons, hid the whole of Nature; no investigation was carried out to the
end, no matter sifted to the bottom; everything that was beyond the most
obvious _causal nexus_ was immediately attributed to these; so that, as
Pomponatius expressed himself at the time, _Certe philosophi nihil
verisimile habent ad haec, quare necesse est, ad Deum, ad angelos et
daemones recurrere._ It is true that there is a suspicion of irony in
what this man says, as his malice in other ways is known, nevertheless
he has expressed the general way of thinking of his age. If any one, on
the other hand, possessed that rare elasticity of mind which alone
enabled him to free himself from the fetters, his writings, and he
himself with them, were burnt; as happened to Bruno and Vanini. But how
absolutely paralysed the ordinary mind is by that early metaphysical
preparation may be seen most strikingly, and from its most ridiculous
side, when it undertakes to criticise the doctrines of a foreign belief.
One finds the ordinary man, as a rule, merely trying to carefully prove
that the dogmas of the foreign belief do not agree with those of his
own; he labours to explain that not only do they not say the same, but
certainly do not mean the same thing as his. With that he fancies in his
simplicity that he has proved the falsity of the doctrines of the alien
belief. It really never occurs to him to ask the question which of the
two is right; but his own articles of belief are to him as _à priori_
certain principles. The Rev. Mr. Morrison has furnished an amusing
example of this kind in vol. xx. of the _Asiatic Journal_ wherein he
criticises the religion and philosophy of the Chinese.

_Demop._ So that's your higher point of view. But I assure you that
there is a higher still. _Primum vivere, deinde philosophari_ is of more
comprehensive significance than one supposes at first sight. Before
everything else, the raw and wicked tendencies of the masses ought to be
restrained, in order to protect them from doing anything that is
extremely unjust, or committing cruel, violent, and disgraceful deeds.
If one waited until they recognised and grasped the truth one would
assuredly come too late. And supposing they had already found truth, it
would surpass their powers of comprehension. In any case it would be a
mere allegorical investiture of truth, a parable, or a myth that would
be of any good to them. There must be, as Kant has said, a public
standard of right and virtue, nay, this must at all times flutter high.
It is all the same in the end what kind of heraldic figures are
represented on it, if they only indicate what is meant. Such an
allegorical truth is at all times and everywhere, for mankind at large,
a beneficial substitute for an eternally unattainable truth, and in
general, for a philosophy which it can never grasp; to say nothing of
its changing its form daily, and not having as yet attained any kind of
general recognition. Therefore practical aims, my good Philalethes, have
in every way the advantage of theoretical.

_Phil._ This closely resembles the ancient advice of Timaeus of Locrus,
the Pythagorean: τας ψυχας ἀπειργομες ψευδεσι λογοις, εἰ κα μη ἀγηται
ἀλαθεσι.[13] And I almost suspect that it is your wish, according to the
fashion of to-day, to remind me--

  "Good friend, the time is near
  When we may feast off what is good in peace."

And your recommendation means that we should take care in time, so that
the waves of the dissatisfied, raging masses may not disturb us at
table. But the whole of this point of view is as false as it is nowadays
universally liked and praised; this is why I make haste to put in a
protest against it. It is _false_ that state, justice, and law cannot be
maintained without the aid of religion and its articles of belief, and
that justice and police regulations need religion as a complement in
order to carry out legislative arrangements. It is _false_ if it were
repeated a hundred times. For the ancients, and especially the Greeks,
furnish us with striking _instantia in contrarium_ founded on fact. They
had absolutely nothing of what we understand by religion. They had no
sacred documents, no dogma to be learnt, and its acceptance advanced by
every one, and its principles inculcated early in youth. The servants of
religion preached just as little about morals, and the ministers
concerned themselves very little about any kind of morality or in
general about what the people either did or left undone. No such thing.
But the duty of the priests was confined merely to temple ceremonies,
prayers, songs, sacrifices, processions, lustrations, and the like, all
of which aimed at anything but the moral improvement of the individual.
The whole of their so-called religion consisted, and particularly in the
towns, in some of the _deorum majorum gentium_ having temples here and
there, in which the aforesaid worship was conducted as an affair of
state, when in reality it was an affair of police. No one, except the
functionaries engaged, was obliged in any way to be present, or even to
believe in it. In the whole of antiquity there is no trace of any
obligation to believe in any kind of dogma. It was merely any one who
openly denied the existence of the gods or calumniated them that was
punished; because by so doing he insulted the state which served these
gods; beyond this every one was allowed to think what he chose of them.
If any one wished to win the favour of these gods privately by prayer or
sacrifice he was free to do so at his own cost and risk; if he did not
do it, no one had anything to say against it, and least of all the
State. Every Roman had his own Lares and Penates at home, which were,
however, at bottom nothing more than the revered portraits of his
ancestors. The ancients had no kind of decisive, clear, and least of all
dogmatically fixed ideas about the immortality of the soul and a life
hereafter, but every one in his own way had lax, vacillating, and
problematical ideas; and their ideas about the gods were just as
various, individual, and vague. So that the ancients had really no
_religion_ in our sense of the word. Was it for this reason that anarchy
and lawlessness reigned among them? Is not law and civil order rather so
much their work, that it still constitutes the foundation of ours? Was
not property perfectly secure, although it consisted of slaves for the
greater part? And did not this condition of things last longer than a
thousand years?

So I cannot perceive, and must protest against the practical aims and
necessity of religion in the sense which you have indicated, and in such
general favour to-day, namely, as an indispensable foundation of all
legislative regulations. For from such a standpoint the pure and sacred
striving after light and truth, to say the least, would seem quixotic
and criminal if it should venture in its feeling of justice to denounce
the authoritative belief as a usurper who has taken possession of the
throne of truth and maintained it by continuing the deception.

_Demop._ But religion is not opposed to truth; for it itself teaches
truth. Only it must not allow truth to appear in its naked form, because
its sphere of activity is not a narrow auditory, but the world and
humanity at large, and therefore it must conform to the requirements and
comprehension of so great and mixed a public; or, to use a medical
simile, it must not present it pure, but must as a medium make use of a
mythical vehicle. Truth may also be compared in this respect to certain
chemical stuffs which in themselves are gaseous, but which for official
uses, as also for preservation or transmission, must be bound to a firm,
palpable base, because they would otherwise volatilise. For example,
chlorine is for all such purposes applied only in the form of chlorides.
But if truth, pure, abstract, and free from anything of a mythical
nature, is always to remain unattainable by us all, philosophers
included, it might be compared to fluorine, which cannot be presented by
itself alone, but only when combined with other stuffs. Or, to take a
simpler simile, truth, which cannot be expressed in any other way than
by myth and allegory, is like water that cannot be transported without a
vessel; but philosophers, who insist upon possessing it pure, are like a
person who breaks the vessel in order to get the water by itself. This
is perhaps a true analogy. At any rate, religion is truth allegorically
and mythically expressed, and thereby made possible and digestible to
mankind at large. For mankind could by no means digest it pure and
unadulterated, just as we cannot live in pure oxygen but require an
addition of four-fifths of nitrogen. And without speaking figuratively,
the profound significance and high aim of life can only be revealed and
shown to the masses symbolically, because they are not capable of
grasping life in its real sense; while philosophy should be like the
Eleusinian mysteries, for the few, the elect.

_Phil._ I understand. The matter resolves itself into truth putting on
the dress of falsehood. But in doing so it enters into a fatal alliance.
What a dangerous weapon is given into the hands of those who have the
authority to make use of falsehood as the vehicle of truth! If such is
the case, I fear there will be more harm caused by the falsehood than
good derived from the truth. If the allegory were admitted to be such, I
should say nothing against it; but in that case it would be deprived of
all respect, and consequently of all efficacy. Therefore the allegory
must assert a claim, which it must maintain, to be true in _sensu
proprio_ while at the most it is true in _sensu allegorico_. Here lies
the incurable mischief, the permanent evil; and therefore religion is
always in conflict, and always will be with the free and noble striving
after pure truth.

_Demop_. Indeed, no. Care has been taken to prevent that. If religion
may not exactly admit its allegorical nature, it indicates it at any
rate sufficiently.

_Phil_. And in what way does it do that?

_Demop_. In its mysteries. _Mystery_ is at bottom only the theological
_terminus technicus_ for religious allegory. All religions have their
mysteries. In reality, a mystery is a palpably absurd dogma which
conceals in itself a lofty truth, which by itself would be absolutely
incomprehensible to the ordinary intelligence of the raw masses. The
masses accept it in this disguise on trust and faith, without allowing
themselves to be led astray by its absurdity, which is palpable to them;
and thereby they participate in the kernel of the matter so far as they
are able. I may add as an explanation that the use of mystery has been
attempted even in philosophy; for example, when Pascal, who was pietest,
mathematician, and philosopher in one, says in this threefold character:
_God is everywhere centre and nowhere periphery_. Malebranche has also
truly remarked, _La liberté est un mystère_. One might go further, and
maintain that in religions everything is really mystery. For it is
utterly impossible to impart truth in _sensu proprio_ to the multitude
in its crudity; it is only a mythical and allegorical reflection of it
that can fall to its share and enlighten it. Naked truth must not appear
before the eyes of the profane vulgar; it can only appear before them
closely veiled. And it is for this reason that it is unfair to demand of
a religion that it should be true in _sensu proprio_, and that, _en
passant_. Rationalists and Supernaturalists of to-day are so absurd.
They both start with the supposition that religion must be the truth;
and while the former prove that it is not, the latter obstinately
maintain that it is; or rather the former cut up and dress the allegory
in such a way that it could be true in _sensu proprio_ but would in that
case become a platitude. The latter wish to maintain, without further
dressing, that it is true in _sensu proprio_, which, as they should
know, can only be carried into execution by inquisitions and the stake.
While in reality, myth and allegory are the essential elements of
religion, but under the indispensable condition (because of the
intellectual limitations of the great masses) that it supplies enough
satisfaction to meet those metaphysical needs of mankind which are
ineradicable, and that it takes the place of pure philosophical truth,
which is infinitely difficult, and perhaps never attainable.

_Phil._ Yes, pretty much in the same way as a wooden leg takes the place
of a natural one. It supplies what is wanting, does very poor service
for it, and claims to be regarded as a natural leg, and is more or less
cleverly put together. There is a difference, however, for, as a rule,
the natural leg was in existence before the wooden one, while religion
everywhere has gained the start of philosophy.

_Demop._ That may be; but a wooden leg is of great value to those who
have no natural leg. You must keep in view that the metaphysical
requirements of man absolutely demand satisfaction; because the horizon
of his thoughts must be defined and not remain unlimited. A man, as a
rule, has no faculty of judgment for weighing reasons, and
distinguishing between what is true and what is false. Moreover, the
work imposed upon him by nature and her requirements leaves him no time
for investigations of that kind, or for the education which they
presuppose. Therefore it is entirely out of the question to imagine he
will be convinced by reasons; there is nothing left for him but belief
and authority. Even if a really true philosophy took the place of
religion, at least nine-tenths of mankind would only accept it on
authority, so that it would be again a matter of belief; for Plato's
φιλοσοφον πληθος ἀδυνατον εἰναι will always hold good. Authority,
however, is only established by time and circumstances, so that we
cannot bestow it on that which has only reason to commend it;
accordingly, we must grant it only to that which has attained it in the
course of history, even if it is only truth represented allegorically.
This kind of truth, supported by authority, appeals directly to the
essentially metaphysical temperament of man--that is, to his need of a
theory concerning the riddle of existence, which thrusts itself upon
him, and arises from the consciousness that behind the physical in the
world there must be a metaphysical, an unchangeable something, which
serves as the foundation of constant change. It also appeals to the
will, fears, and hopes of mortals living in constant need; religion
provides them with gods, demons, to whom they call, appease, and
conciliate. Finally, it appeals to their moral consciousness, which is
undeniably present, and lends to it that authenticity and support from
without--a support without which it would not easily maintain itself in
the struggle against so many temptations. It is exactly from this side
that religion provides an inexhaustible source of consolation and
comfort in the countless and great sorrows of life, a comfort which does
not leave men in death, but rather then unfolds its full efficacy. So
that religion is like some one taking hold of the hand of a blind person
and leading him, since he cannot see for himself; all that the blind
person wants is to attain his end, not to see everything as he walks
along.

_Phil._ This side is certainly the brilliant side of religion. If it is
a _fraus_ it is indeed a _pia fraus_; that cannot be denied. Then
priests become something between deceivers and moralists. For they dare
not teach the real truth, as you yourself have quite correctly
explained, even if it were known to them; which it is not. There can, at
any rate, be a true philosophy, but there can be no true religion: I
mean true in the real and proper understanding of the word, not merely
in that flowery and allegorical sense which you have described, a sense
in which every religion would be true only in different degrees. It is
certainly quite in harmony with the inextricable admixture of good and
evil, honesty and dishonesty, goodness and wickedness, magnanimity and
baseness, which the world presents everywhere, that the most important,
the most lofty, and the most sacred truths can make their appearance
only in combination with a lie, nay, can borrow strength from a lie as
something that affects mankind more powerfully; and as revelation must
be introduced by a lie. One might regard this fact as the _monogram_ of
the moral world. Meanwhile let us not give up the hope that mankind will
some day attain that point of maturity and education at which it is able
to produce a true philosophy on the one hand, and accept it on the
other. _Simplex sigillum veri_: the naked truth must be so simple and
comprehensible that one can impart it to all in its true form without
any admixture of myth and fable (a pack of lies)--in other words,
without masking it as _religion_.

_Demop._ You have not a sufficient idea of the wretched capacities of
the masses.

_Phil._ I express it only as a hope; but to give it up is impossible. In
that case, if truth were in a simpler and more comprehensible form, it
would surely soon drive religion from the position of vicegerent which
it has so long held. Then religion will have fulfilled her mission and
finished her course; she might then dismiss the race which she has
guided to maturity and herself retire in peace. This will be the
_euthanasia_ of religion. However, as long as she lives she has two
faces, one of truth and one of deceit. According as one looks
attentively at one or the other one will like or dislike her. Hence
religion must be regarded as a necessary evil, its necessity resting on
the pitiful weak-mindedness of the great majority of mankind, incapable
of grasping the truth, and consequently when in extremity requires a
substitute for truth.

_Demop._ Really, one would think that you philosophers had truth lying
in readiness, and all that one had to do was to lay hold of it.

_Phil._ If we have not got it, it is principally to be ascribed to the
pressure under which philosophy, at all periods and in all countries,
has been held by religion. We have tried to make not only the expression
and communication of truth impossible, but even the contemplation and
discovery of it, by giving the minds of children in earliest childhood
into the hands of priests to be worked upon; to have the groove in which
their fundamental thoughts are henceforth to run so firmly imprinted, as
in principal matters, to become fixed and determined for a lifetime. I
am sometimes shocked to see when I take into my hand the writings of
even the most intelligent minds of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, and especially if I have just left my oriental studies, how
paralysed and hemmed in on all sides they are by Jewish notions.
Prepared in this way, one cannot form any idea of the true philosophy!

_Demop._ And if, moreover, this true philosophy were discovered,
religion would not cease to exist, as you imagine. There cannot be one
system of metaphysics for everybody; the natural differences of
intellectual power in addition to those of education make this
impossible. The great majority of mankind must necessarily be engaged in
that arduous bodily labour which is requisite in order to furnish the
endless needs of the whole race. Not only does this leave the majority
no time for education, for learning, or for reflection; but by virtue of
the strong antagonism between merely physical and intellectual
qualities, much excessive bodily labour blunts the understanding and
makes it heavy, clumsy, and awkward, and consequently incapable of
grasping any other than perfectly simple and palpable matters. At least
nine-tenths of the human race comes under this category. People require
a system of metaphysics, that is, an account of the world and our
existence, because such an account belongs to the most natural
requirements of mankind. They require also a popular system of
metaphysics, which, in order for it to be this, must combine many rare
qualities; for instance, it must be exceedingly lucid, and yet in the
right places be obscure, nay, to a certain extent, impenetrable; then a
correct and satisfying moral system must be combined with its dogmas;
above everything, it must bring inexhaustible consolation in suffering
and death. It follows from this that it can only be true in _sensu
allegorico_ and not in _sensu proprio_. Further, it must have the
support of an authority which is imposing by its great age, by its
general recognition, by its documents, together with their tone and
statements--qualities which are so infinitely difficult to combine that
many a man, if he stopped to reflect, would not be so ready to help to
undermine a religion, but would consider it the most sacred treasure of
the people. If any one wants to criticise religion he should always bear
in mind the nature of the great masses for which it is destined, and
picture to himself their complete moral and intellectual inferiority. It
is incredible how far this inferiority goes and how steadily a spark of
truth will continue to glimmer even under the crudest veiling of
monstrous fables and grotesque ceremonies, adhering indelibly, like the
perfume of musk, to everything which has come in contact with it. As an
illustration of this, look at the profound wisdom which is revealed in
the Upanishads, and then look at the mad idolatry in the India of
to-day, as is revealed in its pilgrimages, processions, and festivities,
or at the mad and ludicrous doings of the Saniassi of the present time.
Nevertheless, it cannot be denied that in all this madness and absurdity
there yet lies something that is hidden from view, something that is in
accordance with, or a reflection of the profound wisdom that has been
mentioned. It requires this kind of dressing-up for the great brute
masses. In this antithesis we have before us the two poles of
humanity:--the wisdom of the individual and the bestiality of the
masses, both of which, however, find their point of harmony in the moral
kingdom. Who has not thought of the saying from the Kurral--"Vulgar
people look like men; but I have never seen anything like them." The
more highly cultured man may always explain religion to himself _cum
grano salis_; the man of learning, the thoughtful mind, may, in secret,
exchange it for a philosophy. And yet _one_ philosophy would not do for
everybody; each philosophy by the laws of affinity attracts a public to
whose education and mental capacities it is fitted. So there is always
an inferior metaphysical system of the schools for the educated
plebeians, and a higher system for the _élite_. Kant's lofty doctrine,
for example, was degraded to meet the requirements of the schools, and
ruined by Fries, Krug, Salat, and similar people. In short, Goethe's
dictum is as applicable here as anywhere: _One does not suit all_. Pure
belief in revelation and pure metaphysics are for the two extremes; and
for the intermediate steps mutual modifications of both in countless
combinations and gradations. The immeasurable differences which nature
and education place between men have made this necessary.

_Phil._ This point of view reminds me seriously of the mysteries of the
ancients which you have already mentioned; their aim at bottom seems to
have lain in remedying the evil arising out of the differences of mental
capacities and education. Their plan was to single out of the great
multitude a few people, to whom the unveiled truth was absolutely
incomprehensible, and to reveal the truth to them up to a certain point;
then out of these they singled out others to whom they revealed more, as
they were able to grasp more; and so on up to the Epopts. And so we got
μικρα, και μειζονα, και μεγιστα μυστηρια. The plan was based on a
correct knowledge of the intellectual inequality of mankind.

_Demop_. To a certain extent the education in our lower, middle, and
high schools represents the different forms of initiation into the
mysteries.

_Phil_. Only in a very approximate way, and this only in so far as
subjects of higher knowledge were written about exclusively in Latin.
But since that has ceased to be so all the mysteries are profaned.

_Demop_. However that may be, I wish to remind you, in speaking of
religion, that you should grasp it more from the practical and less from
the theoretical side. Personified metaphysics may be religion's enemy,
yet personified morality will be its friend. Perhaps the metaphysics in
all religions is false; but the morality in all is true. This is to be
surmised from the fact that in their metaphysics they contradict each
other, while in their morality they agree.

_Phil_. Which furnishes us with a proof of the rule of logic, that a
true conclusion may follow from false premises.

_Demop_. Well, stick to your conclusion, and be always mindful that
religion has two sides. If it can't stand when looked at merely from the
theoretical--in other words, from its intellectual side, it appears, on
the other hand, from the moral side as the only means of directing,
training, and pacifying those races of animals gifted with reason, whose
kinship with the ape does not exclude a kinship with the tiger. At the
same time religion is, in general, a sufficient satisfaction for their
dull metaphysical needs. You appear to me to have no proper idea of the
difference, wide as the heavens apart, of the profound breach between
your learned man, who is enlightened and accustomed to think, and the
heavy, awkward, stupid, and inert consciousness of mankind's beasts of
burden, whose thoughts have taken once and for all the direction of fear
about their maintenance, and cannot be put in motion in any other; and
whose muscular power is so exclusively exercised that the nervous power
which produces intelligence is thereby greatly reduced. People of this
kind must absolutely have something that they can take hold of on the
slippery and thorny path of their life, some sort of beautiful fable by
means of which things can be presented to them which their crude
intelligence could most certainly only understand in picture and
parable. It is impossible to approach them with subtle explanations and
fine distinctions. If you think of religion in this way, and bear in
mind that its aims are extremely practical and only subordinately
theoretical, it will seem to you worthy of the highest respect.

_Phil_. A respect which would finally rest on the principle that the end
sanctifies the means. However, I am not in favour of a compromise on a
basis of that sort. Religion may be an excellent means of curbing and
controlling the perverse, dull, and malicious creatures of the biped
race; in the eyes of the friend of truth every _fraus_, be it ever so
_pia_, must be rejected. It would be an odd way to promote virtue
through the medium of lies and deception. The flag to which I have sworn
is truth. I shall remain faithful to it everywhere, and regardless of
success, I shall fight for light and truth. If I see religion hostile, I
shall--

_Demop_. But you will not! Religion is not a deception; it is true, and
the most important of all truths. But because, as has already been said,
its doctrines are of such a lofty nature that the great masses cannot
grasp them immediately; because, I say, its light would blind the
ordinary eye, does it appear concealed in the veil of allegory and teach
that which is not exactly true in itself, but which is true according to
the meaning contained in it: and understood in this way religion is the
truth.

_Phil_. That would be very probable, if it were allowed to be true only
in an allegorical sense. But it claims to be exactly true, and true in
the proper sense of the word: herein lies the deception, and it is here
that the friend of truth must oppose it.

_Demop_. But this deception is a _conditio sine qua non_. If religion
admitted that it was merely the allegorical meaning in its doctrines
that was true, it would be deprived of all efficacy, and such rigorous
treatment would put an end to its invaluable and beneficial influence on
the morals and feelings of mankind. Instead of insisting on that with
pedantic obstinacy, look at its great achievements in a practical way
both as regards morality and feelings, as a guide to conduct, as a
support and consolation to suffering humanity in life and death. How
greatly you should guard against rousing suspicion in the masses by
theoretical wrangling, and thereby finally taking from them what is an
inexhaustible source of consolation and comfort to them; which in their
hard lot they need very much more than we do: for this reason alone,
religion ought not to be attacked.

_Phil_. With this argument Luther could have been beaten out of the
field when he attacked the selling of indulgences; for the letters of
indulgence have furnished many a man with irreparable consolation and
perfect tranquillity, so that he joyfully passed away with perfect
confidence in the little packet of them which he firmly held in his hand
as he lay dying, convinced that in them he had so many cards of
admission into all the nine heavens. What is the use of grounds of
consolation and peacefulness over which is constantly hanging the
Damocles-sword of deception? The truth, my friend, the truth alone holds
good, and remains constant and faithful; it is the only solid
consolation; it is the indestructible diamond.

_Demop_. Yes, if you had truth in your pocket to bless us with whenever
we asked for it. But what you possess are only metaphysical systems in
which nothing is certain but the headaches they cost. Before one takes
anything away one must have something better to put in its place.

_Phil_. I wish you would not continually say that. To free a man from
error does not mean to take something from him, but to give him
something. For knowledge that something is wrong is a truth. No error,
however, is harmless; every error will cause mischief sooner or later to
the man who fosters it. Therefore do not deceive any one, but rather
admit you are ignorant of what you do not know, and let each man form
his own dogmas for himself. Perhaps they will not turn out so bad,
especially as they will rub against each other and mutually rectify
errors; at any rate the various opinions will establish tolerance. Those
men who possess both knowledge and capacity may take up the study of
philosophy, or even themselves advance the history of philosophy.

_Demop_. That would be a fine thing! A whole nation of naturalised
metaphysicians quarrelling with each other, and _eventualiter_ striking
each other.

_Phil_. Well, a few blows here and there are the sauce of life, or at
least a very slight evil compared with priestly government--prosecution
of heretics, plundering of the laity, courts of inquisition, crusades,
religious wars, massacres of St. Bartholomew, and the like. They have
been the results of chartered popular metaphysics: therefore I still
hold that one cannot expect to get grapes from thistles, or good from
lies and deception.

_Demop_. How often must I repeat that religion is not a lie, but the
truth itself in a mythical, allegorical dress? But with respect to your
plan of each man establishing his own religion, I had still something to
say to you, that a particularism like this is totally and absolutely
opposed to the nature of mankind, and therefore would abolish all social
order. Man is an _animal metaphysicum_--in other words, he has
surpassingly great metaphysical requirements; accordingly he conceives
life above all in its metaphysical sense, and from that standpoint
wishes to grasp everything. Accordingly, odd as it may sound with regard
to the uncertainty of all dogmas, accord in the fundamental elements of
metaphysics is the principal thing, in so much as it is only among
people who hold the same views on this question that a genuine and
lasting fellowship is possible. As a result of this, nations resemble
and differ from each other more in religion than in government, or even
language. Consequently, the fabric of society, the State, will only be
perfectly firm when it has for a basis a system of metaphysics
universally acknowledged. Such a system, naturally, can only be a
popular metaphysical one--that is, a religion. It then becomes
identified with the government, with all the general expressions of the
national life, as well as with all sacred acts of private life. This was
the case in ancient India, among the Persians, Egyptians, Jews, also the
Greeks and Romans, and it is still the case among the Brahman, Buddhist,
and Mohammedan nations. There, are three doctrines of faith in China, it
is true, and the one that has spread the most, namely, Buddhism, is
exactly the doctrine that is least protected by the State; yet there is
a saying in China that is universally appreciated and daily applied,
_the three doctrines are only one_--in other words, they agree in the
main thing. The Emperor confesses all three at the same time, and agrees
with them all. Europe is the confederacy of _Christian_ States;
Christianity is the basis of each of its members and the common bond of
all; hence Turkey, although it is in Europe, is really not to be
reckoned in it. Similarly the European princes are such "by the grace of
God," and the Pope is the delegate of God; accordingly, as his throne
was the highest, he wished all other thrones to be looked upon only as
held in fee from him. Similarly Archbishops and Bishops, as such, had
temporal authority, just as they have still in England a seat and voice
in the Upper House; Protestant rulers are, as such, heads of their
churches; in England a few years ago this was a girl of eighteen. By the
revolt from the Pope, the Reformation shattered the European structure,
and, in particular, dissolved the true unity of Germany by abolishing
its common faith; this unity, which had as a matter of fact come to
grief, had accordingly to be replaced later by artificial and purely
political bonds. So you see how essentially connected is unity of faith
with common order and every state. It is everywhere the support of the
laws and the constitution--that is to say, the foundation of the social
structure, which would stand with difficulty if faith did not lend power
to the authority of the government and the importance of the ruler.

_Phil_. Oh, yes, princes look upon God as a goblin, wherewith to
frighten grown-up children to bed when nothing else is of any avail; it
is for this reason that they depend so much on God. All right; meanwhile
I should like to advise every ruling lord to read through, on a certain
day every six months, the fifteenth chapter of the First Book of Samuel,
earnestly and attentively; so that he may always have in mind what it
means to support the throne on the altar. Moreover, since burning at the
stake, that _ultima ratio theologorum_, is a thing of the past, this
mode of government has lost its efficacy. For, as you know, religions
are like glowworms: before they can shine it must be dark. A certain
degree of general ignorance is the condition of every religion, and is
the element in which alone it is able to exist. While, as soon as
astronomy, natural science, geology, history, knowledge of countries and
nations have spread their light universally, and philosophy is finally
allowed to speak, every faith which is based on miracle and revelation
must perish, and then philosophy will take its place. In Europe the day
of knowledge and science dawned towards the end of the fifteenth century
with the arrival of the modern Greek philosophers, its sun rose higher
in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, which were so productive,
and scattered the mists of the Middle Age. In the same proportion, both
Church and Faith were obliged to gradually disappear; so that in the
eighteenth century English and French philosophers became direct
antagonists, until finally, under Frederick the Great, Kant came and
took away from religious belief the support it had formerly received
from philosophy, and emancipated the _ancilla theologiae_ in that he
attacked the question with German thoroughness and perseverance, whereby
it received a less frivolous, that is to say, a more earnest tone. As a
result of this we see in the nineteenth century Christianity very much
weakened, almost stripped entirely of serious belief, nay, fighting for
its own existence; while apprehensive princes try to raise it up by an
artificial stimulant, as the doctor tries to revive a dying man by the
aid of a drug. There is a passage from Condorcet's _Des Progrès de
l'esprit humain_, which seems to have been written as a warning to our
epoch: _Le zèle religieux des philosophes et des grands n'était qu'une
dévotion politique: et toute religion, qu'on se permet de défendre comme
une croyance qu'il est utile de laisser au peuple, ne peut plus espérer
qu'une agonie plus ou moins prolongée_. In the whole course of the
events which I have pointed out you may always observe that belief and
knowledge bear the same relation to each other as the two scales of a
balance: when the one rises the other must fall. The balance is so
sensitive that it indicates momentary influences. For example, in the
beginning of this century the predatory excursions of French robbers
under their leader Buonaparte, and the great efforts that were requisite
to drive them out and to punish them, had led to a temporary neglect of
science, and in consequence to a certain decrease in the general
propagation of knowledge; the Church immediately began to raise her head
again and Faith to be revived, a revival partly of a poetical nature, in
keeping with the spirit of the times. On the other hand, in the more
than thirty years' peace that followed, leisure and prosperity promoted
the building up of science and the spread of knowledge in an exceptional
degree, so that the result was what I have said, the dissolution and
threatened fall of religion. Perhaps the time which has been so often
predicted is not far distant, when religion will depart from European
humanity, like a nurse whose care the child has outgrown; it is now
placed in the hands of a tutor for instruction. For without doubt
doctrines of belief that are based only on authority, miracles, and
revelation are only of use and suitable to the childhood of humanity.
That a race, which all physical and historical data confirm as having
been in existence only about a hundred times the life of a man sixty
years old, is still in its first childhood is a fact that every one will
admit.

_Demop_. If instead of prophesying with undisguised pleasure the
downfall of Christianity, you would only consider how infinitely
indebted European humanity is to it, and to the religion which, after
the lapse of some time, followed Christianity from its old home in the
East! Europe received from it a drift which had hitherto been unknown to
it--it learnt the fundamental truth that life cannot be an
end-in-itself, but that the true end of our existence lies beyond it.
The Greeks and Romans had placed this end absolutely in life itself, so
that, in this sense, they may most certainly be called blind heathens.
Correspondingly, all their virtues consist in what is serviceable to the
public, in what is useful; and Aristotle says quite naïvely, "_Those
virtues must necessarily be the greatest which are the most useful to
others_" (ἀναγκη δε μεγιστας εἰναι ἀρετας τας τοις ἀλλοις χρησιμωτατας,
_Rhetor_. I. c. 9). This is why the ancients considered love for one's
country the greatest virtue, although it is a very doubtful one, as it
is made up of narrowness, prejudice, vanity, and an enlightened
self-interest. Preceding the passage that has just been quoted,
Aristotle enumerates all the virtues in order to explain them
individually. They are _Justice, Courage, Moderation, Magnificence_
(μεγαλοπρεπεια), _Magnanimity, Liberality, Gentleness, Reasonableness,
and Wisdom_. How different from the Christian virtues! Even Plato,
without comparison the most transcendental philosopher of pre-Christian
antiquity, knows no higher virtue than _Justice_; he alone recommends it
unconditionally and for its own sake, while all the other philosophers
make a happy life--_vita beata_--the aim of all virtue; and it is
acquired through the medium of moral behaviour. Christianity released
European humanity from its superficial and crude absorption in an
ephemeral, uncertain, and hollow existence.

                         ... _coelumque tueri
  Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus_.

Accordingly, Christianity does not only preach Justice, but the _Love of
Mankind, Compassion, Charity, Reconciliation, Love of one's Enemies,
Patience, Humility, Renunciation, Faith, and Hope_. Indeed, it went even
further: it taught that the world was of evil and that we needed
deliverance; consequently it preached contempt of the world,
self-denial, chastity, the giving up of one's own will, that is to say,
turning away from life and its phantom-like pleasures; it taught further
the healing power of suffering, and that an instrument of torture is the
symbol of Christianity, I willingly admit that this serious and only
correct view of life had spread in other forms throughout Asia thousands
of years previously, independently of Christianity as it is still; but
this view of life was a new and tremendous revelation to European
humanity. For it is well known that the population of Europe consists of
Asiatic races who, driven out from their own country, wandered away, and
by degrees hit upon Europe: on their long wanderings they lost the
original religion of their homes, and with it the correct view of life;
and this is why they formed in another climate religions for themselves
which were somewhat crude; especially the worship of Odin, the Druidic
and the Greek religions, the metaphysical contents of which were small
and shallow. Meanwhile there developed among the Greeks a quite special,
one might say an instinctive, sense of beauty, possessed by them alone
of all the nations of the earth that have ever existed--a peculiar,
fine, and correct sense of beauty, so that in the mouths of their poets
and in the hands of their artists, their mythology took an exceptionally
beautiful and delightful form. On the other hand, the earnest, true, and
profound import of life was lost to the Greeks and Romans; they lived
like big children until Christianity came and brought them back to the
serious side of life.

_Phil_. And to form an idea of the result we need only compare antiquity
with the Middle Age that followed--that is, the time of Pericles with
the fourteenth century. It is difficult to believe that we have the same
kind of beings before us. There, the finest development of humanity,
excellent constitutional regulations, wise laws, cleverly distributed
offices, rationally ordered freedom, all the arts, as well as poetry and
philosophy, at their best; the creation of works which after thousands
of years have never been equalled and are almost works of a higher order
of beings, whom we can never approach; life embellished by the noblest
fellowship, as is portrayed in the _Banquet_ of Xenophon. And now look
at this side, if you can. Look at the time when the Church had
imprisoned the minds, and violence the bodies of men, whereby knights
and priests could lay the whole weight of life on the common beast of
burden--the third estate. There you have club-law, feudalism, and
fanaticism in close alliance, and in their train shocking uncertainty
and darkness of mind, a corresponding intolerance, discord of faiths,
religious wars, crusades, persecution of heretics and inquisitions; as
the form of fellowship, chivalry, an amalgam of savagery and
foolishness, with its pedantic system of absurd affectations, its
degrading superstitions, and apish veneration for women; the survival of
which is gallantry, deservedly requited by the arrogance of women; it
affords to all Asiatics continual material for laughter, in which the
Greeks would have joined. In the golden Middle Age the matter went as
far as a formal and methodical service of women and enjoined deeds of
heroism, _cours d'amour_, bombastic Troubadour songs and so forth,
although it is to be observed that these last absurdities, which have an
intellectual side, were principally at home in France; while among the
material phlegmatic Germans the knights distinguished themselves more by
drinking and robbing. Drinking and hoarding their castles with plunder
were the occupations of their lives; and certainly there was no want of
stupid love-songs in the courts. What has changed the scene so?
Migration and Christianity.

_Demop_. It is a good thing you reminded me of it. Migration was the
source of the evil, and Christianity the dam on which it broke.
Christianity was the means of controlling and taming those raw, wild
hordes who were washed in by the flood of migration. The savage man must
first of all learn to kneel, to venerate, and to obey; it is only after
that, that he can be civilised. This was done in Ireland by St. Patrick,
in Germany by Winifred the Saxon, who was a genuine Boniface. It was
migration of nations, this last movement of Asiatic races towards
Europe, followed only by their fruitless attempts under Attila, Gengis
Khan, and Timur, and, as a comic after-piece, by the gipsies: it was
migration of nations which swept away the humanity of the ancients.
Christianity was the very principle which worked against this savagery,
just as later, through the whole of the Middle Age, the Church and its
hierarchy were extremely necessary to place a limit to the savagery and
barbarism of those lords of violence, the princes and knights: it was
the ice-breaker of this mighty flood. Still, the general aim of
Christianity is not so much to make this life pleasant as to make us
worthy of a better. It looks beyond this span of time, this fleeting
dream, in order to lead us to eternal salvation. Its tendency is ethical
in the highest sense of the word, a tendency which had hitherto been
unknown in Europe; as I have already pointed out to you by comparing the
morality and religion of the ancients with those of Christianity.

_Phil_. That is right so far as theory is concerned; but look at the
practice. In comparison with the Christian centuries that followed, the
ancient world was undoubtedly less cruel than the Middle Age, with its
deaths by frightful torture, its countless burnings at the stake;
further, the ancients were very patient, thought very highly of justice,
and frequently sacrificed themselves for their country, showed traits of
magnanimity of every kind, and such genuine humanity, that, up to the
present time, an acquaintance with their doings and thoughts is called
the study of Humanity. Religious wars, massacres, crusades,
inquisitions, as well as other persecutions, the extermination of the
original inhabitants of America and the introduction of African slaves
in their place, were the fruits of Christianity, and among the ancients
one cannot find anything analogous to this, anything to counterpoise it;
for the slaves of the ancients, the _familia_, the _vernae_, were a
satisfied race and faithfully devoted to their masters, and as widely
distinct from the miserable negroes of the sugar plantations, which are
a disgrace to humanity, as they were in colour. The censurable
toleration of pederasty, for which one chiefly reproaches the morality
of the ancients, is a trifle compared with the Christian horrors I have
cited, and is not so rare among people of to-day as it appears to be.
Can you then, taking everything into consideration, maintain that
humanity has really become morally better by Christianity?

_Demop_. If the result has not everywhere corresponded with the purity
and accuracy of the doctrine, it may be because this doctrine has been
too noble, too sublime for humanity, and its aim set too high: to be
sure, it was much easier to comply with heathen morality or with the
Mohammedan. It is precisely what is most elevated that is the most open
to abuse and deception--_abusus optimi pessimus_; and therefore those
lofty doctrines have sometimes served as a pretext for the most
disgraceful transactions and veritable crimes. The downfall of the
ancient institutions, as well as of the arts and sciences of the old
world, is, as has been said, to be ascribed to the invasion of foreign
barbarians. Accordingly, it was inevitable that ignorance and savagery
got the upper hand; with the result that violence and fraud usurped
their dominion, and knights and priests became a burden to mankind. This
is partly to be explained by the fact that the new religion taught the
lesson of eternal and not temporal welfare, that simplicity of heart was
preferable to intellectual knowledge, and it was averse to all worldly
pleasures which are served by the arts and sciences. However, in so far
as they could be made serviceable to religion they were promoted, and so
flourished to a certain extent.

_Phil_. In a very narrow sphere. The sciences were suspicious
companions, and as such were placed under restrictions; while fond
ignorance, that element so necessary to the doctrines of faith, was
carefully nourished.

_Demop_. And yet what humanity had hitherto acquired in the shape of
knowledge, and handed down in the works of the ancients, was saved from
ruin by the clergy, especially by those in the monasteries. What would
have happened if Christianity had not come in just before the migration
of nations?

_Phil_. It would really be an extremely useful inquiry if some one, with
the greatest frankness and impartiality, tried to weigh exactly and
accurately the advantages and disadvantages derived from religions. To
do this, it would be necessary to have a much greater amount of
historical and psychological data than either of us has at our command.
Academies might make it a subject for a prize essay.

_Demop_. They will take care not to do that.

_Phil_. I am surprised to hear you say that, for it is a bad look-out
for religion. Besides, there are also academies which make it a secret
condition in submitting their questions that the prize should be given
to the competitor who best understands the art of flattering them. If
we, then, could only get a statistician to tell us how many crimes are
prevented yearly by religious motives, and how many by other motives.
There would be very few of the former. If a man feels himself tempted to
commit a crime, certainly the first thing which presents itself to his
mind is the punishment he must suffer for it, and the probability that
he will be punished; after that comes the second consideration, that his
reputation is at stake. If I am not mistaken, he will reflect by the
hour on these two obstacles before religious considerations ever come
into his mind. If he can get away from these two first safeguards
against crime, I am convinced that religion _alone_ will very rarely
keep him back from it.

_Demop_. I believe, however, that it will do so very often; especially
when its influence works through the medium of custom, and thereby
immediately makes a man shrink from the idea of committing a crime.
Early impressions cling to him. As an illustration of what I mean,
consider how many a man, and especially if he is of noble birth, will
often, in order to fulfil some promise, make great sacrifices, which are
instigated solely by the fact that his father has often impressed it
upon him in childhood that "a man of honour, or a gentleman, or a
cavalier, always keeps his word inviolate."

_Phil_. And that won't work unless there is a certain innate _probitas_.
You must not ascribe to religion what is the result of innate goodness
of character, by which pity for the one who would be affected by the
crime prevents a man from committing it. This is the genuine moral
motive, and as such it is independent of all religions.

_Demop_. But even this moral motive has no effect on the masses unless
it is invested with a religious motive, which, at any rate, strengthens
it. However, without any such natural foundation, religious motives
often in themselves alone prevent crime: this is not a matter of
surprise to us in the case of the multitude, when we see that even
people of good education sometimes come under the influence, not indeed
of religious motives, which fundamentally are at least allegorically
true, but of the most absurd superstitions, by which they are guided
throughout the whole of their lives; as, for instance, undertaking
nothing on a Friday, refusing to sit down thirteen at table, obeying
chance omens, and the like: how much more likely are the masses to be
guided by such things. You cannot properly conceive the great
limitations of the raw mind; its interior is entirely dark, especially
if, as is often the case, a bad, unjust, and wicked heart is its
foundation. Men like these, who represent the bulk of humanity, must be
directed and controlled meanwhile, as well as possible, even if it be by
really superstitious motives, until they become susceptible to truer and
better ones. Of the direct effect of religion, one may give as an
instance a common occurrence in Italy, namely, that of a thief being
allowed to replace what he has stolen through the medium of his
confessor, who makes this the condition of his absolution. Then think of
the case of an oath, where religion shows a most decided influence:
whether it be because a man places himself expressly in the position of
a mere _moral being_, and as such regards himself as solemnly appealed
to,--as seems to be the case in France, where the form of the oath is
merely "_je le jure_"; and among the Quakers, whose solemn "yea" or
"nay" takes the place of the oath;--or whether it is because a man
really believes he is uttering something that will forfeit his eternal
happiness,--a belief which is obviously only the investiture of the
former feeling. At any rate, religious motives are a means of awakening
and calling forth his moral nature. A man will frequently consent to
take a false oath, but suddenly refuse to do so when it comes to the
point; whereby truth and right come off victorious.

_Phil_. But false oaths are still oftener sworn, whereby truth and right
are trodden underfoot with the clear knowledge of all the witnesses of
the act. An oath is the jurist's metaphysical _pons asinorum_, and like
this should be used as seldom as ever possible. When it cannot be
avoided, it should be taken with great solemnity, always in the presence
of the clergy--nay, even in a church or in a chapel adjoining the court
of justice.... This is precisely why the French abstract formulary of
the oath is of no value. By the way, you are right to cite the oath as
an undeniable example of the practical efficacy of religion. I must, in
spite of everything you have said, doubt whether the efficacy of
religion goes much beyond this. Just think, if it were suddenly declared
by public proclamation that all criminal laws were abolished; I believe
that neither you nor I would have the courage to go home from here alone
under the protection of religious motives. On the other hand, if in a
similar way all religions were declared to be untrue; we would, under
the protection of the laws alone, live on as formerly, without any
special increase in our fears and measures of precaution. But I will
even go further: religions have very frequently a decidedly demoralising
influence. It may be said generally that duties towards God are the
reverse of duties towards mankind; and that it is very easy to make up
for lack of good behaviour towards men by adulation of God. Accordingly,
we see in all ages and countries that the great majority of mankind find
it much easier to beg admission into Heaven by prayers than to deserve
it by their actions. In every religion it soon comes to be proclaimed
that it is not so much moral actions as faith, ceremonies, and rites of
every kind that are the immediate objects of the Divine will; and indeed
the latter, especially if they are bound up with the emoluments of the
clergy, are considered a substitute for the former. The sacrifice of
animals in temples, or the saying of masses, the erection of chapels or
crosses by the roadside, are soon regarded as the most meritorious
works; so that even a great crime may be expiated by them, as also by
penance, subjection to priestly authority, confessions, pilgrimages,
donations to the temple and its priests, the building of monasteries and
the like; until finally the clergy appear almost only as mediators in
the corruption of the gods. And if things do not go so far as that,
where is the religion whose confessors do not consider prayers, songs of
praise, and various kinds of devotional exercise, at any rate, a partial
substitute for moral conduct? Look at England, for instance, where the
audacious priestcraft has mendaciously identified the Christian Sunday
with the Jewish Sabbath, in spite of the fact that it was ordained by
Constantine the Great in opposition to the Jewish Sabbath, and even took
its name, so that Jehovah's ordinances for the Sabbath--_i.e._, the day
on which the Almighty rested, tired after His six days' work, making it
therefore _essentially the last day_ of the week--might be conferred on
the Christian Sunday, the _dies solis_, the first day of the week which
the sun opens in glory, the day of devotion and joy. The result of this
fraud is that in England "Sabbath breaking," or the "desecration of the
Sabbath," that is, the slightest occupation, whether it be of a useful
or pleasurable nature, and any kind of game, music, knitting, or worldly
book, are on Sundays regarded as great sins. Must not the ordinary man
believe that if, as his spiritual guides impress upon him, he never
fails in a "strict observance of the holy Sabbath and a regular
attendance on Divine Service,"--in other words, if he invariably whiles
away his time on a Sunday, and never fails to sit two hours in church to
listen to the same Litany for the thousandth time, and to babble it with
the rest _a tempo_, he may reckon on indulgence in here and there little
sins which he at times allows himself? Those devils in human form, the
slave-owners and slave-traders in the Free States of North America (they
should be called the Slave States), are, in general, orthodox, pious
Anglicans, who look upon it as a great sin to work on Sundays; and
confident in this, and their regular attendance at church, they expect
to gain eternal happiness. The demoralising influence of religion is
less problematical than its moral influence. On the other hand, how
great and how certain that moral influence must be to make amends for
the horrors and misery which religions, especially the Christian and
Mohammedan religions, have occasioned and spread over the earth! Think
of the fanaticism, of the endless persecutions, the religious wars, that
sanguinary frenzy of which the ancients had no idea; then, think of the
Crusades, a massacre lasting two hundred years, and perfectly
unwarrantable, with its war-cry, _It is God's will_, so that it might
get into its possession the grave of one who had preached love and
endurance; think of the cruel expulsion and extermination of the Moors
and Jews from Spain; think of the massacres, of the inquisitions and
other heretical tribunals, the bloody and terrible conquests of the
Mohammedans in three different parts of the world, and the conquest of
the Christians in America, whose inhabitants were for the most part, and
in Cuba entirely, exterminated; according to Las Casas, within forty
years twelve million persons were murdered--of course, all _in majorem
Dei gloriam_, and for the spreading of the Gospel, and because,
moreover, what was not Christian was not looked upon as human. It is
true I have already touched upon these matters; but when in our day "the
Latest News from the Kingdom of God" is printed, we shall not be tired
of bringing older news to mind. And in particular, let us not forget
India, that sacred soil, that cradle of the human race, at any rate of
the race to which we belong, where first Mohammedans, and later
Christians, were most cruelly infuriated against the followers of the
original belief of mankind; and the eternally lamentable, wanton, and
cruel destruction and disfigurement of the most ancient temples and
images, still show traces of the monotheistic rage of the Mohammedans,
as it was carried on from Marmud the Ghaznevid of accursed memory, down
to Aureng Zeb, the fratricide, whom later the Portuguese Christians
faithfully tried to imitate by destroying the temples and the _auto da
fé_ of the inquisition at Goa. Let us also not forget the chosen people
of God, who, after they had, by Jehovah's express and special command,
stolen from their old and faithful friends in Egypt the gold and silver
vessels which had been lent to them, made a murderous and predatory
excursion into the Promised Land, with Moses at their head, in order to
tear it from the rightful owners, also at Jehovah's express and repeated
commands, knowing no compassion, and relentlessly murdering and
exterminating all the inhabitants, even the women and children (Joshua
x., xi.); just because they were not circumcised and did not know
Jehovah, which was sufficient reason to justify every act of cruelty
against them. For the same reason, in former times the infamous roguery
of the patriarch Jacob and his chosen people against Hamor, King of
Shalem, and his people is recounted to us with glory, precisely because
the people were unbelievers. Truly, it is the worst side of religions
that the believers of one religion consider themselves allowed
everything against the sins of every other, and consequently treat them
with the utmost viciousness and cruelty; the Mohammedans against the
Christians and Hindoos; the Christians against the Hindoos, Mohammedans,
Americans, Negroes, Jews, heretics, and the like. Perhaps I go too far
when I say _all_ religions; for in compliance with truth, I must add
that the fanatical horrors, arising from religion, are only perpetrated
by the followers of the monotheistic religions, that is, of Judaism and
its two branches, Christianity and Islamism. The same is not reported of
the Hindoos and Buddhists, although we know, for instance, that Buddhism
was driven out about the fifth century of our era by the Brahmans from
its original home in the southernmost part of the Indian peninsula, and
afterwards spread over the whole of Asia; yet we have, so far as I know,
no definite information of any deeds of violence, of wars and cruelties
by which this was brought about. This may, most certainly, be ascribed
to the obscurity in which the history of those countries is veiled; but
the extremely mild character of their religion, which continually
impresses upon us to be forbearing towards _every living thing_, as well
as the circumstance that Brahmanism properly admits no proselytes by
reason of its caste system, leads us to hope that its followers may
consider themselves exempt from shedding blood to any great extent, and
from cruelty in any form. Spence Hardy, in his excellent book on
_Eastern Monachism_, p. 412, extols the extraordinary tolerance of the
Buddhists, and adds his assurance that the annals of Buddhism furnish
fewer examples of religious persecution than those of any other
religion. As a matter of fact, intolerance is only essential to
monotheism: an only god is by his nature a jealous god, who cannot
permit any other god to exist. On the other hand, polytheistic gods are
by their nature tolerant: they live and let live; they willingly
tolerate their colleagues as being gods of the same religion, and this
tolerance is afterwards extended to alien gods, who are, accordingly,
hospitably received, and later on sometimes attain even the same rights
and privileges; as in the case of the Romans, who willingly accepted and
venerated Phrygian, Egyptian, and other foreign gods. Hence it is the
monotheistic religions alone that furnish us with religious wars,
persecutions, and heretical tribunals, and also with the breaking of
images, the destruction of idols of the gods; the overthrowing of Indian
temples and Egyptian colossi, which had looked on the sun three thousand
years; and all this because a jealous God had said: "_Thou shalt make no
graven image_," etc. To return to the principal part of the matter: you
are certainly right in advocating the strong metaphysical needs of
mankind; but religions appear to me to be not so much a satisfaction as
an abuse of those needs. At any rate we have seen that, in view of the
progress of morality, its advantages are for the most part
problematical, while its disadvantages, and especially the enormities
which have appeared in its train, are obvious. Of course the matter
becomes quite different if we consider the utility of religion as a
mainstay of thrones; for in so far as these are bestowed "by the grace
of God," altar and throne are closely related. Accordingly, every wise
prince who loves his throne and his family will walk before his people
as a type of true religion; just as even Machiavelli, in the eighteenth
chapter of his book, urgently recommended religion to princes. Moreover,
it may be added that revealed religions are related to philosophy,
exactly as the sovereigns by the grace of God are to the sovereignty of
the people; and hence the two former terms of the parallel are in
natural alliance.

_Demop_. Oh, don't adopt that tone! But consider that in doing so you
are blowing the trumpet of ochlocracy and anarchy, the arch-enemy of all
legislative order, all civilisation, and all humanity.

_Phil_. You are right. It was only a sophism, or what the fencing-master
calls a feint. I withdraw it therefore. But see how disputing can make
even honest men unjust and malicious. So let us cease.

_Demop_. It is true I regret, after all the trouble I have taken, that I
have not altered your opinion in regard to religion; on the other hand,
I can assure you that everything you have brought forward has not shaken
my conviction of its high value and necessity.

_Phil_. I believe you; for as it is put in Hudibras:

  "He that complies against his will
  Is of his own opinion still."

I find consolation, however, in the fact that in controversies and in
taking mineral waters, it is the after-effects that are the true ones.

_Demop_. I hope the after-effect may prove to be beneficial in your
case.

_Phil_. That might be so if I could only digest a Spanish proverb.

_Demop_. And that is?

_Phil._ _Detras de la cruz está el Diablo_.

_Demop_. Which means?

_Phil_ Wait--"Behind the cross stands the devil."

_Demop_. Come, don't let us separate from each other with sarcasms, but
rather let us allow that religion, like Janus, or, better still, like
the Brahman god of death, Yama, has two faces, and like him, one very
friendly and one very sullen. Each of us, however, has only fixed his
eyes on one.

_Phil_. You are right, old fellow.

FOOTNOTES:

[13] _De Anim. Mundi_, p. 104, d. Steph.




PSYCHOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS.


Every animal, and especially man, requires, in order to exist and get on
in the world, a certain fitness and proportion between his will and his
intellect. The more exact and true this fitness and proportion are by
nature, the easier, safer, and pleasanter it will be for him to get
through the world. At the same time, a mere approximation to this exact
point will protect him from destruction. There is, in consequence, a
certain scope within the limits of exactness and fitness of this
so-called proportion. The normal proportion is as follows. As the object
of the intellect is to be the light and guide of the will on its path,
the more violent, impetuous, and passionate the inner force of the will,
the more perfect and clear must be the intellect which belongs to it; so
that the ardent efforts of the will, the glow of passion, the vehemence
of affection, may not lead a man astray or drive him to do things that
he has not given his consideration or are wrong or will ruin him; which
will infallibly be the case when a very strong will is combined with a
very weak intellect. On the other hand, a phlegmatic character, that is
to say, a weak and feeble will, can agree and get on with little
intellect; a moderate will only requires a moderate intellect. In
general, any disproportion between the will and intellect--that is to
say, any deviation from the normal proportion referred to--tends to make
a man unhappy; and the same thing happens when the disproportion is
reversed. The development of the intellect to an abnormal degree of
strength and superiority, thereby making it out of all proportion to the
will, a condition which constitutes the essence of true genius, is not
only superfluous but actually an impediment to the needs and purposes of
life. This means that, in youth, excessive energy in grasping the
objective world, accompanied by a lively imagination and little
experience, makes the mind susceptible to exaggerated ideas and a prey
even to chimeras; and this results in an eccentric and even fantastic
character. And when, later, this condition of mind no longer exists and
succumbs to the teaching of experience, the genius will never feel so
much at home or take up his position in the everyday world or in civic
life, and move with the ease of a man of normal intellect; indeed, he is
often more apt to make curious mistakes. For the ordinary mind is so
perfectly at home in the narrow circle of its own ideas and way of
grasping things that no one can control it in that circle; its
capacities always remain true to their original purpose, namely, to look
after the service of the will; therefore it applies itself unceasingly
to this end without ever going beyond it. While the genius, as I have
stated, is at bottom a _monstrum per excessum_; just as conversely the
passionate, violent, and unintelligent man, the brainless savage, is a
_monstrum per dejectum_.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _will_ to _live_, which forms the innermost kernel of every living
being, is most distinctly apparent in the highest, that is to say in the
cleverest, order of animals, and therefore in them we may see and
consider the nature of the will most clearly. For _below_ this order of
animals the will is not so prominent, and has a less degree of
objectivation; but _above_ the higher order of animals, I mean in men,
we get reason, and with reason reflection, and with this the faculty for
dissimulation, which immediately throws a veil over the actions of the
will. But in outbursts of affection and passion the will exhibits itself
unveiled. This is precisely why passion, when it speaks, always carries
conviction, whatever the passion may be; and rightly so. For the same
reason, the passions are the principal theme of poets and the
stalking-horse of actors. And it is because the will is most striking in
the lower class of animals that we may account for our delight in dogs,
apes, cats, etc.; it is the absolute _naïveté_ of all their expressions
which charms us so much.

What a peculiar pleasure it affords us to see any free animal looking
after its own welfare unhindered, finding its food, or taking care of
its young, or associating with others of its kind, and so on! This is
exactly what ought to be and can be. Be it only a bird, I can look at it
for some time with a feeling of pleasure; nay, a water-rat or a frog,
and with still greater pleasure a hedgehog, a weazel, a roe, or a deer.
The contemplation of animals delights us so much, principally because we
see in them our own existence very _much simplified_.

There is only one mendacious creature in the world--man. Every other is
true and genuine, for it shows itself as it is, and expresses itself
just as it feels. An emblematical or allegorical expression of this
fundamental difference is to be found in the fact that all animals go
about in their natural state; this largely accounts for the happy
impression they make on us when we look at them; and as far as I myself
am concerned, my heart always goes out to them, particularly if they are
free animals. Man, on the other hand, by his silly dress becomes a
monster; his very appearance is objectionable, enhanced by the unnatural
paleness of his complexion,--the nauseating effect of his eating meat,
of his drinking alcohol, his smoking, dissoluteness, and ailments. He
stands out as a blot on Nature. And it was because the Greeks were
conscious of this that they restricted themselves as far as possible in
the matter of dress.

       *       *       *       *       *

Much that is attributed to _force of habit_ ought rather to be put down
to the constancy and immutability of original, innate character, whereby
we always do the _same_ thing under the same circumstances; which
happens the first as for the hundredth time in consequence of the same
necessity. While _force of habit_, in reality, is solely due to
_indolence_ seeking to save the intellect and will the work, difficulty,
and danger of making a fresh choice; so that we are made to do to-day
what we did yesterday and have done a hundred times before, and of which
we know that it will gain its end.

But the truth of the matter lies deeper; for it can be explained more
clearly than appears at first sight. The _power of inertia_ applied to
bodies which may be moved by mechanical means only, becomes _force of
habit_ when applied to bodies which are moved by motives. The actions
which we do out of sheer force of habit occur, as a matter of fact,
without any individual separate motive exercised for the particular
case; hence we do not really think of them. It was only when each action
at first took place that it had a motive; after that it became a habit;
the secondary after-effect of this motive is the present habit, which is
sufficient to carry on the action; just as a body, set in motion by a
push, does not need another push in order to enable it to continue its
motion; it will continue in motion for ever if it is not obstructed in
any way. The same thing applies to animals; training is a habit which is
forced upon them. The horse draws a cart along contentedly without being
urged to do so; this motion is still the effect of those lashes with the
whip which incited him at first, but which by the law of inertia have
become perpetuated as habit. There is really something more in all this
than a mere parable; it is the identity of the thing in question, that
is to say of the will, at very different degrees of its objectivation,
by which the same law of motion takes such different forms.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Viva muchos a�os!_ is the ordinary greeting in Spain, and it is usual
throughout the whole world to wish people a long life. It is not a
knowledge of what life is that explains the origin of such a wish, but
rather knowledge of what man is in his real nature: namely, _the will to
live_.

The wish which every one has, that he may be _remembered_ after his
death, and which those people with aspirations have for _posthumous_
fame, seems to me to arise from this tenacity to life. When they see
themselves cut off from every possibility of real existence they
struggle after a life which is still within their reach, even if it is
only an ideal--that is to say, an unreal one.

       *       *       *       *       *

We wish, more or less, to get to the end of everything we are interested
in or occupied with; we are impatient to get to the end of it, and glad
when it is finished. It is only the general end, the end of all ends,
that we wish, as a rule, as far off as possible.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every separation gives a foretaste of death, and every meeting a
foretaste of the resurrection. This explains why even people who were
indifferent to each other, rejoice so much when they meet again after
the lapse of twenty or thirty years.

       *       *       *       *       *

The deep sorrow we feel on the death of a friend springs from the
feeling that in every individual there is a something which we cannot
define, which is his alone and therefore _irreparable. Omne individuum
ineffabile_. The same applies to individual animals. A man who has by
accident fatally wounded a favourite animal feels the most acute sorrow,
and the animal's dying look causes him infinite pain.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is possible for us to grieve over the death of our enemies and
adversaries, even after the lapse of a long time, almost as much as over
the death of our friends--that is to say, if we miss them as witnesses
of our brilliant success.

       *       *       *       *       *

That the sudden announcement of some good fortune may easily have a
fatal effect on us is due to the fact that our happiness and unhappiness
depend upon the relation of our demands to what we get; accordingly, the
good things we possess, or are quite sure of possessing, are not felt to
be such, because the nature of all enjoyment is really only _negative_,
and has only the effect of annulling pain; whilst, on the other hand,
the nature of pain or evil is really positive and felt immediately. With
the possession, or the certain prospect of it, our demands instantly
rise and increase our desire for further possession and greater
prospects. But if the mind is depressed by continual misfortune, and the
claims reduced to a _minimum_, good fortune that comes suddenly finds no
capacity for its acceptance. Neutralised by no previous claims, it now
has apparently a positive effect, and accordingly its whole power is
exercised; hence it may disorganise the mind--that is to say, be fatal
to it. This is why, as is well known, one is so careful to get a man
first to hope for happiness before announcing it, then to suggest the
prospect of it, then little by little make it known, until gradually all
is known to him; every portion of the revelation loses the strength of
its effect because it is anticipated by a demand, and room is still left
for more. In virtue of all this, it might be said that our stomach for
good fortune is bottomless, but the entrance to it is narrow. What has
been said does not apply to sudden misfortunes in the same way. Since
hope always resists them, they are for this reason rarely fatal. That
fear does not perform an analogous office in cases of good fortune is
due to the fact that we are instinctively more inclined to hope than to
fear; just as our eyes turn of themselves to light in preference to
darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Hope_ is to confuse the desire that something should occur with the
probability that it will. Perhaps no man is free from this folly of the
heart, which deranges the intellect's correct estimation of probability
to such a degree as to make him think the event quite possible, even if
the chances are only a thousand to one. And still, an unexpected
misfortune is like a speedy death-stroke; while a hope that is always
frustrated, and yet springs into life again, is like death by slow
torture.

He who has given up hope has also given up fear; this is the meaning of
the expression _desperate_. It is natural for a man to have faith in
what he wishes, and to have faith in it because he wishes it. If this
peculiarity of his nature, which is both beneficial and comforting, is
eradicated by repeated hard blows of fate, and he is brought to a
converse condition, when he believes that something must happen because
he does not wish it, and what he wishes can never happen just because he
wishes it; this is, in reality, the state which has been called
_desperation_.

       *       *       *       *       *

That we are so often mistaken in others is not always precisely due to
our faulty judgment, but springs, as a rule as Bacon says, from
_intellectus luminis sicci non est, sec recipit infusionem a voluntate
et affectibus_: for without knowing it, we are influenced for or against
them by trifles from the very beginning. It also often lies in the fact
that we do not adhere to the qualities which we really discover in them,
but conclude from these that there are others which we consider
inseparable from, or at any rate incompatible with, them. For instance,
when we discern generosity, we conclude there is honesty; from lying we
conclude there is deception; from deception, stealing, and so on; and
this opens the door to many errors, partly because of the peculiarity of
human nature, and partly because of the one-sidedness of our point of
view. It is true that character is always consistent and connected; but
the roots of all its qualities lies too deep to enable one to decide
from special data in a given case which qualities can, and which cannot
exist together.

       *       *       *       *       *

The use of the word _person_ in every European language to signify a
human individual is unintentionally appropriate; _persona_ really means
a player's mask, and it is quite certain that no one shows himself as he
is, but that each wears a mask and plays a _r�le_. In general, the whole
of social life is a continual comedy, which the worthy find insipid,
whilst the stupid delight in it greatly.

       *       *       *       *       *

It often happens that we blurt out things that may in some kind of way
be harmful to us, but we are silent about things that may make us look
ridiculous; because in this case effect follows very quickly on cause.

       *       *       *       *       *

The ordinary man who has suffered injustice burns with a desire for
revenge; and it has often been said that revenge is sweet. This is
confirmed by the many sacrifices made merely for the sake of enjoying
revenge, without any intention of making good the injury that one has
suffered. The centaur Nessus utilised his last moments in devising an
extremely clever revenge, and the fact that it was certain to be
effective sweetened an otherwise bitter death. The same idea, presented
in a more modern and plausible way, occurs in Bertolotti's novel, _Le
due Sorelle_ which has been translated into three languages. Walter
Scott expresses mankind's proneness to revenge in words as powerful as
they are true: "Vengeance is the sweetest morsel to the mouth that ever
was cooked in hell!" I shall now attempt a psychological explanation of
revenge. All the suffering that nature, chance, or fate have assigned to
us does not, _ceteris paribus_, pain us so much as suffering which is
brought upon us by the arbitrary will of another. This is due to the
fact that we regard nature and fate as the original rulers of the world;
we look upon what befalls us, through them, as something that might have
befallen every one else. Therefore in a case of suffering which arises
from this source, we bemoan the fate of mankind in general more than we
do our own. On the other hand, suffering inflicted on us through the
arbitrary will of another is a peculiarly bitter addition to the pain or
injury caused, as it involves the consciousness of another's
superiority, whether it be in strength or cunning, as opposed to our own
weakness. If compensation is possible, it wipes out the injury; but that
bitter addition, "I must submit to that from you," which often hurts
more than the injury itself, is only to be neutralised by vengeance. For
by injuring the man who has injured us, whether it be by force or
cunning, we show our superiority, and thereby annul the proof of his.
This gives that satisfaction to the mind for which it has been
thirsting. Accordingly, where there is much pride or vanity there will
be a great desire for revenge. But as the fulfilment of every wish
proves to be more or less a delusion, so is also the wish for revenge.
The expected enjoyment is mostly embittered by pity; nay, gratified
revenge will often lacerate the heart and torment the mind, for the
motive which prompts the feeling of it is no longer active, and what is
left is the testimony of our wickedness.

       *       *       *       *       *

The pain of an ungratified desire is small compared with that of
repentance; for the former has to face the immeasurable, open future;
the latter the past, which is closed irrevocably.

       *       *       *       *       *

Money is human happiness _in abstracto_; so that a man who is no longer
capable of enjoying it _in concrete_ gives up his whole heart to it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Moroseness and melancholy are very opposite in nature; and melancholy is
more nearly related to happiness than to moroseness. Melancholy
attracts; moroseness repels. Hypochondria not only makes us unreasonably
cross and angry over things concerning the present; not only fills us
with groundless fears of imaginative mishaps for the future; but also
causes us to unjustly reproach ourselves concerning our actions in the
past.

Hypochondria causes a man to be always searching for and racking his
brain about things that either irritate or torment him. The cause of it
is an internal morbid depression, combined often with an inward
restlessness which is temperamental; when both are developed to their
utmost, suicide is the result.

       *       *       *       *       *

What makes a man hard-hearted is this, that each man has, or fancies he
has, sufficient in his own troubles to bear. This is why people placed
in happier circumstances than they have been used to are sympathetic and
charitable. But people who have always been placed in happy
circumstances are often the reverse; they have become so estranged to
suffering that they have no longer any sympathy with it; and hence it
happens that the poor sometimes show themselves more benevolent than the
rich.

On the other hand, what makes a man so very _curious_, as may be seen in
the way he will spy into other people's affairs, is boredom, a condition
which is diametrically opposed to suffering;--though envy also often
helps in creating curiosity.

       *       *       *       *       *

At times, it seems as though we wish for something, and at the same time
do not wish for it, so that we are at once both pleased and troubled
about it. For instance, if we have to undergo some decisive test in some
affair or other, in which to come off victorious is of great importance
to us; we both wish that the time to be tested were here, and yet dread
the idea of its coming. If it happens that the time, for once in a way,
is postponed, we are both pleased and sorry, for although the
postponement was unexpected, it, however, gives us momentary relief. We
have the same kind of feeling when we expect an important letter
containing some decision of moment, and it fails to come.

In cases like these we are really controlled by two different motives;
the stronger but more remote being the desire to stand the test, and to
have the decision given in our favour; the weaker, which is closer at
hand, the desire to be left in peace and undisturbed for the present,
and consequently in further enjoyment of the advantage that hoping on in
uncertainty has over what might possibly be an unhappy issue.
Consequently, in this case the same happens to our moral vision as to
our physical, when a smaller object near at hand conceals from view a
bigger object some distance away.

       *       *       *       *       *

The course and affairs of our individual life, in view of their true
meaning and connection, are like a piece of crude work in mosaic. So
long as one stands close in front of it, one cannot correctly see the
objects presented, or perceive their importance and beauty; it is only
by standing some distance away that both come into view. And in the same
way one often understands the true connection of important events in
one's own life, not while they are happening, or even immediately after
they have happened, but only a long time afterwards.

Is this so, because we require the magnifying power of imagination, or
because a general view can only be got by looking from a distance? or
because one's emotions would otherwise carry one away? or because it is
only the school of experience that ripens our judgment? Perhaps all
these combined. But it is certain that it is only after many years that
we see the actions of others, and sometimes even our own, in their true
light. And as it is in one's own life, so it is in history.

       *       *       *       *       *

Why is it, in spite of all the mirrors in existence, no man really knows
what he looks like, and, therefore, cannot picture in his mind his own
person as he pictures that of an acquaintance? This is a difficulty
which is thwarted at the very outset by _gnothi sauton--know thyself_.

This is undoubtedly partly due to the fact that a man can only see
himself in the glass by looking straight towards it and remaining quite
still; whereby the play of the eye, which is so important, and the real
characteristic of the face is, to a great extent, lost. But co-operating
with this physical impossibility, there appears to be an ethical
impossibility analogous to it. A man cannot regard the reflection of his
own face in the glass as if it were the face of _some one else_--which
is the condition of his seeing himself _objectively_. This objective
view rests with a profound feeling on the egoist's part, as a moral
being, that what he is looking at is _not himself_; which is requisite
for his perceiving all his defects as they really are from a purely
objective point of view; and not until, then can he see his face
reflected as it really and truly is. Instead of that, when a man sees
his own person in the glass the egoistic side of him always whispers,
_It is not somebody else, but I myself_, which has the effect of a _noli
me tangere_, and prevents his taking a purely objective view. Without
the leaven of a grain of malice, it does not seem possible to look at
oneself objectively.

       *       *       *       *       *

No one knows what capacities he possesses for suffering and doing until
an opportunity occurs to bring them into play; any more than he imagines
when looking into a perfectly smooth pond with a mirror-like surface,
that it can tumble and toss and rush from rock to rock, or leap as high
into the air as a fountain;--any more than in ice-cold water he suspects
latent warmth.

       *       *       *       *       *

That line of Ovid's,

  "_Pronaque cum spectent animalia cetera terram_,"

is only applicable in its true physical sense to animals; but in a
figurative and spiritual sense, unfortunately, to the great majority of
men too. Their thoughts and aspirations are entirely devoted to physical
enjoyment and physical welfare, or to various personal interests which
receive their importance from their relation to the former; but they
have no interests beyond these. This is not only shown in their way of
living and speaking, but also in their look, the expression of their
physiognomy, their gait and gesticulations; everything about them
proclaims _in terram prona!_ Consequently it is not to them, but only to
those nobler and more highly endowed natures, those men who really think
and observe things round them, and are the exceptions in the human race,
that the following lines are applicable:

  "_Os homini sublime dedit coelumque tueri
  Jussitt et erectos ad sidera tollere vultus_."

       *       *       *       *       *

Why is "_common_" an expression of contempt? And why are _"uncommon,"
"extraordinary," "distinguished,"_ expressions of approbation? Why is
everything that is common contemptible?

_Common_, in its original sense, means that which is peculiar and common
to the whole species, that is to say that which is innate in the
species. Accordingly, a man who has no more qualities than those of the
human species in general is a "_common man_" "Ordinary man" is a much
milder expression, and is used more in reference to what is
intellectual, while _common_ is used more in a moral sense.

What value can a being have that is nothing more than like millions of
its kind? Millions? Nay, an infinitude, an endless number of beings,
which Nature in _secula seculorum_ unceasingly sends bubbling forth from
her inexhaustible source; as generous with them as the smith with the
dross that flies round his anvil.

So it is evidently only right that a being which has no other qualities
than those of the species, should make no claim to any other existence
than that confined to and conditioned by the species.

I have already several times explained[14] that whilst animals have only
the generic character, it falls to man's share alone to have an
individual character. Nevertheless, in most men there is in reality very
little individual character; and they may be almost all classified. _Ce
sont des espèces_. Their desires and thoughts, like their faces, are
those of the whole species--at any rate, those of the class of men to
which they belong, and they are therefore of a trivial, common nature,
and exist in thousands. Moreover, as a rule one can tell pretty exactly
beforehand what they will say and do. They have no individual stamp:
they are like manufactured goods. If, then, their nature is absorbed in
that of the species, must not their existence be too? The curse of
vulgarity reduces man to the level of animals, for his nature and
existence are merged in that of the species only. It is taken for
granted that anything that is high, great, or noble by its very nature
stands isolated in a world where no better expression can be found to
signify what is base and paltry than the term which I have mentioned as
being generally used--namely, _common_.

       *       *       *       *       *

According as our intellectual energy is strained or relaxed will life
appear to us either so short, petty, and fleeting, that nothing can
happen of sufficient importance to affect our feelings; nothing is of
any importance to us--be it pleasure, riches, or even fame, and however
much we may have failed, we cannot have lost much; or _vice versâ,_ life
will appear so long, so important, so all in all, so grave, and so
difficult that we throw ourselves into it with our whole soul, so that
we may get a share of its possessions, make ourselves sure of its
prizes, and carry out our plans. The latter is the immanent view of
life; it is what Gracian means by his expression, _tomar muy de veras el
vivir_ (life is to be taken seriously); while for the former, the
transcendental view, Ovid's _non est tanti_ is a good expression;
Plato's a still better, οὔτε τι των ἀνθρωπινων ἀξιον ἑστι, μεγαλης
σπουδης (_nihil, in rebus humanis, magno studio dignum est_).

The former state of mind is the result of the intellect having gained
ascendency over consciousness, where, freed from the mere service of the
will, it grasps the phenomena of life objectively, and so cannot fail to
see clearly the emptiness and futility of it. On the other hand, it is
the _will_ that rules in the other condition of mind, and it is only
there to lighten the way to the object of its desires. A man is great or
small according to the predominance of one or the other of these views
of life.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is quite certain that many a man owes his life's happiness solely to
the circumstance that he possesses a pleasant smile, and so wins the
hearts of others. However, these hearts would do better to take care to
remember what Hamlet put down in his tablets--_that one may smile, and
smile, and be a villain_.

       *       *       *       *       *

People of great and brilliant capacities think little of admitting or
exposing their faults and weaknesses. They regard them as something for
which they have paid, and even are of the opinion that these weaknesses,
instead of being a disgrace to them, do them honour. This is especially
the case when they are errors that are inseparable from their brilliant
capacities--_conditiones sine quibus non_, or, as George Sand expressed
it, _chacun a les défauts de ses vertus_.

On the contrary, there are people of good character and irreproachable
minds, who, rather than admit their few little weaknesses, carefully
conceal them, and are very sensitive if any reference is made to them;
and this just because their whole merit consists in the absence of
errors and defects; and hence when these errors come to light they are
immediately held in less esteem.

       *       *       *       *       *

Modesty, in people of moderate ability, is merely honesty, but in people
of great talent it is hypocrisy. Hence it is just as becoming in the
latter to openly admit the regard they have for themselves, and not to
conceal the fact that they are conscious of possessing exceptional
capabilities, as it is in the former to be modest. Valerius Maximus
gives some very good examples of this in his chapter _de fiducia sui_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Man even surpasses all the lower order of animals in his capacity for
being trained. Mohammedans are trained to pray five times a day with
their faces turned towards Mecca; and they do it regularly. Christians
are trained to make the sign of the Cross on certain occasions, and to
bow, and so forth; so that religion on the whole is a real masterpiece
of training--that is to say, it trains people what they are to think;
and the training, as is well known, cannot begin too early. There is no
absurdity, however palpable it may be, which may not be fixed in the
minds of all men, if it is inculcated before they are six years old by
continual and earnest repetition. For it is the same with men as with
animals, to train them with perfect success one must begin when they are
very young.

Noblemen are trained to regard nothing more sacred than their word of
honour, to believe earnestly, rigidly, and firmly in the inane code of
knight-errantry, and if necessary to seal their belief by death, and to
look upon a king as a being of a higher order. Politeness and
compliments, and particularly our courteous attitude towards ladies, are
the result of training; and so is our esteem for birth, position, and
title. And so is our displeasure at certain expressions directed against
us, our displeasure being proportionate to the expression used. The
Englishman has been trained to consider his being called no gentleman a
crime worthy of death--a liar, a still greater crime; and so, the
Frenchman, if he is called a coward; a German, if he is called a stupid.
Many people are trained to be honest in some particular direction,
whilst in everything else they exhibit very little honesty; so that many
a man will not steal money, but he will steal everything that will
afford him enjoyment in an indirect way. Many a shopkeeper will deceive
without scruple, but he will on no condition whatever steal.

       *       *       *       *       *

The doctor sees mankind in all its weakness; the lawyer in all its
wickedness; the theologian in all its stupidity.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Opinion_ obeys the same law as the swing of the pendulum: if it goes
beyond the centre of gravity on one side, it must go as far beyond on
the other. It is only after a time that it finds the true point of rest
and remains stationary.

       *       *       *       *       *

Distance in space decreases the size of things, for it contracts them
and so makes their defects and deficiencies disappear. This is why
everything looks so much finer in a contracting mirror or in a _camera
obscura_ than it is in reality; and the past is affected in the same way
in the course of time. The scenes and events that happened long ago, as
well as the persons who took part in them, become a delight to the
memory, which ignores everything that is immaterial and disagreeable.
The present possesses no such advantage; it always seems to be
defective. And in space, small objects near at hand appear to be big,
and if they are very near, they cover the whole of our field of vision;
but as soon as we stand some little distance away they become minute and
finally invisible. And so it is with time: the little affairs and
misfortunes of everyday life excite in us emotion, anxiety, vexation,
passion, for so long as they are quite near us, they appear big,
important, and considerable; but as soon as the inexhaustible stream of
time has carried them into the distance they become unimportant; they
are not worth remembering and are soon forgotten, because their
importance merely consisted in being near.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is only now and then that a man learns something; but he forgets the
whole day long.

Our memory is like a sieve, that with time and use holds less and less;
in so far, namely, as the older we get, the quicker anything we have
entrusted to our memory slips through it, while anything that was fixed
firmly in it, when we were young, remains. This is why an old man's
recollections are the clearer the further they go back, and the less
clear the nearer they approach the present; so that his memory, like his
eyes, becomes long-sighted (πρεσβυς).

That sometimes, and apparently without any reason, long-forgotten scenes
suddenly come into the memory, is, in many cases, due to the recurrence
of a scarcely perceptible odour, of which we were conscious when those
scenes actually took place; for it is well known that odours more easily
than anything else awaken memories, and that, in general, something of
an extremely trifling nature is all that is necessary to call up a
_nexus idearum_.

And by the way, I may say that the sense of sight has to do with the
understanding,[15] the sense of hearing with reason,[16] and the sense
of smell with memory, as we see in the present case. Touch and taste are
something real, and dependent on contact; they have no ideal side.

       *       *       *       *       *

Memory has also this peculiarity attached to it, that a slight state of
intoxication very often enhances the remembrance of past times and
scenes, whereby all the circumstances connected with them are recalled
more distinctly than they could be in a state of sobriety; on the other
hand, the recollection of what one said or did while in a state of
intoxication is less clear than usual, nay, one does not recollect at
all if one has been very drunk. Therefore, intoxication enhances one's
recollection of the past, while, on the other hand, one remembers little
of the present, while in that state.

       *       *       *       *       *

That arithmetic is the basest of all mental activities is proved by the
fact that it is the only one that can be accomplished by means of a
machine. Take, for instance, the reckoning machines that are so commonly
used in England at the present time, and solely for the sake of
convenience. But all _analysis finitorum et infinitorum_ is
fundamentally based on calculation. Therefore we may gauge the "profound
sense of the mathematician," of whom Lichtenberg has made fun, in that
he says: "These so-called professors of mathematics have taken advantage
of the ingenuousness of other people, have attained the credit of
possessing profound sense, which strongly resembles the theologians'
profound sense of their own holiness."

       *       *       *       *       *

As a rule, people of very great capacities will get on better with a man
of extremely limited intelligence than with a man of ordinary
intelligence; and it is for the same reason that the despot and the
plebeians, the grandparents and the grandchildren, are natural allies.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am not surprised that people are bored when they are alone; they
cannot laugh when they are alone, for such a thing seems foolish to
them. Is laughter, then, to be regarded as merely a signal for others, a
mere sign, like a word? It is a want of imagination and dulness of mind
generally (ἀναισθησια και βραδυτης ψυχης), as Theophrastus puts it, that
prevents people from laughing when they are alone. The lower animals
neither laugh when they are alone nor in company.

Nyson, the misanthropist, was surprised as he was laughing to himself by
one of these people, who asked him why he laughed when he was alone.
"That is just why I was laughing," was the answer.

       *       *       *       *       *

People who do not go to the theatre are like those who make their toilet
without a looking-glass;--but it is still worse to come to a decision
without seeking the advice of a friend. For a man may have the most
correct and excellent judgment in everything else but in his own
affairs; because here the will at once deranges the intellect. Therefore
a man should seek counsel. A doctor can cure every one but himself; this
is why he calls in a colleague when he is ill.

       *       *       *       *       *

The natural gesticulation of everyday life, such as accompanies any kind
of lively conversation, is a language of its own, and, moreover, is much
more universal than the language of words; so far as it is independent
of words, and the same in all nations; although each nation makes use of
gesticulation in proportion to its vivacity, and in individual nations,
the Italian, for instance, it is supplemented by some few gesticulations
which are merely conventional, and have therefore only local value.

Its universal use is analogous to logic and grammar, since it expresses
the form and not the matter of conversation. However, it is to be
distinguished from them since it has not only an intellectual relation
but also a moral--that is, it defines the movements of the will. And so
it accompanies conversation, just as a correctly progressive bass
accompanies a melody, and serves in the same way to enhance the effect.
The most interesting fact about gesticulation is that as soon as
conversation assumes the same _form_ there is a repetition of the same
gesture. This is the case, however varied the _matter_, that is to say,
the subject-matter, may be. So that I am able to understand quite well
the general nature of a conversation--in other words, the mere form and
type of it, while looking out of a window--without hearing a word
spoken. It is unmistakably evident that the speaker is arguing,
advancing his reasons, then modifying them, then urging them, and
drawing his conclusion in triumph; or it may be he is relating some
wrong that he has suffered, plainly depicting in strong and condemnatory
language the stupidity and stubbornness of his opponents; or he is
speaking of the splendid plan he has thought out and put in execution,
explaining how it became a success, or perhaps failed because fate was
unfavourable; or perhaps he is confessing that he was powerless to act
in the matter in question; or recounting that he noticed and saw
through, in good time, the evil schemes that had been organised against
him, and by asserting his rights or using force frustrated them and
punished their author; and a hundred other things of a similar kind. But
what gesticulation alone really conveys to me is the essential
matter--be it of a moral or intellectual nature--of the whole
conversation _in abstracto_. That is to say the quintessence, the true
substance of the conversation, remains identical whatever has brought
about the conversation, and consequently whatever the subject-matter of
it may be.

The most interesting and amusing part of the matter, as has been said,
is the complete identity of the gestures for denoting the same kind of
circumstances, even if they are used by most diverse people; just as the
words of a language are alike for every one and liable to such
modifications as are brought about by a slight difference in accent or
education. And yet these standing forms of gesticulation which are
universally observed are certainly the outcome of no convention; they
are natural and original, a true language of nature, which may have been
strengthened by imitation and custom. It is incumbent on an actor, as is
well known, and on a public speaker, to a less extent, to make a careful
study of gesture--a study which must principally consist in the
observation and imitation of others, for the matter cannot very well be
based on abstract rules; with the exception of some quite general
leading principles--as, for instance, that the gesture must not follow
the word, but rather immediately precede it, in order to announce it and
thereby rouse attention.

The English have a peculiar contempt for gesticulation, and regard it as
something undignified and common; this seems to me to be only one of
those silly prejudices of English fastidiousness. For it is a language
which nature has given to every one and which every one understands;
therefore to abolish and forbid it for no other reason than to gratify
that so much extolled, gentlemanly feeling, is a very dubious thing to
do.

       *       *       *       *       *

The state of human happiness, for the most part, is like certain groups
of trees, which seen from a distance look wonderfully fine; but if we go
up to them and among them, their beauty disappears; we do not know
wherein it lay, for it is only trees that surround us. And so it happens
that we often envy the position of others.

FOOTNOTES:

[14] _Grundpr. der Ethik_, p. 48; _Welt als Wille und Vorstellung_, vol.
i. p. 338.

[15] _Vierfache Wurzel_, § 21.

[16] _Pererga_, vol. ii. § 311.




METAPHYSICS OF LOVE.


We are accustomed to see poets principally occupied with describing the
love of the sexes. This, as a rule, is the leading idea of every
dramatic work, be it tragic or comic, romantic or classic, Indian or
European. It in no less degree constitutes the greater part of both
lyric and epic poetry, especially if in these we include the host of
romances which have been produced every year for centuries in every
civilised country in Europe as regularly as the fruits of the earth. All
these works are nothing more than many-sided, short, or long
descriptions of the passion in question. Moreover, the most successful
delineations of love, such, for example, as _Romeo and Juliet, La
Nouvelle Héloise_, and _Werther_, have attained immortal fame.

Rochefoucauld says that love may be compared to a ghost since it is
something we talk about but have never seen, and Lichtenberg, in his
essay _Ueber die Macht der Liebe_, disputes and denies its reality and
naturalness--but both are in the wrong. For if it were foreign to and
contradicted human nature--in other words, if it were merely an
imaginary caricature, it would not have been depicted with such zeal by
the poets of all ages, or accepted by mankind with an unaltered
interest; for anything artistically beautiful cannot exist without
truth.

  "_Rien n'est beau que le vrai; le vrai seul est aimable_."--BOIL.

Experience, although not that of everyday, verifies that that which as a
rule begins only as a strong and yet controllable inclination, may
develop, under certain conditions, into a passion, the ardour of which
surpasses that of every other. It will ignore all considerations,
overcome all kinds of obstacles with incredible strength and
persistence. A man, in order to have his love gratified, will
unhesitatingly risk his life; in fact, if his love is absolutely
rejected, he will sacrifice his life into the bargain. The Werthers and
Jacopo Ortis do not only exist in romances; Europe produces every year
at least half-a-dozen like them: _sed ignotis perierunt mortibus illi_:
for their sufferings are chronicled by the writer of official registers
or by the reporters of newspapers. Indeed, readers of the police news in
English and French newspapers will confirm what I have said.

Love drives a still greater number of people into the lunatic asylum.
There is a case of some sort every year of two lovers committing suicide
together because material circumstances happen to be unfavourable to
their union. By the way, I cannot understand how it is that such people,
who are confident of each other's love, and expect to find their
greatest happiness in the enjoyment of it, do not avoid taking extreme
steps, and prefer suffering every discomfort to sacrificing with their
lives a happiness which is greater than any other they can conceive. As
far as lesser phases and passages of love are concerned, all of us have
them daily before our eyes, and, if we are not old, the most of us in
our hearts.

After what has been brought to mind, one cannot doubt either the reality
or importance of love. Instead, therefore, of wondering why a
philosopher for once in a way writes on this subject, which has been
constantly the theme of poets, rather should one be surprised that love,
which always plays such an important _rôle_ in a man's life, has
scarcely ever been considered at all by philosophers, and that it still
stands as material for them to make use of.

Plato has devoted himself more than any one else to the subject of love,
especially in the _Symposium_ and the _Phaedrus_; what he has said about
it, however, comes within the sphere of myth, fable, and raillery, and
only applies for the most part to the love of a Greek youth. The little
that Rousseau says in his _Discours sur l'inégalité_ is neither true nor
satisfactory. Kant's disquisition on love in the third part of his
treatise, _Ueber das Gefühl des Schönen und Erhabenen_, is very
superficial; it shows that he has not thoroughly gone into the subject,
and therefore it is somewhat untrue. Finally, Platner's treatment of it
in his _Anthropology_ will be found by every one to be insipid and
shallow.

To amuse the reader, on the other hand, Spinoza's definition deserves to
be quoted because of its exuberant naïveté: _Amor est titillatio,
concomitante idea causae externae_ (_Eth._ iv., prop. 44). It is not my
intention to be either influenced or to contradict what has been written
by my predecessors; the subject has forced itself upon me objectively,
and has of itself become inseparable from my consideration of the world.
Moreover, I shall expect least approval from those people who are for
the moment enchained by this passion, and in consequence try to express
their exuberant feelings in the most sublime and ethereal images. My
view will seem to them too physical, too material, however metaphysical,
nay, transcendent it is fundamentally.

First of all let them take into consideration that the creature whom
they are idealising to-day in madrigals and sonnets would have been
ignored almost entirely by them if she had been born eighteen years
previously.

Every kind of love, however ethereal it may seem to be, springs entirely
from the instinct of sex; indeed, it is absolutely this instinct, only
in a more definite, specialised, and perhaps, strictly speaking, more
individualised form. If, bearing this in mind, one considers the
important _rôle_ which love plays in all its phases and degrees, not
only in dramas and novels, but also in the real world, where next to
one's love of life it shows itself as the strongest and most active of
all motives; if one considers that it constantly occupies half the
capacities and thoughts of the younger part of humanity, and is the
final goal of almost every human effort; that it influences adversely
the most important affairs; that it hourly disturbs the most earnest
occupations; that it sometimes deranges even the greatest intellects for
a time; that it is not afraid of interrupting the transactions of
statesmen or the investigations of men of learning; that it knows how to
leave its love-letters and locks of hair in ministerial portfolios and
philosophical manuscripts; that it knows equally well how to plan the
most complicated and wicked affairs, to dissolve the most important
relations, to break the strongest ties; that life, health, riches, rank,
and happiness are sometimes sacrificed for its sake; that it makes the
otherwise honest, perfidious, and a man who has been hitherto faithful a
betrayer, and, altogether, appears as a hostile demon whose object is to
overthrow, confuse, and upset everything it comes across: if all this is
taken into consideration one will have reason to ask--"Why is there all
this noise? Why all this crowding, blustering, anguish, and want? Why
should such a trifle play so important a part and create disturbance and
confusion in the well-regulated life of mankind?" But to the earnest
investigator the spirit of truth gradually unfolds the answer: it is not
a trifle one is dealing with; the importance of love is absolutely in
keeping with the seriousness and zeal with which it is prosecuted. The
ultimate aim of all love-affairs, whether they be of a tragic or comic
nature, is really more important than all other aims in human life, and
therefore is perfectly deserving of that profound seriousness with which
it is pursued.

As a matter of fact, love determines nothing less than the
_establishment of the next generation_. The existence and nature of the
_dramatis personae_ who come on to the scene when we have made our exit
have been determined by some frivolous love-affair. As the being, the
_existentia_ of these future people is conditioned by our instinct of
sex in general, so is the nature, the _essentia_, of these same people
conditioned by the selection that the individual makes for his
satisfaction, that is to say, by love, and is thereby in every respect
irrevocably established. This is the key of the problem. In applying it,
we shall understand it more fully if we analyse the various degrees of
love, from the most fleeting sensation to the most ardent passion; we
shall then see that the difference arises from the degree of
individualisation of the choice. All the love-affairs of the present
generation taken altogether are accordingly the _meditatio compositionis
generationis futurae, e qua iterum pendent innumerae generationes_ of
mankind. Love is of such high import, because it has nothing to do with
the weal or woe of the present individual, as every other matter has; it
has to secure the existence and special nature of the human race in
future times; hence the will of the individual appears in a higher
aspect as the will of the species; and this it is that gives a pathetic
and sublime import to love-affairs, and makes their raptures and
troubles transcendent, emotions which poets for centuries have not tired
of depicting in a variety of ways. There is no subject that can rouse
the same interest as love, since it concerns both the weal and woe of
the species, and is related to every other which only concerns the
welfare of the individual as body to surface.

This is why it is so difficult to make a drama interesting if it
possesses no love motive; on the other hand, the subject is never
exhausted, although it is constantly being utilised.

What manifests itself in the individual consciousness as instinct of sex
in general, without being concentrated on any particular individual, is
very plainly in itself, in its generalised form, the will to live. On
the other hand, that which appears as instinct of sex directed to a
certain individual, is in itself the will to live as a definitely
determined individual. In this case the instinct of sex very cleverly
wears the mask of objective admiration, although in itself it is a
subjective necessity, and is, thereby, deceptive. Nature needs these
stratagems in order to accomplish her ends. The purpose of every man in
love, however objective and sublime his admiration may appear to be, is
to beget a being of a definite nature, and that this is so, is verified
by the fact that it is not mutual love but possession that is the
essential. Without possession it is no consolation to a man to know that
his love is requited. In fact, many a man has shot himself on finding
himself in such a position. On the other hand, take a man who is very
much in love; if he cannot have his love returned he is content simply
with possession. Compulsory marriages and cases of seduction corroborate
this, for a man whose love is not returned frequently finds consolation
in giving handsome presents to a woman, in spite of her dislike, or
making other sacrifices, so that he may buy her favour.

The real aim of the whole of love's romance, although the persons
concerned are unconscious of the fact, is that a particular being may
come into the world; and the way and manner in which it is accomplished
is a secondary consideration. However much those of lofty sentiments,
and especially of those in love, may refute the gross realism of my
argument, they are nevertheless in the wrong. For is not the aim of
definitely determining the individualities of the next generation a much
higher and nobler aim than that other, with its exuberant sensations and
transcendental soap-bubbles? Among all earthly aims is there one that is
either more important or greater? It alone is in keeping with that
deep-rooted feeling inseparable from passionate love, with that
earnestness with which it appears, and the importance which it attaches
to the trifles that come within its sphere. It is only in so far as we
regard _this_ end as the real one that the difficulties encountered, the
endless troubles and vexations endured, in order to attain the object we
love, appear to be in keeping with the matter. For it is the future
generation in its entire individual determination which forces itself
into existence through the medium of all this strife and trouble.
Indeed, the future generation itself is already stirring in the careful,
definite, and apparently capricious selection for the satisfaction of
the instinct of sex which we call love. That growing affection of two
lovers for each other is in reality the will to live of the new being,
of which they shall become the parents; indeed, in the meeting of their
yearning glances the life of a new being is kindled, and manifests
itself as a well-organised individuality of the future. The lovers have
a longing to be really united and made one being, and to live as such
for the rest of their lives; and this longing is fulfilled in the
children born to them, in whom the qualities inherited from both, but
combined and united in one being, are perpetuated. Contrarily, if a man
and woman mutually, persistently, and decidedly dislike each other, it
indicates that they could only bring into the world a badly organised,
discordant, and unhappy being. Therefore much must be attached to
Calderon's words, when he calls the horrible Semiramis a daughter of the
air, yet introduces her as a daughter of seduction, after which follows
the murder of the husband.

Finally, it is the will to live presenting itself in the whole species,
which so forcibly and exclusively attracts two individuals of different
sex towards each other. This will anticipates in the being, of which
they shall become the parents, an objectivation of its nature
corresponding to its aims. This individual will inherit the father's
will and character, the mother's intellect, and the constitution of
both. As a rule, however, an individual takes more after the father in
shape and the mother in stature, corresponding to the law which applies
to the offspring of animals.... It is impossible to explain the
individuality of each man, which is quite exceptional and peculiar to
him alone; and it is just as impossible to explain the passion of two
people for each other, for it is equally individual and uncommon in
character; indeed, fundamentally both are one and the same. The former
is _explicite_ what the latter was _implicite_.

We must consider as the origin of a new individual and true _punctum
saliens_ of its life the moment when the parents begin to love each
other--_to fancy each other_, as the English appropriately express it.
And, as has been said, in the meeting of their longing glances
originates the first germ of a new being, which, indeed, like all germs,
is generally crushed out. This new individual is to a certain extent a
new (Platonic) Idea; now, as all Ideas strive with the greatest
vehemence to enter the phenomenal sphere, and to do this, ardently seize
upon the matter which the law of causality distributes among them all,
so this particular Idea of a human individuality struggles with the
greatest eagerness and vehemence for its realisation in the phenomenal.
It is precisely this vehement desire which is the passion of the future
parents for one another. Love has countless degrees, and its two
extremes may be indicated as Ἀφροδιτη πανδημος and οὐρανια;
nevertheless, in essentials it is the same everywhere.

According to the degree, on the other hand, it will be the more powerful
the more _individualised_ it is--that is to say, the more the loved
individual, by virtue of all her qualities, is exclusively fit to
satisfy the lover's desire and needs determined by her own
individuality. If we investigate further we shall understand more
clearly what this involves. All amorous feeling immediately and
essentially concentrates itself on health, strength, and beauty, and
consequently on youth; because the will above all wishes to exhibit the
specific character of the human species as the basis of all
individuality. The same applies pretty well to everyday courtship
(Ἀφροδιτη πανδημος). With this are bound up more special requirements,
which we will consider individually later on, and with which, if there
is any prospect of gratification, there is an increase of passion.
Intense love, however, springs from a fitness of both individualities
for each other; so that the will, that is to say the father's character
and the mother's intellect combined, exactly complete that individual
for which the will to live in general (which exhibits itself in the
whole species) has a longing--a longing proportionate to this its
greatness, and therefore surpassing the measure of a mortal heart; its
motives being in a like manner beyond the sphere of the individual
intellect. This, then, is the soul of a really great passion. The more
perfectly two individuals are fitted for each other in the various
respects which we shall consider further on, the stronger will be their
passion for each other. As there are not two individuals exactly alike,
a particular kind of woman must perfectly correspond with a particular
kind of man--always in view of the child that is to be born. Real,
passionate love is as rare as the meeting of two people exactly fitted
for each other. By the way, it is because there is a possibility of real
passionate love in us all that we understand why poets have depicted it
in their works.

Because the kernel of passionate love turns on the anticipation of the
child to be born and its nature, it is quite possible for friendship,
without any admixture of sexual love, to exist between two young,
good-looking people of different sex, if there is perfect fitness of
temperament and intellectual capacity. In fact, a certain aversion for
each other may exist also. The reason of this is that a child begotten
by them would physically or mentally have discordant qualities. In
short, the child's existence and nature would not be in harmony with the
purposes of the will to live as it presents itself in the species.

In an opposite case, where there is no fitness of disposition,
character, and mental capacity, whereby aversion, nay, even enmity for
each other exists, it is possible for love to spring up. Love of this
kind makes them blind to everything; and if it leads to marriage it is a
very unhappy one.

And now let us more thoroughly investigate the matter. Egoism is a
quality so deeply rooted in every personality that it is on egotistical
ends only that one may safely rely in order to rouse the individual to
activity.

To be sure, the species has a prior, nearer, and greater claim on the
individual than the transient individuality itself; and yet even when
the individual makes some sort of conscious sacrifice for the
perpetuation and future of the species, the importance of the matter
will not be made sufficiently comprehensible to his intellect, which is
mainly constituted to regard individual ends.

Therefore Nature attains her ends by implanting in the individual a
certain illusion by which something which is in reality advantageous to
the species alone seems to be advantageous to himself; consequently he
serves the latter while he imagines he is serving himself. In this
process he is carried away by a mere chimera, which floats before him
and vanishes again immediately, and as a motive takes the place of
reality. _This illusion is instinct_. In most instances instinct may be
regarded as the sense of the species which presents to the will whatever
is of service to the species. But because the will has here become
individual it must be deceived in such a manner for it to discern by the
sense of the _individual_ what the sense of the species has presented to
it; in other words, imagine it is pursuing ends concerning the
individual, when in reality it is pursuing merely general ends (using
the word general in its strictest sense).

Outward manifestation of instinct can be best observed in animals, where
the part it plays is most significant; but it is in ourselves alone that
we can get to know its internal process, as of everything internal. It
is true, it is thought that man has scarcely any instinct at all, or at
any rate has only sufficient instinct when he is born to seek and take
his mother's breast. But as a matter of fact man has a very decided,
clear, and yet complicated instinct--namely, for the selection, both
earnest and capricious, of another individual, to satisfy his instinct
of sex. The beauty or ugliness of the other individual has nothing
whatever to do with this satisfaction in itself, that is in so far as it
is a matter of pleasure based upon a pressing desire of the individual.
The regard, however, for this satisfaction, which is so zealously
pursued, as well as the careful selection it entails, has obviously
nothing to do with the chooser himself, although he fancies that it has.
Its real aim is the child to be born, in whom the type of the species is
to be preserved in as pure and perfect a form as possible. For instance,
different phases of degeneration of the human form are the consequences
of a thousand physical accidents and moral delinquencies; and yet the
genuine type of the human form is, in all its parts, always restored;
further, this is accomplished under the guidance of the sense of beauty,
which universally directs the instinct of sex, and without which the
satisfaction of the latter would deteriorate to a repulsive necessity.

Accordingly, every one in the first place will infinitely prefer and
ardently desire those who are most beautiful--in other words, those in
whom the character of the species is most purely defined; and in the
second, every one will desire in the other individual those perfections
which he himself lacks, and he will consider imperfections, which are
the reverse of his own, beautiful. This is why little men prefer big
women, and fair people like dark, and so on. The ecstasy with which a
man is filled at the sight of a beautiful woman, making him imagine that
union with her will be the greatest happiness, is simply the _sense of
the species_. The preservation of the type of the species rests on this
distinct preference for beauty, and this is why beauty has such power.

We will later on more fully state the considerations which this
involves. It is really instinct aiming at what is best in the species
which induces a man to choose a beautiful woman, although the man
himself imagines that by so doing he is only seeking to increase his own
pleasure. As a matter of fact, we have here an instructive solution of
the secret nature of all instinct which almost always, as in this case,
prompts the individual to look after the welfare of the species. The
care with which an insect selects a certain flower or fruit, or piece of
flesh, or the way in which the ichneumon seeks the larva of a strange
insect so that it may lay its eggs in _that particular place only_, and
to secure which it fears neither labour nor danger, is obviously very
analogous to the care with which a man chooses a woman of a definite
nature individually suited to him. He strives for her with such ardour
that he frequently, in order to attain his object, will sacrifice his
happiness in life, in spite of all reason, by a foolish marriage, by
some love-affair which costs him his fortune, honour, and life, even by
committing crimes. And all this in accordance with the will of nature
which is everywhere sovereign, so that he may serve the species in the
most efficient manner, although he does so at the expense of the
individual.

Instinct everywhere works as with the conception of an end, and yet it
is entirely without one. Nature implants instinct where the acting
individual is not capable of understanding the end, or would be
unwilling to pursue it. Consequently, as a rule, it is only given
prominently to animals, and in particular to those of the lowest order,
which have the least intelligence. But it is only in such a case as the
one we are at present considering that it is also given to man, who
naturally is capable of understanding the end, but would not pursue it
with the necessary zeal--that is to say, he would not pursue it at the
cost of his individual welfare. So that here, as in all cases of
instinct, truth takes the form of illusion in order to influence the
will....

All this, however, on its part throws light upon the instinct of
animals. They, too, are undoubtedly carried away by a kind of illusion,
which represents that they are working for their own pleasure, while it
is for the species that they are working with such industry and
self-denial. The bird builds its nest; the insect seeks a suitable place
wherein to lay its eggs, or even hunts for prey, which it dislikes
itself, but which must be placed beside the eggs as food for the future
larvae; the bee, the wasp, and the ant apply themselves to their skilful
building and extremely complex economy. All of them are undoubtedly
controlled by an illusion which conceals the service of the species
under the mask of an egotistical purpose.

This is probably the only way in which to make the inner or subjective
process, from which spring all manifestations of instinct, intelligible
to us. The outer or objective process, however, shows in animals
strongly controlled by instinct, as insects for instance, a
preponderance of the ganglion--_i.e., subjective_ nervous system over
the _objective_ or cerebral system. From which it may be concluded that
they are controlled not so much by objective and proper apprehension as
by subjective ideas, which excite desire and arise through the influence
of the ganglionic system upon the brain; accordingly they are moved by a
certain illusion....

The great preponderance of brain in man accounts for his having fewer
instincts than the lower order of animals, and for even these few easily
being led astray. For instance, the sense of beauty which instinctively
guides a man in his selection of a mate is misguided when it degenerates
into the proneness to pederasty. Similarly, the blue-bottle (_Musca
vomitoria_), which instinctively ought to place its eggs in putrified
flesh, lays them in the blossom of the _Arum dracunculus_, because it is
misled by the decaying odour of this plant. That an absolutely generic
instinct is the foundation of all love of sex may be confirmed by a
closer analysis of the subject--an analysis which can hardly be avoided.

In the first place, a man in love is by nature inclined to be
inconstant, while a woman constant. A man's love perceptibly decreases
after a certain period; almost every other woman charms him more than
the one he already possesses; he longs for change: while a woman's love
increases from the very moment it is returned. This is because nature
aims at the preservation of the species, and consequently at as great an
increase in it as possible.... This is why a man is always desiring
other women, while a woman always clings to one man; for nature compels
her intuitively and unconsciously to take care of the supporter and
protector of the future offspring. For this reason conjugal fidelity is
artificial with the man but natural to a woman. Hence a woman's
infidelity, looked at objectively on account of the consequences, and
subjectively on account of its unnaturalness, is much more unpardonable
than a man's.

In order to be quite clear and perfectly convinced that the delight we
take in the other sex, however objective it may seem to be, is
nevertheless merely instinct disguised, in other words, the sense of the
species striving to preserve its type, it will be necessary to
investigate more closely the considerations which influence us in this,
and go into details, strange as it may seem for these details to figure
in a philosophical work. These considerations may be classed in the
following way:--

Those that immediately concern the type of the species, _id est_,
beauty; those that concern other physical qualities; and finally, those
that are merely relative and spring from the necessary correction or
neutralisation of the one-sided qualities and abnormities of the two
individuals by each other. Let us look at these considerations
separately.

The first consideration that influences our choice and feelings is
_age_....

The second consideration is that of _health_: a severe illness may alarm
us for the time being, but an illness of a chronic nature or even
cachexy frightens us away, because it would be transmitted.

The third consideration is the _skeleton_, since it is the foundation of
the type of the _species_. Next to old age and disease, nothing disgusts
us so much as a deformed shape; even the most beautiful face cannot make
amends for it--in fact, the ugliest face combined with a well-grown
shape is infinitely preferable. Moreover, we are most keenly sensible of
every malformation of the _skeleton_; as, for instance, a stunted,
short-legged form, and the like, or a limping gait when it is not the
result of some extraneous accident: while a conspicuously beautiful
figure compensates for every defect. It delights us. Further, the great
importance which is attached to small feet! This is because the size of
the foot is an essential characteristic of the species, for no animal
has the tarsus and metatarsus combined so small as man; hence the
uprightness of his gait: he is a plantigrade. And Jesus Sirach has
said[17] (according to the improved translation by Kraus), "A woman that
is well grown and has beautiful feet is like pillars of gold in sockets
of silver." The teeth, too, are important, because they are essential
for nourishment, and quite peculiarly hereditary.

The fourth consideration is a certain _plumpness_, in other words, a
superabundance of the vegetative function, plasticity.... Hence
excessive thinness strikingly repels us.... The last consideration that
influences us is a _beautiful face_. Here, too, the bone parts are taken
into account before everything else. So that almost everything depends
on a beautiful nose, while a short _retroussé_ one will mar all. A
slight upward or downward turn of the nose has often determined the
life's happiness of a great many maidens; and justly so, for the type of
the species is at stake.

A small mouth, by means of small maxillae, is very essential, as it is
the specific characteristic of the human face as distinguished from the
muzzle of the brutes. A receding, as it were, a cut-away chin is
particularly repellent, because _mentum prominulum_ is a characteristic
belonging exclusively to our species.

Finally, we come to the consideration of beautiful eyes and a beautiful
forehead; they depend upon the psychical qualities, and in particular,
the intellectual, which are inherited from the mother. The unconscious
considerations which, on the other hand, influence women in their choice
naturally cannot be so accurately specified. In general, we may say the
following:--That the age they prefer is from thirty to thirty-five. For
instance, they prefer men of this age to youths, who in reality possess
the highest form of human beauty. The reason for this is that they are
not guided by taste but by instinct, which recognises in this particular
age the acme of generative power. In general, women pay little attention
to beauty, that is, to beauty of face; they seem to take it upon
themselves alone to endow the child with beauty. It is chiefly the
strength of a man and the courage that goes with it that attract them,
for both of these promise the generation of robust children and at the
same time a brave protector for them. Every physical defect in a man,
any deviation from the type, a woman may, with regard to the child,
eradicate if she is faultless in these parts herself or excels in a
contrary direction. The only exceptions are those qualities which are
peculiar to the man, and which, in consequence, a mother cannot bestow
on her child; these include the masculine build of the skeleton, breadth
of shoulder, small hips, straight legs, strength of muscle, courage,
beard, and so on. And so it happens that a woman frequently loves an
ugly man, albeit she never loves an unmanly man, because she cannot
neutralise his defects.

The second class of considerations that are the source of love are those
depending on the psychical qualities. Here we shall find that a woman
universally is attracted by the qualities of a man's heart or character,
both of which are inherited from the father. It is mainly firmness of
will, determination and courage, and may be honesty and goodness of
heart too, that win a woman over; while intellectual qualifications
exercise no direct or instinctive power over her, for the simple reason
that these are not inherited from the father. A lack of intelligence
carries no weight with her; in fact, a superabundance of mental power or
even genius, as abnormities, might have an unfavourable effect. And so
we frequently find a woman preferring a stupid, ugly, and ill-mannered
man to one who is well-educated, intellectual, and agreeable. Hence,
people of extremely different temperament frequently marry for
love--that is to say, _he_ is coarse, strong, and narrow-minded, while
_she_ is very sensitive, refined, cultured, and aesthetic, and so on; or
_he_ is genial and clever, and _she_ is a goose.

  "Sic visum Veneri; cui placet impares
  Formas atque animos sub juga aënea
    Saevo mittere cum joco."

The reason for this is, that she is not influenced by intellectual
considerations, but by something entirely different, namely, instinct.
Marriage is not regarded as a means for intellectual entertainment, but
for the generation of children; it is a union of hearts and not of
minds. When a woman says that she has fallen in love with a man's mind,
it is either a vain and ridiculous pretence on her part or the
exaggeration of a degenerate being. A man, on the other hand, is not
controlled in instinctive love by the _qualities_ of the woman's
_character_; this is why so many a Socrates has found his Xantippe, as
for instance, Shakespeare, Albrecht Dürer, Byron, and others. But here
we have the influence of intellectual qualities, because they are
inherited from the mother; nevertheless their influence is easily
overpowered by physical beauty, which concerns more essential points,
and therefore has a more direct effect. By the way, it is for this
reason that mothers who have either felt or experienced the former
influence have their daughters taught the fine arts, languages, etc., so
that they may prove more attractive. In this way they hope by artificial
means to pad the intellect, just as they do their bust and hips if it is
necessary to do so. Let it be understood that here we are simply
speaking of that attraction which is absolutely direct and instinctive,
and from which springs real love. That an intelligent and educated woman
esteems intelligence and brains in a man, and that a man after
deliberate reasoning criticises and considers the character of his
_fianceé_, are matters which do not concern our present subject. Such
things influence a rational selection in marriage, but they do not
control passionate love, which is our matter.

Up to the present I have taken into consideration merely the _absolute_
considerations--_id est_, such considerations as apply to every one. I
now come to the _relative_ considerations, which are individual, because
they aim at rectifying the type of the species which is defectively
presented and at correcting any deviation from it existing in the person
of the chooser himself, and in this way lead back to a pure presentation
of the type. Hence each man loves what he himself is deficient in. The
choice that is based on relative considerations--that is, has in view
the constitution of the individual--is much more certain, decided, and
exclusive than the choice that is made after merely absolute
considerations; consequently real passionate love will have its origin,
as a rule, in these relative considerations, and it will only be the
ordinary phases of love that spring from the absolute. So that it is not
stereotyped, perfectly beautiful women who are wont to kindle great
passions. Before a truly passionate feeling can exist, something is
necessary that is perhaps best expressed by a metaphor in
chemistry--namely, the two persons must neutralise each other, like acid
and alkali to a neutral salt. Before this can be done the following
conditions are essential. In the first place, all sexuality is
one-sided. This one-sidedness is more definitely expressed and exists in
a higher degree in one person than in another; so that it may be better
supplemented and neutralised in each individual by one person than by
another of the opposite sex, because the individual requires a
one-sidedness opposite to his own in order to complete the type of
humanity in the new individual to be generated, to the constitution of
which everything tends....

The following is necessary for this neutralisation of which we are
speaking. The particular degree of _his_ manhood must exactly correspond
to the particular degree of _her_ womanhood in order to exactly balance
the one-sidedness of each. Hence the most manly man will desire the most
womanly woman, and _vice versâ_, and so each will want the individual
that exactly corresponds to him in degree of sex. Inasmuch as two
persons fulfil this necessary relation towards each other, it is
instinctively felt by them and is the origin, together with the other
_relative_ considerations, of the higher degrees of love. While,
therefore, two lovers are pathetically talking about the harmony of
their souls, the kernel of the conversation is for the most part the
harmony concerning the individual and its perfection, which obviously is
of much more importance than the harmony of their souls--which
frequently turns out to be a violent discord shortly after marriage.

We now come to those other relative considerations which depend on each
individual trying to eradicate, through the medium of another, his
weaknesses, deficiencies, and deviations from the type, in order that
they may not be perpetuated in the child that is to be born or develop
into absolute abnormities. The weaker a man is in muscular power, the
more will he desire a woman who is muscular; and the same thing applies
to a woman....

Nevertheless, if a big woman choose a big husband, in order, perhaps, to
present a better appearance in society, the children, as a rule, suffer
for her folly. Again, another very decided consideration is complexion.
Blonde people fancy either absolutely dark complexions or brown; but it
is rarely the case _vice versâ_. The reason for it is this: that fair
hair and blue eyes are a deviation from the type and almost constitute
an abnormity, analogous to white mice, or at any rate white horses. They
are not indigenous to any other part of the world but Europe,--not even
to the polar regions,--and are obviously of Scandinavian origin. _En
passant_, it is my conviction that a white skin is not natural to man,
and that by nature he has either a black or brown skin like our
forefathers, the Hindoos, and that the white man was never originally
created by nature; and that, therefore, there is no _race_ of white
people, much as it is talked about, but every white man is a bleached
one. Driven up into the north, where he was a stranger, and where he
existed only like an exotic plant, in need of a hothouse in winter, man
in the course of centuries became white. The gipsies, an Indian tribe
which emigrated only about four centuries ago, show the transition of
the Hindoo's complexion to ours. In love, therefore, nature strives to
return to dark hair and brown eyes, because they are the original type;
still, a white skin has become second nature, although not to such an
extent as to make the dark skin of the Hindoo repellent to us.

Finally, every man tries to find the corrective of his own defects and
aberrations in the particular parts of his body, and the more
conspicuous the defect is the greater is his determination to correct
it. This is why snub-nosed persons find an aquiline nose or a
parrot-like face so indescribably pleasing; and the same thing applies
to every other part of the body. Men of immoderately long and attenuated
build delight in a stunted and short figure. Considerations of
temperament also influence a man's choice. Each prefers a temperament
the reverse of his own; but only in so far as his is a decided one.

A man who is quite perfect in some respect himself does not, it is true,
desire and love imperfection in this particular respect, yet he can be
more easily reconciled to it than another man, because he himself saves
the children from being very imperfect in this particular. For instance,
a man who has a very white skin himself will not dislike a yellowish
complexion, while a man who has a yellowish complexion will consider a
dazzlingly white skin divinely beautiful. It is rare for a man to fall
in love with a positively ugly woman, but when he does, it is because
exact harmony in the degree of sex exists between them, and all her
abnormities are precisely the opposite to, that is to say, the
corrective of his. Love in these circumstances is wont to attain a high
degree.

The profoundly earnest way in which we criticise and narrowly consider
every part of a woman, while she on her part considers us; the
scrupulously careful way we scrutinise, a woman who is beginning to
please us; the fickleness of our choice; the strained attention with
which a man watches his _fiancée_; the care he takes not to be deceived
in any trait; and the great importance he attaches to every more or less
essential trait,--all this is quite in keeping with the importance of
the end. For the child that is to be born will have to bear a similar
trait through its whole life; for instance, if a woman stoops but a
little, it is possible for her son to be inflicted with a hunchback; and
so in every other respect. We are not conscious of all this, naturally.
On the contrary, each man imagines that his choice is made in the
interest of his own pleasure (which, in reality, cannot be interested in
it at all); his choice, which we must take for granted is in keeping
with his own individuality, is made precisely in the interest of the
species, to maintain the type of which as pure as possible is the secret
task. In this case the individual unconsciously acts in the interest of
something higher, that is, the species. This is why he attaches so much
importance to things to which he might, nay, would be otherwise
indifferent. There is something quite singular in the unconsciously
serious and critical way two young people of different sex look at each
other on meeting for the first time; in the scrutinising and penetrating
glances they exchange, in the careful inspection which their various
traits undergo. This scrutiny and analysis represent the _meditation of
the genius of the species_ on the individual which may be born and the
combination of its qualities; and the greatness of their delight in and
longing for each other is determined by this meditation. This longing,
although it may have become intense, may possibly disappear again if
something previously unobserved comes to light. And so the genius of the
species meditates concerning the coming race in all who are yet not too
old. It is Cupid's work to fashion this race, and he is always busy,
always speculating, always meditating. The affairs of the individual in
their whole ephemeral totality are very trivial compared with those of
this divinity, which concern the species and the coming race; therefore
he is always ready to sacrifice the individual regardlessly. He is
related to these ephemeral affairs as an immortal being is to a mortal,
and his interests to theirs as infinite to finite. Conscious, therefore,
of administering affairs of a higher order than those that concern
merely the weal and woe of the individual, he administers them with
sublime indifference amid the tumult of war, the bustle of business, or
the raging of a plague--indeed, he pursues them into the seclusion of
the cloisters.

It has been seen that the intensity of love grows with its
individuation; we have shown that two individuals may be so physically
constituted, that, in order to restore the best possible type of the
species, the one is the special and perfect complement of the other,
which, in consequence, exclusively desires it. In a case of this kind,
passionate love arises, and as it is bestowed on one object, and one
only--that is to say, because it appears in the _special_ service of the
species--it immediately assumes a nobler and sublimer nature. On the
other hand, mere sexual instinct is base, because, without
individuation, it is directed to all, and strives to preserve the
species merely as regards quantity with little regard for quality.
Intense love concentrated on one individual may develop to such a
degree, that unless it is gratified all the good things of this world,
and even life itself, lose their importance. It then becomes a desire,
the intensity of which is like none other; consequently it will make any
kind of sacrifice, and should it happen that it cannot be gratified, it
may lead to madness or even suicide. Besides these unconscious
considerations which are the source of passionate love, there must be
still others, which we have not so directly before us. Therefore, we
must take it for granted that here there is not only a fitness of
constitution but also a special fitness between the man's _will_ and the
woman's _intellect_, in consequence of which a perfectly definite
individual can be born to them alone, whose existence is contemplated by
the genius of the species for reasons to us impenetrable, since they are
the very essence of the thing-in-itself. Or more strictly speaking, the
will to live desires to objectivise itself in an individual which is
precisely determined, and can only be begotten by this particular father
and this particular mother. This metaphysical yearning of the will in
itself has immediately, as its sphere of action in the circle of human
beings, the hearts of the future parents, who accordingly are seized
with this desire. They now fancy that it is for their own sakes they are
longing for what at present has purely a metaphysical end, that is to
say, for what does not come within the range of things that exist in
reality. In other words, it is the desire of the future individual to
enter existence, which has first become possible here, a longing which
proceeds from the primary source of all being and exhibits itself in the
phenomenal world as the intense love of the future parents for each
other, and has little regard for anything outside itself. In fact, love
is an illusion like no other; it will induce a man to sacrifice
everything he possesses in the world, in order to obtain this woman, who
in reality will satisfy him no more than any other. It also ceases to
exist when the end, which was in reality metaphysical, has been
frustrated perhaps by the woman's barrenness (which, according to
Hufeland, is the result of nineteen accidental defects in the
constitution), just as it is frustrated daily in millions of crushed
germs in which the same metaphysical life-principle struggles to exist;
there is no other consolation in this than that there is an infinity of
space, time, and matter, and consequently inexhaustible opportunity, at
the service of the will to live.

Although this subject has not been treated by Theophrastus Paracelsus,
and my entire train of thought is foreign to him, yet it must have
presented itself to him, if even in a cursory way, when he gave
utterance to the following remarkable words, written in quite a
different context and in his usual desultory style: _Hi sunt, quos Deus
copulavit, ut eam, quae fuit Uriae et David; quamvis ex diametro (sic
enim sibi humana mens persuadebat) cum justo et legitimo matrimonio
pugnaret hoc ... sed propter Salomonem, qui aliunde nasci non potuit,
nisi ex Bathseba, conjuncto David semine, quamvis meretrice, conjunxit
eos Deus._[18]

The yearning of love, the ἱμερος, which has been expressed in countless
ways and forms by the poets of all ages, without their exhausting the
subject or even doing it justice; this longing which makes us imagine
that the possession of a certain woman will bring interminable
happiness, and the loss of her, unspeakable pain; this longing and this
pain do not arise from the needs of an ephemeral individual, but are, on
the contrary, the sigh of the spirit of the species, discerning
irreparable means of either gaining or losing its ends. It is the
species alone that has an interminable existence: hence it is capable of
endless desire, endless gratification, and endless pain. These, however,
are imprisoned in the heart of a mortal; no wonder, therefore, if it
seems like to burst, and can find no expression for the announcements of
endless joy or endless pain. This it is that forms the substance of all
erotic poetry that is sublime in character, which, consequently, soars
into transcendent metaphors, surpassing everything earthly. This is the
theme of Petrarch, the material for the St. Preuxs, Werthers, and Jacopo
Ortis, who otherwise could be neither understood nor explained. This
infinite regard is not based on any kind of intellectual, nor, in
general, upon any real merits of the beloved one; because the lover
frequently does not know her well enough; as was the case with Petrarch.

It is the spirit of the species alone that can see at a glance of what
_value_ the beloved one is to _it_ for its purposes. Moreover, great
passions, as a rule, originate at first sight:

  "Who ever lov'd, that lov'd not at first sight."

--SHAKESPEARE, _As You Like It,_ iii. 5.

Curiously enough, there is a passage touching upon this in _Guzmann de
Alfarache_, a well-known romance written two hundred and fifty years ago
by Mateo Aleman: _No es necessario para que uno ame, que pase distancia
de tiempo, que siga discurso, in haga eleccion, sino que con aquella
primera y sola vista, concurran juntamente cierta correspondencia ó
consonancia, ó lo que acá solemos vulgarmente decir, una confrontacion
de sangre, à que por particular influxo suelen mover las estrellas_.
(For a man to love there is no need for any length of time to pass for
him to weigh considerations or make his choice, but only that a certain
correspondence and consonance is encountered on both sides at the first
and only glance, or that which is ordinarily called _a sympathy of
blood_, to which a peculiar influence of the stars generally impels.)
Accordingly, the loss of the beloved one through a rival, or through
death, is the greatest pain of all to those passionately in love; just
because it is of a transcendental nature, since it affects him not
merely as an individual, but also assails him in his _essentia aeterna_,
in the life of the species, in whose special will and service he was
here called. This is why jealousy is so tormenting and bitter, and the
giving up of the loved one the greatest of all sacrifices. A hero is
ashamed of showing any kind of emotion but that which may be the outcome
of love; the reason for this is, that when he is in love it is not he,
but the species which is grieving. In Calderon's _Zenobia the Great_
there is a scene in the second act between Zenobia and Decius where the
latter says, _Cielos, luego tu me quieres? Perdiera cien mil victorias,
Volviérame_, etc. (Heavens! then you love me? For this I would
sacrifice a thousand victories, etc.) In this case honour, which has
hitherto outweighed every other interest, is driven out of the field
directly love--_i.e._, the interest of the species--comes into play and
discerns something that will be of decided advantage to itself; for the
interest of the species, compared with that of the mere individual,
however important this may be, is infinitely more important. Honour,
duty, and fidelity succumb to it after they have withstood every other
temptation--the menace of death even. We find the same going on in
private life; for instance, a man has less conscience when in love than
in any other circumstances. Conscience is sometimes put on one side even
by people who are otherwise honest and straightforward, and infidelity
recklessly committed if they are passionately in love--i.e., when the
interest of the species has taken possession of them. It would seem,
indeed, as if they believed themselves conscious of a greater authority
than the interests of individuals could ever confer; this is simply
because they are concerned in the interest of the species. Chamfort's
utterance in this respect is remarkable: _Quand un homme et une femme
ont l'un pour l'autre une passion violente, il me semble toujours que
quelque soient les obstacles qui les séparent, un mari, des parens,
etc.; les deux amans sont l'un à l'autre, de par la Nature, qu'ils
s'appartiennent de droit devin, malgré les lois et les conventions
humaines_.... From this standpoint the greater part of the _Decameron_
seems a mere mocking and jeering on the part of the genius of the
species at the rights and interests of the individual which it treads
underfoot. Inequality of rank and all similar relations are put on one
side with the same indifference and disregarded by the genius of the
species, if they thwart the union of two people passionately in love
with one another: it pursues its ends pertaining to endless generations,
scattering human principles and scruples abroad like chaff.

For the same reason, a man will willingly risk every kind of danger, and
even become courageous, although he may otherwise be faint-hearted. What
a delight we take in watching, either in a play or novel, two young
lovers fighting for each other--i.e., for the interest of the
species--and their defeat of the old people, who had only in view the
welfare of the individual! For the struggling of a pair of lovers seems
to us so much more important, delightful, and consequently justifiable
than any other, as the species is more important than the individual.

Accordingly, we have as the fundamental subject of almost all comedies
the genius of the species with its purposes, running counter to the
personal interests of the individuals presented, and, in consequence,
threatening to undermine their happiness. As a rule it carries out its
ends, which, in keeping with true poetic justice, satisfies the
spectator, because the latter feels that the purposes of the species
widely surpass those of the individual. Hence he is quite consoled when
he finally takes leave of the victorious lovers, sharing with them the
illusion that they have established their own happiness, while, in
truth, they have sacrificed it for the welfare of the species, in
opposition to the will of the discreet old people.

It has been attempted in a few out-of-the-way comedies to reverse this
state of things and to effect the happiness of the individuals at the
cost of the ends of the species; but here the spectator is sensible of
the pain inflicted on the genius of the species, and does not find
consolation in the advantages that are assured to the individuals.

Two very well-known little pieces occur to me as examples of this kind:
_La reine de 16 ans_, and _Le mariage de raison_.

In the love-affairs that are treated in tragedies the lovers, as a rule,
perish together: the reason for this is that the purposes of the
species, whose tools the lovers were, have been frustrated, as, for
instance, in _Romeo and Juliet, Tancred, Don Carlos, Wallenstein, The
Bride of Messina_, and so on.

A man in love frequently furnishes comic as well as tragic aspects; for
being in the possession of the spirit of the species and controlled by
it, he no longer belongs to himself, and consequently his line of
conduct is not in keeping with that of the individual. It is
fundamentally this that in the higher phases of love gives such a
poetical and sublime colour, nay, transcendental and hyperphysical turn
to a man's thoughts, whereby he appears to lose sight of his essentially
material purpose. He is inspired by the spirit of the species, whose
affairs are infinitely more important than any which concern mere
individuals, in order to establish by special mandate of this spirit the
existence of an indefinitely long posterity with _this_ particular and
precisely determined nature, which it can receive only from him as
father and his loved one as mother, and which, moreover, _as such_ never
comes into existence, while the objectivation of the will to live
expressly demands this existence. It is the feeling that he is engaged
in affairs of such transcendent importance that exalts the lover above
everything earthly, nay, indeed, above himself, and gives such a
hyperphysical clothing to his physical wishes, that love becomes, even
in the life of the most prosaic, a poetical episode; and then the affair
often assumes a comical aspect. That mandate of the will which
objectifies itself in the species presents itself in the consciousness
of the lover under the mask of the anticipation of an infinite
happiness, which is to be found in his union with this particular woman.
This illusion to a man deeply in love becomes so dazzling that if it
cannot be attained, life itself not only loses all charm, but appears to
be so joyless, hollow, and uninteresting as to make him too disgusted
with it to be afraid of the terrors of death; this is why he sometimes
of his own free will cuts his life short. The will of a man of this kind
has become engulfed in that of the species, or the will of the species
has obtained so great an ascendency over the will of the individual that
if such a man cannot be effective in the manifestation of the first, he
disdains to be so in the last. The individual in this case is too weak a
vessel to bear the infinite longing of the will of the species
concentrated upon a definite object. When this is the case suicide is
the result, and sometimes suicide of the two lovers; unless nature, to
prevent this, causes insanity, which then enshrouds with its veil the
consciousness of so hopeless a condition. The truth of this is confirmed
yearly by various cases of this description.

However, it is not only unrequited love that leads frequently to a
tragic end; for requited love more frequently leads to unhappiness than
to happiness. This is because its demands often so severely clash with
the personal welfare of the lover concerned as to undermine it, since
the demands are incompatible with the lover's other circumstances, and
in consequence destroy the plans of life built upon them. Further, love
frequently runs counter not only to external circumstances but to the
individuality itself, for it may fling itself upon a person who, apart
from the relation of sex, may become hateful, despicable, nay, even
repulsive. As the will of the species, however, is so very much stronger
than that of the individual, the lover shuts his eyes to all
objectionable qualities, overlooks everything, ignores all, and unites
himself for ever to the object of his passion. He is so completely
blinded by this illusion that as soon as the will of the species is
accomplished the illusion vanishes and leaves in its place a hateful
companion for life. From this it is obvious why we often see very
intelligent, nay, distinguished men married to dragons and she-devils,
and why we cannot understand how it was possible for them to make such a
choice. Accordingly, the ancients represented _Amor_ as blind. In fact,
it is possible for a lover to clearly recognise and be bitterly
conscious of horrid defects in his _fiancée's_ disposition and
character--defects which promise him a life of misery--and yet for him
not to be filled with fear:

  "I ask not, I care not,
    If guilt's in thy heart;
  I know that I love thee,
    Whatever thou art."

For, in truth, he is not acting in his own interest but in that of a
third person, who has yet to come into existence, albeit he is under the
impression that he is acting in his own But it is this very _acting in
some one else's interest_ which is everywhere the stamp of greatness and
gives to passionate love the touch of the sublime, making it a worthy
subject for the poet. Finally, a man may both love and hate his beloved
at the same time. Accordingly, Plato compares a man's love to the love
of a wolf for a sheep. We have an instance of this kind when a
passionate lover, in spite of all his exertions and entreaties, cannot
obtain a hearing upon any terms.

  "I love and hate her."--SHAKESPEARE, _Cymb_. iii. 5.

When hatred is kindled, a man will sometimes go so far as to first kill
his beloved and then himself. Examples of this kind are brought before
our notice yearly in the newspapers. Therefore Goethe says truly:

  "Bei aller verschmähten Liebe, beim höllichen Elemente!
  Ich wollt', ich wüsst' was ärger's, das ich fluchen könnte!"

It is in truth no hyperbole on the part of a lover when he calls his
beloved's coldness, or the joy of her vanity, which delights in his
suffering, _cruelty_. For he has come under the influence of an impulse
which, akin to the instinct of animals, compels him in spite of all
reason to unconditionally pursue his end and discard every other; he
cannot give it up. There has not been one but many a Petrarch, who,
failing to have his love requited, has been obliged to drag through life
as if his feet were either fettered or carried a leaden weight, and give
vent to his sighs in a lonely forest; nevertheless there was only one
Petrarch who possessed the true poetic instinct, so that Goethe's
beautiful lines are true of him:

  "Und wenn der Mensch in seiner Quaal verstummt,
  Gab mir ein Gott, zu sagen, wie ich leide."

As a matter of fact, the genius of the species is at continual warfare
with the guardian genius of individuals; it is its pursuer and enemy; it
is always ready to relentlessly destroy personal happiness in order to
carry out its ends; indeed, the welfare of whole nations has sometimes
been sacrificed to its caprice. Shakespeare furnishes us with such an
example in _Henry VI_ Part III., Act iii., Scenes 2 and 3. This is
because the species, in which lies the germ of our being, has a nearer
and prior claim upon us than the individual, so that the affairs of the
species are more important than those of the individual. Sensible of
this, the ancients personified the genius of the species in Cupid,
notwithstanding his having the form of a child, as a hostile and cruel
god, and therefore one to be decried as a capricious and despotic demon,
and yet lord of both gods and men.

  Συ δ' ὠ θεων τυραννε κ' ἀνθρωπων, Ἐρως.
  (Tu, deorum hominumque tyranne, Amor!)

Murderous darts, blindness, and wings are Cupid's attributes. The latter
signify inconstancy, which as a rule comes with the disillusion
following possession.

Because, for instance, love is based on an illusion and represents what
is an advantage to the species as an advantage to the individual, the
illusion necessarily vanishes directly the end of the species has been
attained. The spirit of the species, which for the time being has got
the individual into its possession, now frees him again. Deserted by the
spirit, he relapses into his original state of narrowness and want; he
is surprised to find that after all his lofty, heroic, and endless
attempts to further his own pleasure he has obtained but little; and
contrary to his expectation, he finds that he is no happier than he was
before. He discovers that he has been the dupe of the will of the
species. Therefore, as a rule, a Theseus who has been made happy will
desert his Ariadne. If Petrarch's passion had been gratified his song
would have become silent from that moment, as that of the birds as soon
as the eggs are laid.

Let it be said in passing that, however much my metaphysics of love may
displease those in love, the fundamental truth revealed by me would
enable them more effectually than anything else to overcome their
passion, if considerations of reason in general could be of any avail.
The words of the comic poet of ancient times remain good: _Quae res in
se neque consilium, neque modum habet ullum, eam consilio regere non
potes_. People who marry for love do so in the interest of the species
and not of the individuals. It is true that the persons concerned
imagine they are promoting their own happiness; but their real aim,
which is one they are unconscious of, is to bring forth an individual
which can be begotten by them alone. This purpose having brought them
together, they ought henceforth to try and make the best of things. But
it very frequently happens that two people who have been brought
together by this instinctive illusion, which is the essence of
passionate love, are in every other respect temperamentally different.
This becomes apparent when the illusion wears off, as it necessarily
must.

Accordingly, people who marry for love are generally unhappy, for such
people look after the welfare of the future generation at the expense of
the present. _Quien se casa por amores, ha de vivir con dolores_ (He who
marries for love must live in grief), says the Spanish proverb.
Marriages _de convenance_, which are generally arranged by the parents,
will turn out the reverse. The considerations in this case which control
them, whatever their nature may be, are at any rate real and unable to
vanish of themselves. A marriage of this kind attends to the welfare of
the present generation to the detriment of the future, it is true; and
yet this remains problematical.

A man who marries for money, and not for love, lives more in the
interest of the individual than in that of the species; a condition
exactly opposed to truth; therefore it is unnatural and rouses a certain
feeling of contempt. A girl who against the wish of her parents refuses
to marry a rich man, still young, and ignores all considerations of
_convenance_, in order to choose another instinctively to her liking,
sacrifices her individual welfare to the species. But it is for this
very reason that she meets with a certain approval, for she has given
preference to what was more important and acted in the spirit of nature
(of the species) more exactly; while the parents advised only in the
spirit of individual egoism.

As the outcome of all this, it seems that to marry means that either the
interest of the individual or the interest of the species must suffer.
As a rule one or the other is the case, for it is only by the rarest and
luckiest accident that _convenance_ and passionate love go hand in hand.
The wretched condition of most persons physically, morally, and
intellectually may be partly accounted for by the fact that marriages
are not generally the result of pure choice and inclination, but of all
kinds of external considerations and accidental circumstances. However,
if inclination to a certain degree is taken into consideration, as well
as convenience, this is as it were a compromise with the genius of the
species. As is well known, happy marriages are few and far between,
since marriage is intended to have the welfare of the future generation
at heart and not the present.

However, let me add for the consolation of the more tender-hearted that
passionate love is sometimes associated with a feeling of quite another
kind--namely, real friendship founded on harmony of sentiment, but this,
however, does not exist until the instinct of sex has been extinguished.
This friendship will generally spring from the fact that the physical,
moral, and intellectual qualities which correspond to and supplement
each other in two individuals in love, in respect of the child to be
born, will also supplement each other in respect of the individuals
themselves as opposite qualities of temperament and intellectual
excellence, and thereby establish a harmony of sentiment.

The whole metaphysics of love which has been treated here is closely
related to my metaphysics in general, and the light it throws upon this
may be said to be as follows.

We have seen that a man's careful choice, developing through innumerable
degrees to passionate love, for the satisfaction of his instinct of sex,
is based upon the fundamental interest he takes in the constitution of
the next generation. This overwhelming interest that he takes verifies
two truths which have been already demonstrated.

First: Man's immortality, which is perpetuated in the future race. For
this interest of so active and zealous a nature, which is neither the
result of reflection nor intention, springs from the innermost
characteristics and tendencies of our being, could not exist so
continuously or exercise such great power over man if the latter were
really transitory and if a race really and totally different to himself
succeeded him merely in point of time.

Second: That his real nature is more closely allied to the species than
to the individual. For this interest that he takes in the special nature
of the species, which is the source of all love, from the most fleeting
emotion to the most serious passion, is in reality the most important
affair in each man's life, the successful or unsuccessful issue of which
touches him more nearly than anything else. This is why it has been
pre-eminently called the "affair of the heart." Everything that merely
concerns one's own person is set aside and sacrificed, if the case
require it, to this interest when it is of a strong and decided nature.
Therefore in this way man proves that he is more interested in the
species than in the individual, and that he lives more directly in the
interest of the species than in that of the individual.

Why, then, is a lover so absolutely devoted to every look and turn of
his beloved, and ready to make any kind of sacrifice for her? Because
the _immortal_ part of him is yearning for her; it is only the _mortal_
part of him that longs for everything else. That keen and even intense
longing for a particular woman is accordingly a direct pledge of the
immortality of the essence of our being and of its perpetuity in the
species.

To regard this perpetuity as something unimportant and insufficient is
an error, arising from the fact that in thinking of the continuity of
the species we only think of the future existence of beings similar to
ourselves, but in no respect, however, identical with us; and again,
starting from knowledge directed towards without, we only grasp the
outer form of the species as it presents itself to us, and do not take
into consideration its inner nature. It is precisely this inner nature
that lies at the foundation of our own consciousness as its kernel, and
therefore is more direct than our consciousness itself, and as
thing-in-itself exempt from the _principium individuationis_--is in
reality identical and the same in all individuals, whether they exist at
the same or at different times.

This, then, is the will to live--that is to say, it is exactly _that
which_ so intensely desires both life and continuance, and which
accordingly remains unharmed and unaffected by death. Further, its
present state cannot be improved, and while there is life it is certain
of the unceasing sufferings and death of the individual. The _denial_ of
the will to live is reserved to free it from this, as the means by which
the individual will breaks away from the stem of the species, and
surrenders that existence in it.

We are wanting both in ideas and all data as to what it is after that.
We can only indicate it as something which is free to be will to live or
not to live. Buddhism distinguishes the latter case by the word
_Nirvana_. It is the point which as such remains for ever impenetrable
to all human knowledge.

Looking at the turmoil of life from this standpoint we find all occupied
with its want and misery, exerting all their strength in order to
satisfy its endless needs and avert manifold suffering, without,
however, daring to expect anything else in return than merely the
preservation of this tormented individual existence for a short span of
time. And yet, amid all this turmoil we see a pair of lovers exchanging
longing glances--yet why so secretly, timidly, and stealthily? Because
these lovers are traitors secretly striving to perpetuate all this
misery and turmoil that otherwise would come to a timely end.

FOOTNOTES:

[17] Ch. xxvi. 23.

[18] _De vita longa_ i. 5.




PHYSIOGNOMY.


That the outside reflects the inner man, and that the face expresses his
whole character, is an obvious supposition and accordingly a safe one,
demonstrated as it is in the desire people have _to see_ on all
occasions a man who has distinguished himself by something good or evil,
or produced some exceptional work; or if this is denied them, at any
rate to hear from others _what he looks like_. This is why, on the one
hand, they go to places where they conjecture he is to be found; and on
the other, why the press, and especially the English press, tries to
describe him in a minute and striking way; he is soon brought visibly
before us either by a painter or an engraver; and finally, photography,
on that account so highly prized, meets this necessity in a most perfect
way.

It is also proved in everyday life that each one inspects the
physiognomy of those he comes in contact with, and first of all secretly
tries to discover their moral and intellectual character from their
features. This could not be the case if, as some foolish people state,
the outward appearance of a man is of no importance; nay, if the soul is
one thing and the body another, and the latter related to the soul as
the coat is to the man himself.

Rather is every human face a hieroglyph, which, to be sure, admits of
being deciphered--nay, the whole alphabet of which we carry about with
us. Indeed, the face of a man, as a rule, bespeaks more interesting
matter than his tongue, for it is the compendium of all which he will
ever say, as it is the register of all his thoughts and aspirations.
Moreover, the tongue only speaks the thoughts of one man, while the face
expresses a thought of nature. Therefore it is worth while to observe
everybody attentively; even if they are not worth talking to. Every
individual is worthy of observation as a single thought of nature; so is
beauty in the highest degree, for it is a higher and more general
conception of nature: it is her thought of a species. This is why we are
so captivated by beauty. It is a fundamental and principal thought of
Nature; whereas the individual is only a secondary thought, a corollary.

In secret, everybody goes upon the principle that a man _is_ what he
_looks_; but the difficulty lies in its application. The ability to
apply it is partly innate and partly acquired by experience; but no one
understands it thoroughly, for even the most experienced may make a
mistake. Still, it is not the face that deceives, whatever Figaro may
say, but it is we who are deceived in reading what is not there. The
deciphering of the face is certainly a great and difficult art. Its
principles can never be learnt _in abstracto_. Its first condition is
that the man must be looked at from a _purely objective_ point of view;
which is not so easy to do. As soon as, for instance, there is the
slightest sign of dislike, or affection, or fear, or hope, or even the
thought of the impression which we ourselves are making on him--in
short, as soon as anything of a subjective nature is present, the
hieroglyphics become confused and falsified. The sound of a language is
only heard by one who does not understand it, because in thinking of the
significance one is not conscious of the sign itself; and similarly the
physiognomy of a man is only seen by one to whom it is still
strange--that is to say, by one who has not become accustomed to his
face through seeing him often or talking to him. Accordingly it is,
strictly speaking, the first glance that gives one a purely objective
impression of a face, and makes it possible for one to decipher it. A
smell only affects us when we first perceive it, and it is the first
glass of wine which gives us its real taste; in the same way, it is only
when we see a face for the first time that it makes a full impression
upon us. Therefore one should carefully attend to the first impression;
one should make a note of it, nay, write it down if the man is of
personal importance--that is, if one can trust one's own sense of
physiognomy. Subsequent acquaintance and intercourse will erase that
impression, but it will be verified one day in the future.

_En passant_, let us not conceal from ourselves the fact that this first
impression is as a rule extremely disagreeable: but how little there is
in the majority of faces! With the exception of those that are
beautiful, good-natured, and intellectual--that is, the very few and
exceptional,--I believe a new face for the most part gives a sensitive
person a sensation akin to a shock, since the disagreeable impression is
presented in a new and surprising combination.

As a rule it is indeed _a sorry sight_. There are individuals whose
faces are stamped with such naïve vulgarity and lowness of character,
such an animal limitation of intelligence, that one wonders how they
care to go out with such a face and do not prefer to wear a mask. Nay,
there are faces a mere glance at which makes one feel contaminated. One
cannot therefore blame people, who are in a position to do so, if they
seek solitude and escape the painful sensation of "_seeing new faces_."
The _metaphysical_ explanation of this rests on the consideration that
the individuality of each person is exactly that by which he should be
reclaimed and corrected.

If any one, on the other hand, will be content with a _psychological_
explanation, let him ask himself what kind of physiognomy can be
expected in those whose minds, their whole life long, have scarcely ever
entertained anything but petty, mean, and miserable thoughts, and
vulgar, selfish, jealous, wicked, and spiteful desires. Each one of
these thoughts and desires has left its impress on the face for the
length of time it existed; all these marks, by frequent repetition, have
eventually become furrows and blemishes, if one may say so. Therefore
the appearance of the majority of people is calculated to give one a
shock at first sight, and it is only by degrees that one becomes
accustomed to a face--that is to say, becomes so indifferent to the
impression as to be no longer affected by it.

But that the predominating facial expression is formed by countless
fleeting and characteristic contortions is also the reason why the faces
of intellectual men only become moulded gradually, and indeed only
attain their sublime expression in old age; whilst portraits of them in
their youth only show the first traces of it. But, on the other hand,
what has just been said about the shock one receives at first sight
coincides with the above remark, that it is only at first sight that a
face makes its true and full impression. In order to get a purely
objective and true impression of it, we must stand in no kind of
relation to the person, nay, if possible, we must not even have spoken
to him. Conversation makes one in some measure friendly disposed, and
brings us into a certain _rapport_, a reciprocal _subjective_ relation,
which immediately interferes with our taking an objective view. As
everybody strives to win either respect or friendship for himself, a man
who is being observed will immediately resort to every art of
dissembling, and corrupt us with his airs, hypocrisies, and flatteries;
so that in a short time we no longer see what the first impression had
clearly shown us. It is said that "most people gain on further
acquaintance" but what ought to be said is that "they delude us" on
further acquaintance. But when these bad traits have an opportunity of
showing themselves later on, our first impression generally receives its
justification. Sometimes a further acquaintance is a hostile one, in
which case it will not be found that people gain by it. Another reason
for the apparent advantage of a further acquaintance is, that the man
whose first appearance repels us, as soon as we converse with him no
longer shows his true being and character, but his education as
well--that is to say, not only what he really is by nature, but what he
has appropriated from the common wealth of mankind; three-fourths of
what he says does not belong to him, but has been acquired from without;
so that we are often surprised to hear such a minotaur speak so humanly.
And on a still further acquaintance, the brutality of which his face
gave promise, will reveal itself in all its glory. Therefore a man who
is gifted with a keen sense of physiognomy should pay careful attention
to those verdicts prior to a further acquaintance, and therefore
genuine. For the face of a man expresses exactly what he is, and if he
deceives us it is not his fault but ours. On the other hand, the words
of a man merely state what he thinks, more frequently only what he has
learnt, or it may be merely what he pretends to think. Moreover, when we
speak to him, nay, only hear others speak to him, our attention is taken
away from his real physiognomy; because it is the substance, that which
is given fundamentally, and we disregard it; and we only pay attention
to its pathognomy, its play of feature while speaking. This, however, is
so arranged that the good side is turned upwards.

When Socrates said to a youth who was introduced to him so that he might
test his capabilities, "Speak so that I may see you" (taking it for
granted that he did not simply mean "hearing" by "seeing"), he was right
in so far as it is only in speaking that the features and especially the
eyes of a man become animated, and his intellectual powers and
capabilities imprint their stamp on his features: we are then in a
position to estimate provisionally the degree and capacity of his
intelligence; which was precisely Socrates' aim in that case. But, on
the other hand, it is to be observed, firstly, that this rule does not
apply to the _moral_ qualities of a man, which lie deeper; and secondly,
that what is gained from an _objective_ point of view by the clearer
development of a man's countenance while he is speaking, is again from a
_subjective_ point of view lost, because of the personal relation into
which he immediately enters with us, occasioning a slight fascination,
does not leave us unprejudiced observers, as has already been explained.
Therefore, from this last standpoint it might be more correct to say:
"Do not speak in order that I may see you."

For to obtain a pure and fundamental grasp of a man's physiognomy one
must observe him when he is alone and left to himself. Any kind of
society and conversation with another throw a reflection upon him which
is not his own, mostly to his advantage; for he thereby is placed in a
condition of action and reaction which exalts him. But, on the contrary,
if he is alone and left to himself immersed in the depths of his own
thoughts and sensations, it is only then that he is absolutely and
wholly _himself_. And any one with a keen, penetrating eye for
physiognomy can grasp the general character of his whole being at a
glance. For on his face, regarded in and by itself, is indicated the
ground tone of all his thoughts and efforts, the _arrêt irrevocable_ of
his future, and of which he is only conscious when alone.

The science of physiognomy is one of the principal means of a knowledge
of mankind: arts of dissimulation do not come within the range of
physiognomy, but within that of mere pathognomy and mimicry. This is
precisely why I recommend the physiognomy of a man to be studied when he
is alone and left to his own thoughts, and before he has been conversed
with; partly because it is only then that his physiognomy can be seen
purely and simply, since in conversation pathognomy immediately steps
in, and he then resorts to the arts of dissimulation which he has
acquired; and partly because personal intercourse, even of the slightest
nature, makes us prejudiced, and in consequence impairs our judgment.

Concerning our physiognomy in general, it is still to be observed that
it is much easier to discover the intellectual capacities of a man than
his moral character. The intellectual capacities take a much more
outward direction. They are expressed not only in the face and play of
his features, but also in his walk, nay, in every movement, however
slight it may be. One could perhaps discriminate from behind between a
blockhead, a fool, and a man of genius. A clumsy awkwardness
characterises every movement of the blockhead; folly imprints its mark
on every gesture, and so do genius and a reflective nature. Hence the
outcome of La Bruyere's remark: _Il n'y a rien de si délié, de si
simple, et de si imperceptible où il n'y entrent des manières, qui nous
décèlent: un sot ni n'entre, ni ne sort, ni ne s'assied, ni ne se lève,
ni ne se tait, ni n'est sur ses jambes, comme un homme d'esprit_. This
accounts for, by the way, that instinct _stir et prompt_ which,
according to Helvetius, ordinary people have of recognising people of
genius and of running away from them. This is to be accounted for by the
fact that the larger and more developed the brain, and the thinner, in
relation to it, the spine and nerves, the greater not only is the
intelligence, but also at the same time the mobility and pliancy of all
the limbs; because they are controlled more immediately and decisively
by the brain; consequently everything depends more on a single thread,
every movement of which precisely expresses its purpose. The whole
matter is analogous to, nay dependent on, the fact that the higher an
animal stands in the scale of development, the easier can it be killed
by wounding it in a single place. Take, for instance, batrachia: they
are as heavy, clumsy, and slow in their movements as they are
unintelligent, and at the same time extremely tenacious of life. This is
explained by the fact that with a little brain they have a very thick
spine and nerves. But gait and movement of the arms are for the most
part functions of the brain; because the limbs receive their motion, and
even the slightest modification of it, from the brain through the medium
of the spinal nerves; and this is precisely why voluntary movements tire
us. This feeling of fatigue, like that of pain, has its seat in the
brain, and not as we suppose in the limbs, hence motion promotes sleep;
on the other hand, those motions that are not excited by the brain, that
is to say, the involuntary motions of organic life, of the heart and
lungs, go on without causing fatigue: and as thought as well as motion
is a function of the brain, the character of its activity is denoted in
both, according to the nature of the individual. Stupid people move like
lay figures, while every joint of intellectual people speaks for itself.
Intellectual qualities are much better discerned, however, in the face
than in gestures and movements, in the shape and size of the forehead,
in the contraction and movement of the features, and especially in the
eye; from the little, dull, sleepy-looking eye of the pig, through all
gradations, to the brilliant sparkling eye of the genius. The _look of
wisdom_, even of the best kind, is different from that of _genius_,
since it bears the stamp of serving the will; while that of the latter
is free from it. Therefore the anecdote which Squarzafichi relates in
his life of Petrarch, and has taken from Joseph Brivius, a contemporary,
is quite credible--namely, that when Petrarch was at the court of
Visconti, and among many men and titled people, Galeazzo Visconti asked
his son, who was still a boy in years and was afterwards the first Duke
of Milan, to pick out _the wisest man_ of those present. The boy looked
at every one for a while, when he seized Petrarch's hand and led him to
his father, to the great admiration of all present. For nature imprints
her stamp of dignity so distinctly on the distinguished among mankind
that a child can perceive it. Therefore I should advise my sagacious
countrymen, if they ever again wish to trumpet a commonplace person as a
genius for the period of thirty years, not to choose for that end such
an inn-keeper's physiognomy as was possessed by Hegel, upon whose face
nature had written in her clearest handwriting the familiar title,
_commonplace person_. But what applies to intellectual qualities does
not apply to the moral character of mankind; its physiognomy is much
more difficult to perceive, because, being of a metaphysical nature, it
lies much deeper, and although moral character is connected with the
constitution and with the organism, it is not so immediately connected,
however, with definite parts of its system as is intellect. Hence, while
each one makes a public show of his intelligence, with which he is in
general quite satisfied, and tries to display it at every opportunity,
the moral qualities are seldom brought to light, nay, most people
intentionally conceal them; and long practice makes them acquire great
mastery in hiding them.

Meanwhile, as has been explained above, wicked thoughts and worthless
endeavours gradually leave their traces on the face, and especially the
eyes. Therefore, judging by physiognomy, we can easily guarantee that a
man will never produce an immortal work; but not that he will never
commit a great crime.




ON SUICIDE.


As far as I can see, it is only the followers of monotheistic, that is
of Jewish, religions that regard suicide as a crime. This is the more
striking as there is no forbiddance of it, or even positive disapproval
of it, to be found either in the New Testament or the Old; so that
teachers of religion have to base their disapprobation of suicide on
their own philosophical grounds; these, however, are so bad that they
try to compensate for the weakness of their arguments by strongly
expressing their abhorrence of the act--that is to say, by abusing it.
We are told that suicide is an act of the greatest cowardice, that it is
only possible to a madman, and other absurdities of a similar nature; or
they make use of the perfectly senseless expression that it is
"_wrong_," while it is perfectly clear that no one has such indisputable
right over anything in the world as over his own person and life.
Suicide, as has been said, is computed a crime, rendering
inevitable--especially in vulgar, bigoted England--an ignominious
burial and the confiscation of the property; this is why the jury almost
always bring in the verdict of insanity. Let one's own moral feelings
decide the matter for one. Compare the impression made upon one by the
news that a friend has committed a crime, say a murder, an act of
cruelty or deception, or theft, with the news that he has died a
voluntary death. Whilst news of the first kind will incite intense
indignation, the greatest displeasure, and a desire for punishment or
revenge, news of the second will move us to sorrow and compassion;
moreover, we will frequently have a feeling of admiration for his
courage rather than one of moral disapproval, which accompanies a wicked
act. Who has not had acquaintances, friends, relatives, who have
voluntarily left this world? And are we to think of them with horror as
criminals? _Nego ac pernego_! I am rather of the opinion that the clergy
should be challenged to state their authority for stamping--from the
pulpit or in their writings--as a _crime_ an act which has been
committed by many people honoured and loved by us, and refusing an
honourable burial to those who have of their own free will left the
world. They cannot produce any kind of Biblical authority, nay, they
have no philosophical arguments that are at all valid; and it is
_reasons_ that we want; mere empty phrases or words of abuse we cannot
accept. If the criminal law forbids suicide, that is not a reason that
holds good in the church; moreover, it is extremely ridiculous, for what
punishment can frighten those who seek death? When a man is punished for
trying to commit suicide, it is his clumsy failure that is punished.

The ancients were also very far from looking at the matter in this
light. Pliny says: "_Vitam quidem non adeo expetendam censemus, ut
quoque modo trahenda sit. Quisquis es talis, aeque moriere, etiam cum
obscoenus vixeris, aut nefandus. Quapropter hoc primum quisque in
remediis animi sui habeat: ex omnibus bonis, quae homini tribuit natura,
nullum melius esse tempestiva morte: idque in ea optimum, quod illam
sibi quisque praestare poterit_." He also says: "_Ne Deum quidem posse
omnia. Namque nec sibi potest mortem consciscere, si velit, quod homini
dedit optimum in taniis vitae poenis_," etc.

In Massilia and on the island of Ceos a hemlock-potion was offered in
public by the magistrate to those who could give valid reasons for
quitting this life. And how many heroes and wise men of ancient times
have not ended their lives by a voluntary death! To be sure, Aristotle
says "Suicide is a wrong against the State, although not against the
person;" Stobæus, however, in his treatise on the Peripatetic ethics
uses this sentence: _φευκτον δε τον βιον γιγνεσθαι τοις μεν ἀγαθοις ἐν
ταις ἀγαν ἀτυχιαις τοις δε κακοις και ἐν ταις ἀγαν εὐτυχιαις. (Vitam
autem relinquendam esse bonis in nimiis quidem miseriis pravis vero in
nimium quoque secundis_) And similarly: Διο και γαμησειν, και
παιδοποιησεσθαι, και πολιτευσεσθαι, etc.; και καθολου την ἀρετην
ἀοκουντα και μενειν ἐν τῳ βιῳ, και παλιν, εἰ δεοι, ποτε δἰ ἀναγκας
ἀπαλλαγησεσθαι, ταφης προνοησαντα, etc. _(Ideoque et uxorem ducturum, et
liberos procreaturum, et ad civitatem accessurum,_ etc.; _atque omnino
virtutem colendo tum vitam servaturum, tum iterum, cogente necessitate,
relicturum,_ etc.) And we find that suicide was actually praised by the
Stoics as a noble and heroic act, this is corroborated by hundreds of
passages, and especially in the works of Seneca. Further, it is well
known that the Hindoos often look upon suicide as a religious act, as,
for instance, the self-sacrifice of widows, throwing oneself under the
wheels of the chariot of the god at Juggernaut, or giving oneself to the
crocodiles in the Ganges or casting oneself in the holy tanks in the
temples, and so on. It is the same on the stage--that mirror of life.
For instance, in the famous Chinese play, _L'Orphelin de la Chine_,[19]
almost all the noble characters end by suicide, without indicating
anywhere or it striking the spectator that they were committing a crime.
At bottom it is the same on our own stage; for instance, Palmira in
_Mahomet_, Mortimer in _Maria Stuart_, Othello, Countess Terzky. Is
Hamlet's monologue the meditation of a criminal? He merely states that
considering the nature of the world, death would be certainly
preferable, if we were sure that by it we should be annihilated. But
_there lies the rub_! But the reasons brought to bear against suicide by
the priests of monotheistic, that is of Jewish religions, and by those
philosophers who adapt themselves to it, are weak sophisms easily
contradicted.[20] Hume has furnished the most thorough refutation of
them in his _Essay on Suicide_, which did not appear until after his
death, and was immediately suppressed by the shameful bigotry and gross
ecclesiastical tyranny existing in England. Hence, only a very few
copies of it were sold secretly, and those at a dear price; and for this
and another treatise of that great man we are indebted to a reprint
published at Basle. That a purely philosophical treatise originating
from one of the greatest thinkers and writers of England, which refuted
with cold reason the current arguments against suicide, must steal about
in that country as if it were a fraudulent piece of work until it found
protection in a foreign country, is a great disgrace to the English
nation. At the same time it shows what a good conscience the Church has
on a question of this kind. The only valid moral reason against suicide
has been explained in my chief work. It is this: that suicide prevents
the attainment of the highest moral aim, since it substitutes a real
release from this world of misery for one that is merely apparent. But
there is a very great difference between a mistake and a crime, and it
is as a crime that the Christian clergy wish to stamp it. Christianity's
inmost truth is that suffering (the Cross) is the real purpose of life;
hence it condemns suicide as thwarting this end, while the ancients,
from a lower point of view, approved of it, nay, honoured it. This
argument against suicide is nevertheless ascetic, and only holds good
from a much higher ethical standpoint than has ever been taken by moral
philosophers in Europe. But if we come down from that very high
standpoint, there is no longer a valid moral reason for condemning
suicide. The extraordinarily active zeal with which the clergy of
monotheistic religions attack suicide is not supported either by the
Bible or by any valid reasons; so it looks as if their zeal must be
instigated by some secret motive. May it not be that the voluntary
sacrificing of one's life is a poor compliment to him who said, παντα
καλα λιαν?[21]

In that case it would be another example of the gross optimism of these
religions denouncing suicide, in order to avoid being denounced by it.

       *       *       *       *       *

As a rule, it will be found that as soon as the terrors of life outweigh
the terrors of death a man will put an end to his life. The resistance
of the terrors of death is, however, considerable; they stand like a
sentinel at the gate that leads out of life. Perhaps there is no one
living who would not have already put an end to his life if this end had
been something that was purely negative, a sudden cessation of
existence. But there is something positive about it, namely, the
destruction of the body. And this alarms a man simply because his body
is the manifestation of the will to live.

Meanwhile, the fight as a rule with these sentinels is not so hard as it
may appear to be from a distance; in consequence, it is true, of the
antagonism between mental and physical suffering. For instance, if we
suffer very great bodily pain, or if the pain lasts a long time, we
become indifferent to all other troubles: our recovery is what we desire
most dearly. In the same way, great mental suffering makes us insensible
to bodily suffering: we despise it. Nay, if it outweighs the other, we
find it a beneficial distraction, a pause in our mental suffering. And
so it is that suicide becomes easy; for the bodily pain that is bound up
with it loses all importance in the eyes of one who is tormented by
excessive mental suffering. This is particularly obvious in the case of
those who are driven to commit suicide through some purely morbid and
discordant feeling. They have no feelings to overcome; they do not need
to rush at it, but as soon as the keeper who looks after them leaves
them for two minutes they quickly put an end to their life.

       *       *       *       *       *

When in some horrid and frightful dream we reach the highest pitch of
terror, it awakens us, scattering all the monsters of the night. The
same thing happens in the dream of life, when the greatest degree of
terror compels us to break it off.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suicide may also be looked upon as an experiment, as a question which
man puts to Nature and compels her to answer. It asks, what change a
man's existence and knowledge of things experience through death? It is
an awkward experiment to make; for it destroys the very consciousness
that awaits the answer.

FOOTNOTES:

[19] Translated by St. Julien, 1834.

[20] See my treatise on the _Foundation of Morals_, § 5.

[21] Bd. I. p. 69.





End of Project Gutenberg's Essays of Schopenhauer, by Arthur Schopenhauer


================================================================================
[The World as Will and Idea Vol.2 (의지와 표상으로서의 세계 2)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The World as Will and Idea (Vol. 1 of 3)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The World as Will and Idea (Vol. 1 of 3)

Author: Arthur Schopenhauer

Translator: Viscount R. B. Haldane Haldane
        J. Kemp


        
Release date: December 27, 2011 [eBook #38427]
                Most recently updated: September 24, 2022

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/38427


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORLD AS WILL AND IDEA (VOL. 1 OF 3) ***





                        The World As Will And Idea

                                    By

                           Arthur Schopenhauer

                      Translated From The German By

                           R. B. Haldane, M.A.

                                   And

                              J. Kemp, M.A.

                                 Vol. I.

                          Containing Four Books.

            “Ob nicht Natur zuletzt sich doch ergünde?”—GOETHE

                             Seventh Edition

                                  London

                    Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co.

                                   1909





CONTENTS


Translators’ Preface.
Preface To The First Edition.
Preface To The Second Edition.
First Book. The World As Idea.
   First Aspect. The Idea Subordinated To The Principle Of Sufficient
   Reason: The Object Of Experience And Science.
Second Book. The World As Will.
   First Aspect. The Objectification Of The Will.
Third Book. The World As Idea.
   Second Aspect. The Idea Independent Of The Principle Of Sufficient
   Reason: The Platonic Idea: The Object Of Art.
Fourth Book. The World As Will.
   Second Aspect. The Assertion And Denial Of The Will To Live, When
   Self-Consciousness Has Been Attained.
Footnotes






TRANSLATORS’ PREFACE.


The style of “Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung” is sometimes loose and
involved, as is so often the case in German philosophical treatises. The
translation of the book has consequently been a matter of no little
difficulty. It was found that extensive alteration of the long and
occasionally involved sentences, however likely to prove conducive to a
satisfactory English style, tended not only to obliterate the form of the
original but even to imperil the meaning. Where a choice has had to be
made, the alternative of a somewhat slavish adherence to Schopenhauer’s
_ipsissima verba_ has accordingly been preferred to that of inaccuracy.
The result is a piece of work which leaves much to be desired, but which
has yet consistently sought to reproduce faithfully the spirit as well as
the letter of the original.

As regards the rendering of the technical terms about which there has been
so much controversy, the equivalents used have only been adopted after
careful consideration of their meaning in the theory of knowledge. For
example, “Vorstellung” has been rendered by “idea,” in preference to
“representation,” which is neither accurate, intelligible, nor elegant.
“Idee,” is translated by the same word, but spelled with a
capital,—“Idea.” Again, “Anschauung” has been rendered according to the
context, either by “perception” simply, or by “intuition or perception.”

Notwithstanding statements to the contrary in the text, the book is
probably quite intelligible in itself, apart from the treatise “On the
Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason.” It has, however,
been considered desirable to add an abstract of the latter work in an
appendix to the third volume of this translation.

R. B. H.

J. K.





PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.


I propose to point out here how this book must be read in order to be
thoroughly understood. By means of it I only intend to impart a single
thought. Yet, notwithstanding all my endeavours, I could find no shorter
way of imparting it than this whole book. I hold this thought to be that
which has very long been sought for under the name of philosophy, and the
discovery of which is therefore regarded by those who are familiar with
history as quite as impossible as the discovery of the philosopher’s
stone, although it was already said by Pliny: _Quam multa fieri non posse,
priusquam sint facta, judicantur?_ (Hist. nat. 7, 1.)

According as we consider the different aspects of this one thought which I
am about to impart, it exhibits itself as that which we call metaphysics,
that which we call ethics, and that which we call æsthetics; and certainly
it must be all this if it is what I have already acknowledged I take it to
be.

A _system of thought_ must always have an architectonic connection or
coherence, that is, a connection in which one part always supports the
other, though the latter does not support the former, in which ultimately
the foundation supports all the rest without being supported by it, and
the apex is supported without supporting. On the other hand, a _single
thought_, however comprehensive it may be, must preserve the most perfect
unity. If it admits of being broken up into parts to facilitate its
communication, the connection of these parts must yet be organic, _i.e._,
it must be a connection in which every part supports the whole just as
much as it is supported by it, a connection in which there is no first and
no last, in which the whole thought gains distinctness through every part,
and even the smallest part cannot be completely understood unless the
whole has already been grasped. A book, however, must always have a first
and a last line, and in this respect will always remain very unlike an
organism, however like one its content may be: thus form and matter are
here in contradiction.

It is self-evident that under these circumstances no other advice can be
given as to how one may enter into the thought explained in this work than
_to read the book twice_, and the first time with great patience, a
patience which is only to be derived from the belief, voluntarily
accorded, that the beginning presupposes the end almost as much as the end
presupposes the beginning, and that all the earlier parts presuppose the
later almost as much as the later presuppose the earlier. I say “almost;”
for this is by no means absolutely the case, and I have honestly and
conscientiously done all that was possible to give priority to that which
stands least in need of explanation from what follows, as indeed generally
to everything that can help to make the thought as easy to comprehend and
as distinct as possible. This might indeed to a certain extent be achieved
if it were not that the reader, as is very natural, thinks, as he reads,
not merely of what is actually said, but also of its possible
consequences, and thus besides the many contradictions actually given of
the opinions of the time, and presumably of the reader, there may be added
as many more which are anticipated and imaginary. That, then, which is
really only misunderstanding, must take the form of active disapproval,
and it is all the more difficult to recognise that it is misunderstanding,
because although the laboriously-attained clearness of the explanation and
distinctness of the expression never leaves the immediate sense of what is
said doubtful, it cannot at the same time express its relations to all
that remains to be said. Therefore, as we have said, the first perusal
demands patience, founded on confidence that on a second perusal much, or
all, will appear in an entirely different light. Further, the earnest
endeavour to be more completely and even more easily comprehended in the
case of a very difficult subject, must justify occasional repetition.
Indeed the structure of the whole, which is organic, not a mere chain,
makes it necessary sometimes to touch on the same point twice. Moreover
this construction, and the very close connection of all the parts, has not
left open to me the division into chapters and paragraphs which I should
otherwise have regarded as very important, but has obliged me to rest
satisfied with four principal divisions, as it were four aspects of one
thought. In each of these four books it is especially important to guard
against losing sight, in the details which must necessarily be discussed,
of the principal thought to which they belong, and the progress of the
whole exposition. I have thus expressed the first, and like those which
follow, unavoidable demand upon the reader, who holds the philosopher in
small favour just because he himself is a philosopher.

The second demand is this, that the introduction be read before the book
itself, although it is not contained in the book, but appeared five years
earlier under the title, “_Ueber die vierfache Wurzel des Satzes vom
zureichenden Grunde: eine philosophische Abhandlung_” (On the fourfold
root of the principle of sufficient reason: a philosophical essay).
Without an acquaintance with this introduction and propadeutic it is
absolutely impossible to understand the present work properly, and the
content of that essay will always be presupposed in this work just as if
it were given with it. Besides, even if it had not preceded this book by
several years, it would not properly have been placed before it as an
introduction, but would have been incorporated in the first book. As it
is, the first book does not contain what was said in the earlier essay,
and it therefore exhibits a certain incompleteness on account of these
deficiencies, which must always be supplied by reference to it. However,
my disinclination was so great either to quote myself or laboriously to
state again in other words what I had already said once in an adequate
manner, that I preferred this course, notwithstanding the fact that I
might now be able to give the content of that essay a somewhat better
expression, chiefly by freeing it from several conceptions which resulted
from the excessive influence which the Kantian philosophy had over me at
the time, such as—categories, outer and inner sense, and the like. But
even there these conceptions only occur because as yet I had never really
entered deeply into them, therefore only by the way and quite out of
connection with the principal matter. The correction of such passages in
that essay will consequently take place of its own accord in the mind of
the reader through his acquaintance with the present work. But only if we
have fully recognised by means of that essay what the principle of
sufficient reason is and signifies, what its validity extends to, and what
it does not extend to, and that that principle is not before all things,
and the whole world merely in consequence of it, and in conformity to it,
a corollary, as it were, of it; but rather that it is merely the form in
which the object, of whatever kind it may be, which is always conditioned
by the subject, is invariably known so far as the subject is a knowing
individual: only then will it be possible to enter into the method of
philosophy which is here attempted for the first time, and which is
completely different from all previous methods.

But the same disinclination to repeat myself word for word, or to say the
same thing a second time in other and worse words, after I have deprived
myself of the better, has occasioned another defect in the first book of
this work. For I have omitted all that is said in the first chapter of my
essay “On Sight and Colour,” which would otherwise have found its place
here, word for word. Therefore the knowledge of this short, earlier work
is also presupposed.

Finally, the third demand I have to make on the reader might indeed be
tacitly assumed, for it is nothing but an acquaintance with the most
important phenomenon that has appeared in philosophy for two thousand
years, and that lies so near us: I mean the principal writings of Kant. It
seems to me, in fact, as indeed has already been said by others, that the
effect these writings produce in the mind to which they truly speak is
very like that of the operation for cataract on a blind man: and if we
wish to pursue the simile further, the aim of my own work may be described
by saying that I have sought to put into the hands of those upon whom that
operation has been successfully performed a pair of spectacles suitable to
eyes that have recovered their sight—spectacles of whose use that
operation is the absolutely necessary condition. Starting then, as I do to
a large extent, from what has been accomplished by the great Kant, I have
yet been enabled, just on account of my earnest study of his writings, to
discover important errors in them. These I have been obliged to separate
from the rest and prove to be false, in order that I might be able to
presuppose and apply what is true and excellent in his doctrine, pure and
freed from error. But not to interrupt and complicate my own exposition by
a constant polemic against Kant, I have relegated this to a special
appendix. It follows then, from what has been said, that my work
presupposes a knowledge of this appendix just as much as it presupposes a
knowledge of the philosophy of Kant; and in this respect it would
therefore be advisable to read the appendix first, all the more as its
content is specially related to the first book of the present work. On the
other hand, it could not be avoided, from the nature of the case, that
here and there the appendix also should refer to the text of the work; and
the only result of this is, that the appendix, as well as the principal
part of the work, must be read twice.

The philosophy of Kant, then, is the only philosophy with which a thorough
acquaintance is directly presupposed in what we have to say here. But if,
besides this, the reader has lingered in the school of the divine Plato,
he will be so much the better prepared to hear me, and susceptible to what
I say. And if, indeed, in addition to this he is a partaker of the benefit
conferred by the Vedas, the access to which, opened to us through the
Upanishads, is in my eyes the greatest advantage which this still young
century enjoys over previous ones, because I believe that the influence of
the Sanscrit literature will penetrate not less deeply than did the
revival of Greek literature in the fifteenth century: if, I say, the
reader has also already received and assimilated the sacred, primitive
Indian wisdom, then is he best of all prepared to hear what I have to say
to him. My work will not speak to him, as to many others, in a strange and
even hostile tongue; for, if it does not sound too vain, I might express
the opinion that each one of the individual and disconnected aphorisms
which make up the Upanishads may be deduced as a consequence from the
thought I am going to impart, though the converse, that my thought is to
be found in the Upanishads, is by no means the case.

But most readers have already grown angry with impatience, and burst into
reproaches with difficulty kept back so long. How can I venture to present
a book to the public under conditions and demands the first two of which
are presumptuous and altogether immodest, and this at a time when there is
such a general wealth of special ideas, that in Germany alone they are
made common property through the press, in three thousand valuable,
original, and absolutely indispensable works every year, besides
innumerable periodicals, and even daily papers; at a time when especially
there is not the least deficiency of entirely original and profound
philosophers, but in Germany alone there are more of them alive at the
same time, than several centuries could formerly boast of in succession to
each other? How is one ever to come to the end, asks the indignant reader,
if one must set to work upon a book in such a fashion?

As I have absolutely nothing to advance against these reproaches, I only
hope for some small thanks from such readers for having warned them in
time, so that they may not lose an hour over a book which it would be
useless to read without complying with the demands that have been made,
and which should therefore be left alone, particularly as apart from this
we might wager a great deal that it can say nothing to them, but rather
that it will always be only _pancorum hominum_, and must therefore quietly
and modestly wait for the few whose unusual mode of thought may find it
enjoyable. For apart from the difficulties and the effort which it
requires from the reader, what cultured man of this age, whose knowledge
has almost reached the august point at which the paradoxical and the false
are all one to it, could bear to meet thoughts almost on every page that
directly contradict that which he has yet himself established once for all
as true and undeniable? And then, how disagreeably disappointed will many
a one be if he finds no mention here of what he believes it is precisely
here he ought to look for, because his method of speculation agrees with
that of a great living philosopher,(1) who has certainly written pathetic
books, and who only has the trifling weakness that he takes all he learned
and approved before his fifteenth year for inborn ideas of the human mind.
Who could stand all this? Therefore my advice is simply to lay down the
book.

But I fear I shall not escape even thus. The reader who has got as far as
the preface and been stopped by it, has bought the book for cash, and asks
how he is to be indemnified. My last refuge is now to remind him that he
knows how to make use of a book in several ways, without exactly reading
it. It may fill a gap in his library as well as many another, where,
neatly bound, it will certainly look well. Or he can lay it on the
toilet-table or the tea-table of some learned lady friend. Or, finally,
what certainly is best of all, and I specially advise it, he can review
it.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

And now that I have allowed myself the jest to which in this two-sided
life hardly any page can be too serious to grant a place, I part with the
book with deep seriousness, in the sure hope that sooner or later it will
reach those to whom alone it can be addressed; and for the rest, patiently
resigned that the same fate should, in full measure, befall it, that in
all ages has, to some extent, befallen all knowledge, and especially the
weightiest knowledge of the truth, to which only a brief triumph is
allotted between the two long periods in which it is condemned as
paradoxical or disparaged as trivial. The former fate is also wont to
befall its author. But life is short, and truth works far and lives long:
let us speak the truth.

_Written at Dresden in August 1818._





PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.


Not to my contemporaries, not to my compatriots—to mankind I commit my now
completed work in the confidence that it will not be without value for
them, even if this should be late recognised, as is commonly the lot of
what is good. For it cannot have been for the passing generation,
engrossed with the delusion of the moment, that my mind, almost against my
will, has uninterruptedly stuck to its work through the course of a long
life. And while the lapse of time has not been able to make me doubt the
worth of my work, neither has the lack of sympathy; for I constantly saw
the false and the bad, and finally the absurd and senseless,(2) stand in
universal admiration and honour, and I bethought myself that if it were
not the case those who are capable of recognising the genuine and right
are so rare that we may look for them in vain for some twenty years, then
those who are capable of producing it could not be so few that their works
afterwards form an exception to the perishableness of earthly things; and
thus would be lost the reviving prospect of posterity which every one who
sets before himself a high aim requires to strengthen him.

Whoever seriously takes up and pursues an object that does not lead to
material advantages, must not count on the sympathy of his contemporaries.
For the most part he will see, however, that in the meantime the
superficial aspect of that object becomes current in the world, and enjoys
its day; and this is as it should be. The object itself must be pursued
for its own sake, otherwise it cannot be attained; for any design or
intention is always dangerous to insight. Accordingly, as the whole
history of literature proves, everything of real value required a long
time to gain acceptance, especially if it belonged to the class of
instructive, not entertaining, works; and meanwhile the false flourished.
For to combine the object with its superficial appearance is difficult,
when it is not impossible. Indeed that is just the curse of this world of
want and need, that everything must serve and slave for these; and
therefore it is not so constituted that any noble and sublime effort, like
the endeavour after light and truth, can prosper unhindered and exist for
its own sake. But even if such an endeavour has once succeeded in
asserting itself, and the conception of it has thus been introduced,
material interests and personal aims will immediately take possession of
it, in order to make it their tool or their mask. Accordingly, when Kant
brought philosophy again into repute, it had soon to become the tool of
political aims from above, and personal aims from below; although,
strictly speaking, not philosophy itself, but its ghost, that passes for
it. This should not really astonish us; for the incredibly large majority
of men are by nature quite incapable of any but material aims, indeed they
can conceive no others. Thus the pursuit of truth alone is far too lofty
and eccentric an endeavour for us to expect all or many, or indeed even a
few, faithfully to take part in. If yet we see, as for example at present
in Germany, a remarkable activity, a general moving, writing, and talking
with reference to philosophical subjects, we may confidently assume that,
in spite of solemn looks and assurances, only real, not ideal aims, are
the actual _primum mobile_, the concealed motive of such a movement; that
it is personal, official, ecclesiastical, political, in short, material
ends that are really kept in view, and consequently that mere party ends
set the pens of so many pretended philosophers in such rapid motion. Thus
some design or intention, not the desire of insight, is the guiding star
of these disturbers of the peace, and truth is certainly the last thing
that is thought of in the matter. It finds no partisans; rather, it may
pursue its way as silently and unheeded through such a philosophical riot
as through the winter night of the darkest century bound in the rigid
faith of the church, when it was communicated only to a few alchemists as
esoteric learning, or entrusted it may be only to the parchment. Indeed I
might say that no time can be more unfavourable to philosophy than that in
which it is shamefully misused, on the one hand to further political
objects, on the other as a means of livelihood. Or is it believed that
somehow, with such effort and such a turmoil, the truth, at which it by no
means aims, will also be brought to light? Truth is no prostitute, that
throws herself away upon those who do not desire her; she is rather so coy
a beauty that he who sacrifices everything to her cannot even then be sure
of her favour.

If Governments make philosophy a means of furthering political ends,
learned men see in philosophical professorships a trade that nourishes the
outer man just like any other; therefore they crowd after them in the
assurance of their good intentions, that is, the purpose of subserving
these ends. And they keep their word: not truth, not clearness, not Plato,
not Aristotle, but the ends they were appointed to serve are their guiding
star, and become at once the criterion of what is true, valuable, and to
be respected, and of the opposites of these. Whatever, therefore, does not
answer these ends, even if it were the most important and extraordinary
things in their department, is either condemned, or, when this seems
hazardous, suppressed by being unanimously ignored. Look only at their
zeal against pantheism; will any simpleton believe that it proceeds from
conviction? And, in general, how is it possible that philosophy, degraded
to the position of a means of making one’s bread, can fail to degenerate
into sophistry? Just because this is infallibly the case, and the rule, “I
sing the song of him whose bread I eat,” has always held good, the making
of money by philosophy was regarded by the ancients as the characteristic
of the sophists. But we have still to add this, that since throughout this
world nothing is to be expected, can be demanded, or is to be had for gold
but mediocrity, we must be contented with it here also. Consequently we
see in all the German universities the cherished mediocrity striving to
produce the philosophy which as yet is not there to produce, at its own
expense and indeed in accordance with a predetermined standard and aim, a
spectacle at which it would be almost cruel to mock.

While thus philosophy has long been obliged to serve entirely as a means
to public ends on the one side and private ends on the other, I have
pursued the course of my thought, undisturbed by them, for more than
thirty years, and simply because I was obliged to do so and could not help
myself, from an instinctive impulse, which was, however, supported by the
confidence that anything true one may have thought, and anything obscure
one may have thrown light upon, will appeal to any thinking mind, no
matter when it comprehends it, and will rejoice and comfort it. To such an
one we speak as those who are like us have spoken to us, and have so
become our comfort in the wilderness of this life. Meanwhile the object is
pursued on its own account and for its own sake. Now it happens curiously
enough with philosophical meditations, that precisely that which one has
thought out and investigated for oneself, is afterwards of benefit to
others; not that, however, which was originally intended for others. The
former is confessedly nearest in character to perfect honesty; for a man
does not seek to deceive himself, nor does he offer himself empty husks;
so that all sophistication and all mere talk is omitted, and consequently
every sentence that is written at once repays the trouble of reading it.
Thus my writings bear the stamp of honesty and openness so distinctly on
the face of them, that by this alone they are a glaring contrast to those
of three celebrated sophists of the post-Kantian period. I am always to be
found at the standpoint of _reflection_, _i.e._, rational deliberation and
honest statement, never at that of _inspiration_, called intellectual
intuition, or absolute thought; though, if it received its proper name, it
would be called empty bombast and charlatanism. Working then in this
spirit, and always seeing the false and bad in universal acceptance, yea,
bombast(3) and charlatanism(4) in the highest honour, I have long
renounced the approbation of my contemporaries. It is impossible that an
age which for twenty years has applauded a Hegel, that intellectual
Caliban, as the greatest of the philosophers, so loudly that it echoes
through the whole of Europe, could make him who has looked on at that
desirous of its approbation. It has no more crowns of honour to bestow;
its applause is prostituted, and its censure has no significance. That I
mean what I say is attested by the fact that if I had in any way sought
the approbation of my contemporaries, I would have had to strike out a
score of passages which entirely contradict all their opinions, and indeed
must in part be offensive to them. But I would count it a crime to
sacrifice a single syllable to that approbation. My guiding star has, in
all seriousness, been truth. Following it, I could first aspire only to my
own approbation, entirely averted from an age deeply degraded as regards
all higher intellectual efforts, and a national literature demoralised
even to the exceptions, a literature in which the art of combining lofty
words with paltry significance has reached its height. I can certainly
never escape from the errors and weaknesses which, in my case as in every
one else’s, necessarily belong to my nature; but I will not increase them
by unworthy accommodations.

As regards this second edition, first of all I am glad to say that after
five and twenty years I find nothing to retract; so that my fundamental
convictions have only been confirmed, as far as concerns myself at least.
The alterations in the first volume therefore, which contains the whole
text of the first edition, nowhere touch what is essential. Sometimes they
concern things of merely secondary importance, and more often consist of
very short explanatory additions inserted here and there. Only the
criticism of the Kantian philosophy has received important corrections and
large additions, for these could not be put into a supplementary book,
such as those which are given in the second volume, and which correspond
to each of the four books that contain the exposition of my own doctrine.
In the case of the latter, I have chosen this form of enlarging and
improving them, because the five and twenty years that have passed since
they were composed have produced so marked a change in my method of
exposition and in my style, that it would not have done to combine the
content of the second volume with that of the first, as both must have
suffered by the fusion. I therefore give both works separately, and in the
earlier exposition, even in many places where I would now express myself
quite differently, I have changed nothing, because I desired to guard
against spoiling the work of my earlier years through the carping
criticism of age. What in this regard might need correction will correct
itself in the mind of the reader with the help of the second volume. Both
volumes have, in the full sense of the word, a supplementary relation to
each other, so far as this rests on the fact that one age of human life
is, intellectually, the supplement of another. It will therefore be found,
not only that each volume contains what the other lacks, but that the
merits of the one consist peculiarly in that which is wanting in the
other. Thus, if the first half of my work surpasses the second in what can
only be supplied by the fire of youth and the energy of first conceptions,
the second will surpass the first by the ripeness and complete elaboration
of the thought which can only belong to the fruit of the labour of a long
life. For when I had the strength originally to grasp the fundamental
thought of my system, to follow it at once into its four branches, to
return from them to the unity of their origin, and then to explain the
whole distinctly, I could not yet be in a position to work out all the
branches of the system with the fulness, thoroughness, and elaborateness
which is only reached by the meditation of many years—meditation which is
required to test and illustrate the system by innumerable facts, to
support it by the most different kinds of proof, to throw light on it from
all sides, and then to place the different points of view boldly in
contrast, to separate thoroughly the multifarious materials, and present
them in a well-arranged whole. Therefore, although it would, no doubt,
have been more agreeable to the reader to have my whole work in one piece,
instead of consisting, as it now does, of two halves, which must be
combined in using them, he must reflect that this would have demanded that
I should accomplish at one period of life what it is only possible to
accomplish in two, for I would have had to possess the qualities at one
period of life that nature has divided between two quite different ones.
Hence the necessity of presenting my work in two halves supplementary to
each other may be compared to the necessity in consequence of which a
chromatic object-glass, which cannot be made out of one piece, is produced
by joining together a convex lens of flint glass and a concave lens of
crown glass, the combined effect of which is what was sought. Yet, on the
other hand, the reader will find some compensation for the inconvenience
of using two volumes at once, in the variety and the relief which is
afforded by the handling of the same subject, by the same mind, in the
same spirit, but in very different years. However, it is very advisable
that those who are not yet acquainted with my philosophy should first of
all read the first volume without using the supplementary books, and
should make use of these only on a second perusal; otherwise it would be
too difficult for them to grasp the system in its connection. For it is
only thus explained in the first volume, while the second is devoted to a
more detailed investigation and a complete development of the individual
doctrines. Even those who should not make up their minds to a second
reading of the first volume had better not read the second volume till
after the first, and then for itself, in the ordinary sequence of its
chapters, which, at any rate, stand in some kind of connection, though a
somewhat looser one, the gaps of which they will fully supply by the
recollection of the first volume, if they have thoroughly comprehended it.
Besides, they will find everywhere the reference to the corresponding
passages of the first volume, the paragraphs of which I have numbered in
the second edition for this purpose, though in the first edition they were
only divided by lines.

I have already explained in the preface to the first edition, that my
philosophy is founded on that of Kant, and therefore presupposes a
thorough knowledge of it. I repeat this here. For Kant’s teaching produces
in the mind of every one who has comprehended it a fundamental change
which is so great that it may be regarded as an intellectual new-birth. It
alone is able really to remove the inborn realism which proceeds from the
original character of the intellect, which neither Berkeley nor
Malebranche succeed in doing, for they remain too much in the universal,
while Kant goes into the particular, and indeed in a way that is quite
unexampled both before and after him, and which has quite a peculiar, and,
we might say, immediate effect upon the mind in consequence of which it
undergoes a complete undeception, and forthwith looks at all things in
another light. Only in this way can any one become susceptible to the more
positive expositions which I have to give. On the other hand, he who has
not mastered the Kantian philosophy, whatever else he may have studied,
is, as it were, in a state of innocence; that is to say, he remains in the
grasp of that natural and childish realism in which we are all born, and
which fits us for everything possible, with the single exception of
philosophy. Such a man then stands to the man who knows the Kantian
philosophy as a minor to a man of full age. That this truth should
nowadays sound paradoxical, which would not have been the case in the
first thirty years after the appearance of the Critique of Reason, is due
to the fact that a generation has grown up that does not know Kant
properly, because it has never heard more of him than a hasty, impatient
lecture, or an account at second-hand; and this again is due to the fact
that in consequence of bad guidance, this generation has wasted its time
with the philosophemes of vulgar, uncalled men, or even of bombastic
sophists, which are unwarrantably commended to it. Hence the confusion of
fundamental conceptions, and in general the unspeakable crudeness and
awkwardness that appears from under the covering of affectation and
pretentiousness in the philosophical attempts of the generation thus
brought up. But whoever thinks he can learn Kant’s philosophy from the
exposition of others makes a terrible mistake. Nay, rather I must
earnestly warn against such accounts, especially the more recent ones; and
indeed in the years just past I have met with expositions of the Kantian
philosophy in the writings of the Hegelians which actually reach the
incredible. How should the minds that in the freshness of youth have been
strained and ruined by the nonsense of Hegelism, be still capable of
following Kant’s profound investigations? They are early accustomed to
take the hollowest jingle of words for philosophical thoughts, the most
miserable sophisms for acuteness, and silly conceits for dialectic, and
their minds are disorganised through the admission of mad combinations of
words to which the mind torments and exhausts itself in vain to attach
some thought. No Critique of Reason can avail them, no philosophy, they
need a _medicina mentis_, first as a sort of purgative, _un petit cours de
senscommunologie_, and then one must further see whether, in their case,
there can even be any talk of philosophy. The Kantian doctrine then will
be sought for in vain anywhere else but in Kant’s own works; but these are
throughout instructive, even where he errs, even where he fails. In
consequence of his originality, it holds good of him in the highest
degree, as indeed of all true philosophers, that one can only come to know
them from their own works, not from the accounts of others. For the
thoughts of any extraordinary intellect cannot stand being filtered
through the vulgar mind. Born behind the broad, high, finely-arched brow,
from under which shine beaming eyes, they lose all power and life, and
appear no longer like themselves, when removed to the narrow lodging and
low roofing of the confined, contracted, thick-walled skull from which
dull glances steal directed to personal ends. Indeed we may say that minds
of this kind act like an uneven glass, in which everything is twisted and
distorted, loses the regularity of its beauty, and becomes a caricature.
Only from their authors themselves can we receive philosophical thoughts;
therefore whoever feels himself drawn to philosophy must himself seek out
its immortal teachers in the still sanctuary of their works. The principal
chapters of any one of these true philosophers will afford a thousand
times more insight into their doctrines than the heavy and distorted
accounts of them that everyday men produce, who are still for the most
part deeply entangled in the fashionable philosophy of the time, or in the
sentiments of their own minds. But it is astonishing how decidedly the
public seizes by preference on these expositions at second-hand. It seems
really as if elective affinities were at work here, by virtue of which the
common nature is drawn to its like, and therefore will rather hear what a
great man has said from one of its own kind. Perhaps this rests on the
same principle as that of mutual instruction, according to which children
learn best from children.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

One word more for the professors of philosophy. I have always been
compelled to admire not merely the sagacity, the true and fine tact with
which, immediately on its appearance, they recognised my philosophy as
something altogether different from and indeed dangerous to their own
attempts, or, in popular language, something that would not suit their
turn; but also the sure and astute policy by virtue of which they at once
discovered the proper procedure with regard to it, the complete harmony
with which they applied it, and the persistency with which they have
remained faithful to it. This procedure, which further commended itself by
the great ease of carrying it out, consists, as is well known, in
altogether ignoring and thus in secreting—according to Goethe’s malicious
phrase, which just means the appropriating of what is of weight and
significance. The efficiency of this quiet means is increased by the
Corybantic shouts with which those who are at one reciprocally greet the
birth of their own spiritual children—shouts which compel the public to
look and note the air of importance with which they congratulate
themselves on the event. Who can mistake the object of such proceedings?
Is there then nothing to oppose to the maxim, _primum vivere, deinde
philosophari_? These gentlemen desire to live, and indeed to live by
philosophy. To philosophy they are assigned with their wives and children,
and in spite of Petrarch’s _povera e nuda vai filosofia_, they have staked
everything upon it. Now my philosophy is by no means so constituted that
any one can live by it. It lacks the first indispensable requisite of a
well-paid professional philosophy, a speculative theology, which—in spite
of the troublesome Kant with his Critique of Reason—should and must, it is
supposed, be the chief theme of all philosophy, even if it thus takes on
itself the task of talking straight on of that of which it can know
absolutely nothing. Indeed my philosophy does not permit to the professors
the fiction they have so cunningly devised, and which has become so
indispensable to them, of a reason that knows, perceives, or apprehends
immediately and absolutely. This is a doctrine which it is only necessary
to impose upon the reader at starting, in order to pass in the most
comfortable manner in the world, as it were in a chariot and four, into
that region beyond the possibility of all experience, which Kant has
wholly and for ever shut out from our knowledge, and in which are found
immediately revealed and most beautifully arranged the fundamental dogmas
of modern, Judaising, optimistic Christianity. Now what in the world has
my subtle philosophy, deficient as it is in these essential requisites,
with no intentional aim, and unable to afford a means of subsistence,
whose pole star is truth alone the naked, unrewarded, unbefriended, often
persecuted truth, and which steers straight for it without looking to the
right hand or the left,—what, I say, has this to do with that _alma
mater_, the good, well-to-do university philosophy which, burdened with a
hundred aims and a thousand motives, comes on its course cautiously
tacking, while it keeps before its eyes at all times the fear of the Lord,
the will of the ministry, the laws of the established church, the wishes
of the publisher, the attendance of the students, the goodwill of
colleagues, the course of current politics, the momentary tendency of the
public, and Heaven knows what besides? Or what has my quiet, earnest
search for truth in common with the noisy scholastic disputations of the
chair and the benches, the inmost motives of which are always personal
aims. The two kinds of philosophy are, indeed, radically different. Thus
it is that with me there is no compromise and no fellowship, that no one
reaps any benefit from my works but the man who seeks the truth alone, and
therefore none of the philosophical parties of the day; for they all
follow their own aims, while I have only insight into truth to offer,
which suits none of these aims, because it is not modelled after any of
them. If my philosophy is to become susceptible of professorial
exposition, the times must entirely change. What a pretty thing it would
be if a philosophy by which nobody could live were to gain for itself
light and air, not to speak of the general ear! This must be guarded
against, and all must oppose it as one man. But it is not just such an
easy game to controvert and refute; and, moreover, these are mistaken
means to employ, because they just direct the attention of the public to
the matter, and its taste for the lucubrations of the professors of
philosophy might be destroyed by the perusal of my writings. For whoever
has tasted of earnest will not relish jest, especially when it is
tiresome. Therefore the silent system, so unanimously adopted, is the only
right one, and I can only advise them to stick to it and go on with it as
long as it will answer, that is, until to ignore is taken to imply
ignorance; then there will just be time to turn back. Meanwhile it remains
open to every one to pluck out a small feather here and there for his own
use, for the superfluity of thoughts at home should not be very
oppressive. Thus the ignoring and silent system may hold out a good while,
at least the span of time I may have yet to live, whereby much is already
won. And if, in the meantime, here and there an indiscreet voice has let
itself be heard, it is soon drowned by the loud talking of the professors,
who, with important airs, know how to entertain the public with very
different things. I advise, however, that the unanimity of procedure
should be somewhat more strictly observed, and especially that the young
men should be looked after, for they are sometimes so fearfully
indiscreet. For even so I cannot guarantee that the commended procedure
will last for ever, and cannot answer for the final issue. It is a nice
question as to the steering of the public, which, on the whole, is good
and tractable. Although we nearly at all times see the Gorgiases and the
Hippiases uppermost, although the absurd, as a rule, predominates, and it
seems impossible that the voice of the individual can ever penetrate
through the chorus of the befooling and the befooled, there yet remains to
the genuine works of every age a quite peculiar, silent, slow, and
powerful influence; and, as if by a miracle, we see them rise at last out
of the turmoil like a balloon that floats up out of the thick atmosphere
of this globe into purer regions, where, having once arrived, it remains
at rest, and no one can draw it down again.

_Written at Frankfort-on-the-Maine in February 1844._





FIRST BOOK. THE WORLD AS IDEA.




First Aspect. The Idea Subordinated To The Principle Of Sufficient Reason:
The Object Of Experience And Science.


    Sors de l’enfance, ami réveille toi!

    —_Jean Jacques Rousseau._


§ 1. “The world is my idea:”—this is a truth which holds good for
everything that lives and knows, though man alone can bring it into
reflective and abstract consciousness. If he really does this, he has
attained to philosophical wisdom. It then becomes clear and certain to him
that what he knows is not a sun and an earth, but only an eye that sees a
sun, a hand that feels an earth; that the world which surrounds him is
there only as idea, _i.e._, only in relation to something else, the
consciousness, which is himself. If any truth can be asserted _a priori_,
it is this: for it is the expression of the most general form of all
possible and thinkable experience: a form which is more general than time,
or space, or causality, for they all presuppose it; and each of these,
which we have seen to be just so many modes of the principle of sufficient
reason, is valid only for a particular class of ideas; whereas the
antithesis of object and subject is the common form of all these classes,
is that form under which alone any idea of whatever kind it may be,
abstract or intuitive, pure or empirical, is possible and thinkable. No
truth therefore is more certain, more independent of all others, and less
in need of proof than this, that all that exists for knowledge, and
therefore this whole world, is only object in relation to subject,
perception of a perceiver, in a word, idea. This is obviously true of the
past and the future, as well as of the present, of what is farthest off,
as of what is near; for it is true of time and space themselves, in which
alone these distinctions arise. All that in any way belongs or can belong
to the world is inevitably thus conditioned through the subject, and
exists only for the subject. The world is idea.

This truth is by no means new. It was implicitly involved in the sceptical
reflections from which Descartes started. Berkeley, however, was the first
who distinctly enunciated it, and by this he has rendered a permanent
service to philosophy, even though the rest of his teaching should not
endure. Kant’s primary mistake was the neglect of this principle, as is
shown in the appendix. How early again this truth was recognised by the
wise men of India, appearing indeed as the fundamental tenet of the
Vedânta philosophy ascribed to Vyasa, is pointed out by Sir William Jones
in the last of his essays: “On the philosophy of the Asiatics” (Asiatic
Researches, vol. iv. p. 164), where he says, “The fundamental tenet of the
Vedanta school consisted not in denying the existence of matter, that is,
of solidity, impenetrability, and extended figure (to deny which would be
lunacy), but in correcting the popular notion of it, and in contending
that it has no essence independent of mental perception; that existence
and perceptibility are convertible terms.” These words adequately express
the compatibility of empirical reality and transcendental ideality.

In this first book, then, we consider the world only from this side, only
so far as it is idea. The inward reluctance with which any one accepts the
world as merely his idea, warns him that this view of it, however true it
may be, is nevertheless one-sided, adopted in consequence of some
arbitrary abstraction. And yet it is a conception from which he can never
free himself. The defectiveness of this view will be corrected in the next
book by means of a truth which is not so immediately certain as that from
which we start here; a truth at which we can arrive only by deeper
research and more severe abstraction, by the separation of what is
different and the union of what is identical. This truth, which must be
very serious and impressive if not awful to every one, is that a man can
also say and must say, “the world is my will.”

In this book, however, we must consider separately that aspect of the
world from which we start, its aspect as knowable, and therefore, in the
meantime, we must, without reserve, regard all presented objects, even our
own bodies (as we shall presently show more fully), merely as ideas, and
call them merely ideas. By so doing we always abstract from will (as we
hope to make clear to every one further on), which by itself constitutes
the other aspect of the world. For as the world is in one aspect entirely
_idea_, so in another it is entirely _will_. A reality which is neither of
these two, but an object in itself (into which the thing in itself has
unfortunately dwindled in the hands of Kant), is the phantom of a dream,
and its acceptance is an _ignis fatuus_ in philosophy.

§ 2. That which knows all things and is known by none is the subject. Thus
it is the supporter of the world, that condition of all phenomena, of all
objects which is always pre-supposed throughout experience; for all that
exists, exists only for the subject. Every one finds himself to be
subject, yet only in so far as he knows, not in so far as he is an object
of knowledge. But his body is object, and therefore from this point of
view we call it idea. For the body is an object among objects, and is
conditioned by the laws of objects, although it is an immediate object.
Like all objects of perception, it lies within the universal forms of
knowledge, time and space, which are the conditions of multiplicity. The
subject, on the contrary, which is always the knower, never the known,
does not come under these forms, but is presupposed by them; it has
therefore neither multiplicity nor its opposite unity. We never know it,
but it is always the knower wherever there is knowledge.

So then the world as idea, the only aspect in which we consider it at
present, has two fundamental, necessary, and inseparable halves. The one
half is the object, the forms of which are space and time, and through
these multiplicity. The other half is the subject, which is not in space
and time, for it is present, entire and undivided, in every percipient
being. So that any one percipient being, with the object, constitutes the
whole world as idea just as fully as the existing millions could do; but
if this one were to disappear, then the whole world as idea would cease to
be. These halves are therefore inseparable even for thought, for each of
the two has meaning and existence only through and for the other, each
appears with the other and vanishes with it. They limit each other
immediately; where the object begins the subject ends. The universality of
this limitation is shown by the fact that the essential and hence
universal forms of all objects, space, time, and causality, may, without
knowledge of the object, be discovered and fully known from a
consideration of the subject, _i.e._, in Kantian language, they lie _a
priori_ in our consciousness. That he discovered this is one of Kant’s
principal merits, and it is a great one. I however go beyond this, and
maintain that the principle of sufficient reason is the general expression
for all these forms of the object of which we are _a priori_ conscious;
and that therefore all that we know purely _a priori_, is merely the
content of that principle and what follows from it; in it all our certain
_a priori_ knowledge is expressed. In my essay on the principle of
sufficient reason I have shown in detail how every possible object comes
under it; that is, stands in a necessary relation to other objects, on the
one side as determined, on the other side as determining: this is of such
wide application, that the whole existence of all objects, so far as they
are objects, ideas and nothing more, may be entirely traced to this their
necessary relation to each other, rests only in it, is in fact merely
relative; but of this more presently. I have further shown, that the
necessary relation which the principle of sufficient reason expresses
generally, appears in other forms corresponding to the classes into which
objects are divided, according to their possibility; and again that by
these forms the proper division of the classes is tested. I take it for
granted that what I said in this earlier essay is known and present to the
reader, for if it had not been already said it would necessarily find its
place here.

§ 3. The chief distinction among our ideas is that between ideas of
perception and abstract ideas. The latter form just one class of ideas,
namely concepts, and these are the possession of man alone of all
creatures upon earth. The capacity for these, which distinguishes him from
all the lower animals, has always been called reason.(5) We shall consider
these abstract ideas by themselves later, but, in the first place, we
shall speak exclusively of the _ideas of perception_. These comprehend the
whole visible world, or the sum total of experience, with the conditions
of its possibility. We have already observed that it is a highly important
discovery of Kant’s, that these very conditions, these forms of the
visible world, _i.e._, the absolutely universal element in its perception,
the common property of all its phenomena, space and time, even when taken
by themselves and apart from their content, can, not only be thought in
the abstract, but also be directly perceived; and that this perception or
intuition is not some kind of phantasm arising from constant recurrence in
experience, but is so entirely independent of experience that we must
rather regard the latter as dependent on it, inasmuch as the qualities of
space and time, as they are known in _a priori_ perception or intuition,
are valid for all possible experience, as rules to which it must
invariably conform. Accordingly, in my essay on the principle of
sufficient reason, I have treated space and time, because they are
perceived as pure and empty of content, as a special and independent class
of ideas. This quality of the universal forms of intuition, which was
discovered by Kant, that they may be perceived in themselves and apart
from experience, and that they may be known as exhibiting those laws on
which is founded the infallible science of mathematics, is certainly very
important. Not less worthy of remark, however, is this other quality of
time and space, that the principle of sufficient reason, which conditions
experience as the law of causation and of motive, and thought as the law
of the basis of judgment, appears here in quite a special form, to which I
have given the name of the ground of being. In time, this is the
succession of its moments, and in space the position of its parts, which
reciprocally determine each other _ad infinitum_.

Any one who has fully understood from the introductory essay the complete
identity of the content of the principle of sufficient reason in all its
different forms, must also be convinced of the importance of the knowledge
of the simplest of these forms, as affording him insight into his own
inmost nature. This simplest form of the principle we have found to be
time. In it each instant is, only in so far as it has effaced the
preceding one, its generator, to be itself in turn as quickly effaced. The
past and the future (considered apart from the consequences of their
content) are empty as a dream, and the present is only the indivisible and
unenduring boundary between them. And in all the other forms of the
principle of sufficient reason, we shall find the same emptiness, and
shall see that not time only but also space, and the whole content of both
of them, _i.e._, all that proceeds from causes and motives, has a merely
relative existence, is only through and for another like to itself,
_i.e._, not more enduring. The substance of this doctrine is old: it
appears in Heraclitus when he laments the eternal flux of things; in Plato
when he degrades the object to that which is ever becoming, but never
being; in Spinoza as the doctrine of the mere accidents of the one
substance which is and endures. Kant opposes what is thus known as the
mere phenomenon to the thing in itself. Lastly, the ancient wisdom of the
Indian philosophers declares, “It is Mâyâ, the veil of deception, which
blinds the eyes of mortals, and makes them behold a world of which they
cannot say either that it is or that it is not: for it is like a dream; it
is like the sunshine on the sand which the traveller takes from afar for
water, or the stray piece of rope he mistakes for a snake.” (These similes
are repeated in innumerable passages of the Vedas and the Puranas.) But
what all these mean, and that of which they all speak, is nothing more
than what we have just considered—the world as idea subject to the
principle of sufficient reason.

§ 4. Whoever has recognised the form of the principle of sufficient
reason, which appears in pure time as such, and on which all counting and
arithmetical calculation rests, has completely mastered the nature of
time. Time is nothing more than that form of the principle of sufficient
reason, and has no further significance. Succession is the form of the
principle of sufficient reason in time, and succession is the whole nature
of time. Further, whoever has recognised the principle of sufficient
reason as it appears in the presentation of pure space, has exhausted the
whole nature of space, which is absolutely nothing more than that
possibility of the reciprocal determination of its parts by each other,
which is called position. The detailed treatment of this, and the
formulation in abstract conceptions of the results which flow from it, so
that they may be more conveniently used, is the subject of the science of
geometry. Thus also, whoever has recognised the law of causation, the
aspect of the principle of sufficient reason which appears in what fills
these forms (space and time) as objects of perception, that is to say
matter, has completely mastered the nature of matter as such, for matter
is nothing more than causation, as any one will see at once if he
reflects. Its true being is its action, nor can we possibly conceive it as
having any other meaning. Only as active does it fill space and time; its
action upon the immediate object (which is itself matter) determines that
perception in which alone it exists. The consequence of the action of any
material object upon any other, is known only in so far as the latter acts
upon the immediate object in a different way from that in which it acted
before; it consists only of this. Cause and effect thus constitute the
whole nature of matter; its true being is its action. (A fuller treatment
of this will be found in the essay on the Principle of Sufficient Reason,
§ 21, p. 77.) The nature of all material things is therefore very
appropriately called in German _Wirklichkeit_,(6) a word which is far more
expressive than _Realität_. Again, that which is acted upon is always
matter, and thus the whole being and essence of matter consists in the
orderly change, which one part of it brings about in another part. The
existence of matter is therefore entirely relative, according to a
relation which is valid only within its limits, as in the case of time and
space.

But time and space, each for itself, can be mentally presented apart from
matter, whereas matter cannot be so presented apart from time and space.
The form which is inseparable from it presupposes space, and the action in
which its very existence consists, always imports some change, in other
words a determination in time. But space and time are not only, each for
itself, presupposed by matter, but a union of the two constitutes its
essence, for this, as we have seen, consists in action, _i.e._, in
causation. All the innumerable conceivable phenomena and conditions of
things, might be coexistent in boundless space, without limiting each
other, or might be successive in endless time without interfering with
each other: thus a necessary relation of these phenomena to each other,
and a law which should regulate them according to such a relation, is by
no means needful, would not, indeed, be applicable: it therefore follows
that in the case of all co-existence in space and change in time, so long
as each of these forms preserves for itself its condition and its course
without any connection with the other, there can be no causation, and
since causation constitutes the essential nature of matter, there can be
no matter. But the law of causation receives its meaning and necessity
only from this, that the essence of change does not consist simply in the
mere variation of things, but rather in the fact that at the _same part of
space_ there is now _one thing_ and then _another_, and at _one_ and the
same point of time there is _here_ one thing and there _another_: only
this reciprocal limitation of space and time by each other gives meaning,
and at the same time necessity, to a law, according to which change must
take place. What is determined by the law of causality is therefore not
merely a succession of things in time, but this succession with reference
to a definite space, and not merely existence of things in a particular
place, but in this place at a different point of time. Change, _i.e._,
variation which takes place according to the law of causality, implies
always a determined part of space and a determined part of time together
and in union. Thus causality unites space with time. But we found that the
whole essence of matter consisted in action, _i.e._, in causation,
consequently space and time must also be united in matter, that is to say,
matter must take to itself at once the distinguishing qualities both of
space and time, however much these may be opposed to each other, and must
unite in itself what is impossible for each of these independently, that
is, the fleeting course of time, with the rigid unchangeable perduration
of space: infinite divisibility it receives from both. It is for this
reason that we find that co-existence, which could neither be in time
alone, for time has no contiguity, nor in space alone, for space has no
before, after, or now, is first established through matter. But the
co-existence of many things constitutes, in fact, the essence of reality,
for through it permanence first becomes possible; for permanence is only
knowable in the change of something which is present along with what is
permanent, while on the other hand it is only because something permanent
is present along with what changes, that the latter gains the special
character of change, _i.e._, the mutation of quality and form in the
permanence of substance, that is to say, in matter.(7) If the world were
in space alone, it would be rigid and immovable, without succession,
without change, without action; but we know that with action, the idea of
matter first appears. Again, if the world were in time alone, all would be
fleeting, without persistence, without contiguity, hence without
co-existence, and consequently without permanence; so that in this case
also there would be no matter. Only through the union of space and time do
we reach matter, and matter is the possibility of co-existence, and,
through that, of permanence; through permanence again matter is the
possibility of the persistence of substance in the change of its
states.(8) As matter consists in the union of space and time, it bears
throughout the stamp of both. It manifests its origin in space, partly
through the form which is inseparable from it, but especially through its
persistence (substance), the _a priori_ certainty of which is therefore
wholly deducible from that of space(9) (for variation belongs to time
alone, but in it alone and for itself nothing is persistent). Matter shows
that it springs from time by quality (accidents), without which it never
exists, and which is plainly always causality, action upon other matter,
and therefore change (a time concept). The law of this action, however,
always depends upon space and time together, and only thus obtains
meaning. The regulative function of causality is confined entirely to the
determination of what must occupy _this time and this space_. The fact
that we know _a priori_ the unalterable characteristics of matter, depends
upon this derivation of its essential nature from the forms of our
knowledge of which we are conscious _a priori_. These unalterable
characteristics are space-occupation, _i.e._, impenetrability, _i.e._,
causal action, consequently, extension, infinite divisibility,
persistence, _i.e._, indestructibility, and lastly mobility: weight, on
the other hand, notwithstanding its universality, must be attributed to _a
posteriori_ knowledge, although Kant, in his “Metaphysical Introduction to
Natural Philosophy,” p. 71 (p. 372 of Rosenkranz’s edition), treats it as
knowable _a priori_.

But as the object in general is only for the subject, as its idea, so
every special class of ideas is only for an equally special quality in the
subject, which is called a faculty of perception. This subjective
correlative of time and space in themselves as empty forms, has been named
by Kant pure sensibility; and we may retain this expression, as Kant was
the first to treat of the subject, though it is not exact, for sensibility
presupposes matter. The subjective correlative of matter or of causation,
for these two are the same, is understanding, which is nothing more than
this. To know causality is its one function, its only power; and it is a
great one, embracing much, of manifold application, yet of unmistakable
identity in all its manifestations. Conversely all causation, that is to
say, all matter, or the whole of reality, is only for the understanding,
through the understanding, and in the understanding. The first, simplest,
and ever-present example of understanding is the perception of the actual
world. This is throughout knowledge of the cause from the effect, and
therefore all perception is intellectual. The understanding could never
arrive at this perception, however, if some effect did not become known
immediately, and thus serve as a starting-point. But this is the affection
of the animal body. So far, then, the animal body is the _immediate
object_ of the subject; the perception of all other objects becomes
possible through it. The changes which every animal body experiences, are
immediately known, that is, felt; and as these effects are at once
referred to their causes, the perception of the latter as _objects_
arises. This relation is no conclusion in abstract conceptions; it does
not arise from reflection, nor is it arbitrary, but immediate, necessary,
and certain. It is the method of knowing of the pure understanding,
without which there could be no perception; there would only remain a dull
plant-like consciousness of the changes of the immediate object, which
would succeed each other in an utterly unmeaning way, except in so far as
they might have a meaning for the will either as pain or pleasure. But as
with the rising of the sun the visible world appears, so at one stroke,
the understanding, by means of its one simple function, changes the dull,
meaningless sensation into perception. What the eye, the ear, or the hand
feels, is not perception; it is merely its data. By the understanding
passing from the effect to the cause, the world first appears as
perception extended in space, varying in respect of form, persistent
through all time in respect of matter; for the understanding unites space
and time in the idea of matter, that is, causal action. As the world as
idea exists only through the understanding, so also it exists only for the
understanding. In the first chapter of my essay on “Light and Colour,” I
have already explained how the understanding constructs perceptions out of
the data supplied by the senses; how by comparison of the impressions
which the various senses receive from the object, a child arrives at
perceptions; how this alone affords the solution of so many phenomena of
the senses; the single vision of two eyes, the double vision in the case
of a squint, or when we try to look at once at objects which lie at
unequal distances behind each other; and all illusion which is produced by
a sudden alteration in the organs of sense. But I have treated this
important subject much more fully and thoroughly in the second edition of
the essay on “The Principle of Sufficient Reason,” § 21. All that is said
there would find its proper place here, and would therefore have to be
said again; but as I have almost as much disinclination to quote myself as
to quote others, and as I am unable to explain the subject better than it
is explained there, I refer the reader to it, instead of quoting it, and
take for granted that it is known.

The process by which children, and persons born blind who have been
operated upon, learn to see, the single vision of the double sensation of
two eyes, the double vision and double touch which occur when the organs
of sense have been displaced from their usual position, the upright
appearance of objects while the picture on the retina is upside down, the
attributing of colour to the outward objects, whereas it is merely an
inner function, a division through polarisation, of the activity of the
eye, and lastly the stereoscope,—all these are sure and incontrovertible
evidence that perception is not merely of the senses, but
intellectual—that is, _pure knowledge through the understanding of the
cause from the effect_, and that, consequently, it presupposes the law of
causality, in a knowledge of which all perception—that is to say all
experience, by virtue of its primary and only possibility, depends. The
contrary doctrine that the law of causality results from experience, which
was the scepticism of Hume, is first refuted by this. For the independence
of the knowledge of causality of all experience,—that is, its _a priori_
character—can only be deduced from the dependence of all experience upon
it; and this deduction can only be accomplished by proving, in the manner
here indicated, and explained in the passages referred to above, that the
knowledge of causality is included in perception in general, to which all
experience belongs, and therefore in respect of experience is completely
_a priori_, does not presuppose it, but is presupposed by it as a
condition. This, however, cannot be deduced in the manner attempted by
Kant, which I have criticised in the essay on “The Principle of Sufficient
Reason,” § 23.

§ 5. It is needful to guard against the grave error of supposing that
because perception arises through the knowledge of causality, the relation
of subject and object is that of cause and effect. For this relation
subsists only between the immediate object and objects known indirectly,
thus always between objects alone. It is this false supposition that has
given rise to the foolish controversy about the reality of the outer
world; a controversy in which dogmatism and scepticism oppose each other,
and the former appears, now as realism, now as idealism. Realism treats
the object as cause, and the subject as its effect. The idealism of Fichte
reduces the object to the effect of the subject. Since however, and this
cannot be too much emphasised, there is absolutely no relation according
to the principle of sufficient reason between subject and object, neither
of these views could be proved, and therefore scepticism attacked them
both with success. Now, just as the law of causality precedes perception
and experience as their condition, and therefore cannot (as Hume thought)
be derived from them, so object and subject precede all knowledge, and
hence the principle of sufficient reason in general, as its first
condition; for this principle is merely the form of all objects, the whole
nature and possibility of their existence as phenomena: but the object
always presupposes the subject; and therefore between these two there can
be no relation of reason and consequent. My essay on the principle of
sufficient reason accomplishes just this: it explains the content of that
principle as the essential form of every object—that is to say, as the
universal nature of all objective existence, as something which pertains
to the object as such; but the object as such always presupposes the
subject as its necessary correlative; and therefore the subject remains
always outside the province in which the principle of sufficient reason is
valid. The controversy as to the reality of the outer world rests upon
this false extension of the validity of the principle of sufficient reason
to the subject also, and starting with this mistake it can never
understand itself. On the one side realistic dogmatism, looking upon the
idea as the effect of the object, desires to separate these two, idea and
object, which are really one, and to assume a cause quite different from
the idea, an object in itself, independent of the subject, a thing which
is quite inconceivable; for even as object it presupposes subject, and so
remains its idea. Opposed to this doctrine is scepticism, which makes the
same false presupposition that in the idea we have only the effect, never
the cause, therefore never real being; that we always know merely the
action of the object. But this object, it supposes, may perhaps have no
resemblance whatever to its effect, may indeed have been quite erroneously
received as the cause, for the law of causality is first to be gathered
from experience, and the reality of experience is then made to rest upon
it. Thus both of these views are open to the correction, firstly, that
object and idea are the same; secondly, that the true being of the object
of perception is its action, that the reality of the thing consists in
this, and the demand for an existence of the object outside the idea of
the subject, and also for an essence of the actual thing different from
its action, has absolutely no meaning, and is a contradiction: and that
the knowledge of the nature of the effect of any perceived object,
exhausts such an object itself, so far as it is object, _i.e._, idea, for
beyond this there is nothing more to be known. So far then, the perceived
world in space and time, which makes itself known as causation alone, is
entirely real, and is throughout simply what it appears to be, and it
appears wholly and without reserve as idea, bound together according to
the law of causality. This is its empirical reality. On the other hand,
all causality is in the understanding alone, and for the understanding.
The whole actual, that is, active world is determined as such through the
understanding, and apart from it is nothing. This, however, is not the
only reason for altogether denying such a reality of the outer world as is
taught by the dogmatist, who explains its reality as its independence of
the subject. We also deny it, because no object apart from a subject can
be conceived without contradiction. The whole world of objects is and
remains idea, and therefore wholly and for ever determined by the subject;
that is to say, it has transcendental ideality. But it is not therefore
illusion or mere appearance; it presents itself as that which it is, idea,
and indeed as a series of ideas of which the common bond is the principle
of sufficient reason. It is according to its inmost meaning quite
comprehensible to the healthy understanding, and speaks a language quite
intelligible to it. To dispute about its reality can only occur to a mind
perverted by over-subtilty, and such discussion always arises from a false
application of the principle of sufficient reason, which binds all ideas
together of whatever kind they may be, but by no means connects them with
the subject, nor yet with a something which is neither subject nor object,
but only the ground of the object; an absurdity, for only objects can be
and always are the ground of objects. If we examine more closely the
source of this question as to the reality of the outer world, we find that
besides the false application of the principle of sufficient reason
generally to what lies beyond its province, a special confusion of its
forms is also involved; for that form which it has only in reference to
concepts or abstract ideas, is applied to perceived ideas, real objects;
and a ground of knowing is demanded of objects, whereas they can have
nothing but a ground of being. Among the abstract ideas, the concepts
united in the judgment, the principle of sufficient reason appears in such
a way that each of these has its worth, its validity, and its whole
existence, here called _truth_, simply and solely through the relation of
the judgment to something outside of it, its ground of knowledge, to which
there must consequently always be a return. Among real objects, ideas of
perception, on the other hand, the principle of sufficient reason appears
not as the principle of the ground of _knowing_, but of _being_, as the
law of causality: every real object has paid its debt to it, inasmuch as
it has come to be, _i.e._, has appeared as the effect of a cause. The
demand for a ground of knowing has therefore here no application and no
meaning, but belongs to quite another class of things. Thus the world of
perception raises in the observer no question or doubt so long as he
remains in contact with it: there is here neither error nor truth, for
these are confined to the province of the abstract—the province of
reflection. But here the world lies open for sense and understanding;
presents itself with naive truth as that which it really is—ideas of
perception which develop themselves according to the law of causality.

So far as we have considered the question of the reality of the outer
world, it arises from a confusion which amounts even to a misunderstanding
of reason itself, and therefore thus far, the question could be answered
only by explaining its meaning. After examination of the whole nature of
the principle of sufficient reason, of the relation of subject and object,
and the special conditions of sense perception, the question itself
disappeared because it had no longer any meaning. There is, however, one
other possible origin of this question, quite different from the purely
speculative one which we have considered, a specially empirical origin,
though the question is always raised from a speculative point of view, and
in this form it has a much more comprehensible meaning than it had in the
first. We have dreams; may not our whole life be a dream? or more exactly:
is there a sure criterion of the distinction between dreams and reality?
between phantasms and real objects? The assertion that what is dreamt is
less vivid and distinct than what we actually perceive is not to the
point, because no one has ever been able to make a fair comparison of the
two; for we can only compare the recollection of a dream with the present
reality. Kant answers the question thus: “The connection of ideas among
themselves, according to the law of causality, constitutes the difference
between real life and dreams.” But in dreams, as well as in real life,
everything is connected individually at any rate, in accordance with the
principle of sufficient reason in all its forms, and this connection is
broken only between life and dreams, or between one dream and another.
Kant’s answer therefore could only run thus:—the _long_ dream (life) has
throughout complete connection according to the principle of sufficient
reason; it has not this connection, however, with _short_ dreams, although
each of these has in itself the same connection: the bridge is therefore
broken between the former and the latter, and on this account we
distinguish them.

But to institute an inquiry according to this criterion, as to whether
something was dreamt or seen, would always be difficult and often
impossible. For we are by no means in a position to trace link by link the
causal connection between any experienced event and the present moment,
but we do not on that account explain it as dreamt. Therefore in real life
we do not commonly employ that method of distinguishing between dreams and
reality. The only sure criterion by which to distinguish them is in fact
the entirely empirical one of awaking, through which at any rate the
causal connection between dreamed events and those of waking life, is
distinctly and sensibly broken off. This is strongly supported by the
remark of Hobbes in the second chapter of Leviathan, that we easily
mistake dreams for reality if we have unintentionally fallen asleep
without taking off our clothes, and much more so when it also happens that
some undertaking or design fills all our thoughts, and occupies our dreams
as well as our waking moments. We then observe the awaking just as little
as the falling asleep, dream and reality run together and become
confounded. In such a case there is nothing for it but the application of
Kant’s criterion; but if, as often happens, we fail to establish by means
of this criterion, either the existence of causal connection with the
present, or the absence of such connection, then it must for ever remain
uncertain whether an event was dreamt or really happened. Here, in fact,
the intimate relationship between life and dreams is brought out very
clearly, and we need not be ashamed to confess it, as it has been
recognised and spoken of by many great men. The Vedas and Puranas have no
better simile than a dream for the whole knowledge of the actual world,
which they call the web of Mâyâ, and they use none more frequently. Plato
often says that men live only in a dream; the philosopher alone strives to
awake himself. Pindar says (ii. η. 135): σκιας οναρ ανθρωπος (umbræ
somnium homo), and Sophocles:—


    Ὀνω γυν ἡμας ουδεν οντας αλλο, πλην
    Σιδωλ᾽ ὁσοιπερ ζωμεν, ὴ κουφην σκιαν.—Ajax, 125.


(Nos enim, quicunque vivimus, nihil aliud esse comperio quam simulacra et
levem umbram.) Beside which most worthily stands Shakespeare:—


          “We are such stuff
    As dreams are made on, and our little life
    Is rounded with a sleep.”—_Tempest_, Act iv. Sc. 1.


Lastly, Calderon was so deeply impressed with this view of life that he
sought to embody it in a kind of metaphysical drama—“Life a Dream.”

After these numerous quotations from the poets, perhaps I also may be
allowed to express myself by a metaphor. Life and dreams are leaves of the
same book. The systematic reading of this book is real life, but when the
reading hours (that is, the day) are over, we often continue idly to turn
over the leaves, and read a page here and there without method or
connection: often one we have read before, sometimes one that is new to
us, but always in the same book. Such an isolated page is indeed out of
connection with the systematic study of the book, but it does not seem so
very different when we remember that the whole continuous perusal begins
and ends just as abruptly, and may therefore be regarded as merely a
larger single page.

Thus although individual dreams are distinguished from real life by the
fact that they do not fit into that continuity which runs through the
whole of experience, and the act of awaking brings this into
consciousness, yet that very continuity of experience belongs to real life
as its form, and the dream on its part can point to a similar continuity
in itself. If, therefore, we consider the question from a point of view
external to both, there is no distinct difference in their nature, and we
are forced to concede to the poets that life is a long dream.

Let us turn back now from this quite independent empirical origin of the
question of the reality of the outer world, to its speculative origin. We
found that this consisted, first, in the false application of the
principle of sufficient reason to the relation of subject and object; and
secondly, in the confusion of its forms, inasmuch as the principle of
sufficient reason of knowing was extended to a province in which the
principle of sufficient reason of being is valid. But the question could
hardly have occupied philosophers so constantly if it were entirely devoid
of all real content, and if some true thought and meaning did not lie at
its heart as its real source. Accordingly, we must assume that when the
element of truth that lies at the bottom of the question first came into
reflection and sought its expression, it became involved in these confused
and meaningless forms and problems. This at least is my opinion, and I
think that the true expression of that inmost meaning of the question,
which it failed to find, is this:—What is this world of perception besides
being my idea? Is that of which I am conscious only as idea, exactly like
my own body, of which I am doubly conscious, in one aspect as _idea_, in
another aspect as _will_? The fuller explanation of this question and its
answer in the affirmative, will form the content of the second book, and
its consequences will occupy the remaining portion of this work.

§ 6. For the present, however, in this first book we consider everything
merely as idea, as object for the subject. And our own body, which is the
starting-point for each of us in our perception of the world, we consider,
like all other real objects, from the side of its knowableness, and in
this regard it is simply an idea. Now the consciousness of every one is in
general opposed to the explanation of objects as mere ideas, and more
especially to the explanation of our bodies as such; for the thing in
itself is known to each of us immediately in so far as it appears as our
own body; but in so far as it objectifies itself in the other objects of
perception, it is known only indirectly. But this abstraction, this
one-sided treatment, this forcible separation of what is essentially and
necessarily united, is only adopted to meet the demands of our argument;
and therefore the disinclination to it must, in the meantime, be
suppressed and silenced by the expectation that the subsequent treatment
will correct the one-sidedness of the present one, and complete our
knowledge of the nature of the world.

At present therefore the body is for us immediate object; that is to say,
that idea which forms the starting-point of the subject’s knowledge;
because the body, with its immediately known changes, precedes the
application of the law of causality, and thus supplies it with its first
data. The whole nature of matter consists, as we have seen, in its causal
action. But cause and effect exist only for the understanding, which is
nothing but their subjective correlative. The understanding, however,
could never come into operation if there were not something else from
which it starts. This is simple sensation—the immediate consciousness of
the changes of the body, by virtue of which it is immediate object. Thus
the possibility of knowing the world of perception depends upon two
conditions; the first, _objectively expressed_, is the power of material
things to act upon each other, to produce changes in each other, without
which common quality of all bodies no perception would be possible, even
by means of the sensibility of the animal body. And if we wish to express
this condition _subjectively_ we say: The understanding first makes
perception possible; for the law of causality, the possibility of effect
and cause, springs only from the understanding, and is valid only for it,
and therefore the world of perception exists only through and for it. The
second condition is the sensibility of animal bodies, or the quality of
being immediate objects of the subject which certain bodies possess. The
mere modification which the organs of sense sustain from without through
their specific affections, may here be called ideas, so far as these
affections produce neither pain nor pleasure, that is, have no immediate
significance for the will, and are yet perceived, exist therefore only for
_knowledge_. Thus far, then, I say that the body is immediately _known_,
is _immediate object_. But the conception of object is not to be taken
here in its fullest sense, for through this immediate knowledge of the
body, which precedes the operation of the understanding, and is mere
sensation, our own body does not exist specifically as _object_, but first
the material things which affect it: for all knowledge of an object
proper, of an idea perceived in space, exists only through and for the
understanding; therefore not before, but only subsequently to its
operation. Therefore the body as object proper, that is, as an idea
perceived in space, is first known indirectly, like all other objects,
through the application of the law of causality to the action of one of
its parts upon another, as, for example, when the eye sees the body or the
hand touches it. Consequently the form of our body does not become known
to us through mere feeling, but only through knowledge, only in idea; that
is to say, only in the brain does our own body first come to appear as
extended, articulate, organic. A man born blind receives this idea only
little by little from the data afforded by touch. A blind man without
hands could never come to know his own form; or at the most could infer
and construct it little by little from the effects of other bodies upon
him. If, then, we call the body an immediate object, we are to be
understood with these reservations.

In other respects, then, according to what has been said, all animal
bodies are immediate objects; that is, starting-points for the subject
which always knows and therefore is never known in its perception of the
world. Thus the distinctive characteristic of animal life is knowledge,
with movement following on motives, which are determined by knowledge,
just as movement following on stimuli is the distinctive characteristic of
plant-life. Unorganised matter, however, has no movement except such as is
produced by causes properly so called, using the term in its narrowest
sense. All this I have thoroughly discussed in my essay on the principle
of sufficient reason, § 20, in the “Ethics,” first essay, iii., and in my
work on Sight and Colour, § 1, to which I therefore refer.

It follows from what has been said, that all animals, even the least
developed, have understanding; for they all know objects, and this
knowledge determines their movements as motive. Understanding is the same
in all animals and in all men; it has everywhere the same simple form;
knowledge of causality, transition from effect to cause, and from cause to
effect, nothing more; but the degree of its acuteness, and the extension
of the sphere of its knowledge varies enormously, with innumerable
gradations from the lowest form, which is only conscious of the causal
connection between the immediate object and objects affecting it—that is
to say, perceives a cause as an object in space by passing to it from the
affection which the body feels, to the higher grades of knowledge of the
causal connection among objects known indirectly, which extends to the
understanding of the most complicated system of cause and effect in
nature. For even this high degree of knowledge is still the work of the
understanding, not of the reason. The abstract concepts of the reason can
only serve to take up the objective connections which are immediately
known by the understanding, to make them permanent for thought, and to
relate them to each other; but reason never gives us immediate knowledge.
Every force and law of nature, every example of such forces and laws, must
first be immediately known by the understanding, must be apprehended
through perception before it can pass into abstract consciousness for
reason. Hooke’s discovery of the law of gravitation, and the reference of
so many important phenomena to this one law, was the work of immediate
apprehension by the understanding; and such also was the proof of Newton’s
calculations, and Lavoisier’s discovery of acids and their important
function in nature, and also Goethe’s discovery of the origin of physical
colours. All these discoveries are nothing more than a correct immediate
passage from the effect to the cause, which is at once followed by the
recognition of the ideality of the force of nature which expresses itself
in all causes of the same kind; and this complete insight is just an
example of that single function of the understanding, by which an animal
perceives as an object in space the cause which affects its body, and
differs from such a perception only in degree. Every one of these great
discoveries is therefore, just like perception, an operation of the
understanding, an immediate intuition, and as such the work of an instant,
an _apperçu_, a flash of insight. They are not the result of a process of
abstract reasoning, which only serves to make the immediate knowledge of
the understanding permanent for thought by bringing it under abstract
concepts, _i.e._, it makes knowledge distinct, it puts us in a position to
impart it and explain it to others. The keenness of the understanding in
apprehending the causal relations of objects which are known indirectly,
does not find its only application in the sphere of natural science
(though all the discoveries in that sphere are due to it), but it also
appears in practical life. It is then called good sense or prudence, as in
its other application it is better called acuteness, penetration,
sagacity. More exactly, good sense or prudence signifies exclusively
understanding at the command of the will. But the limits of these
conceptions must not be too sharply defined, for it is always that one
function of the understanding by means of which all animals perceive
objects in space, which, in its keenest form, appears now in the phenomena
of nature, correctly inferring the unknown causes from the given effects,
and providing the material from which the reason frames general rules as
laws of nature; now inventing complicated and ingenious machines by
adapting known causes to desired effects; now in the sphere of motives,
seeing through and frustrating intrigues and machinations, or fitly
disposing the motives and the men who are susceptible to them, setting
them in motion, as machines are moved by levers and wheels, and directing
them at will to the accomplishment of its ends. Deficiency of
understanding is called _stupidity_. It is just _dulness in applying the
law of causality_, incapacity for the immediate apprehension of the
concatenations of causes and effects, motives and actions. A stupid person
has no insight into the connection of natural phenomena, either when they
follow their own course, or when they are intentionally combined, _i.e._,
are applied to machinery. Such a man readily believes in magic and
miracles. A stupid man does not observe that persons, who apparently act
independently of each other, are really in collusion; he is therefore
easily mystified, and outwitted; he does not discern the hidden motives of
proffered advice or expressions of opinion, &c. But it is always just one
thing that he lacks—keenness, rapidity, ease in applying the law of
causality, _i.e._, power of understanding. The greatest, and, in this
reference, the most instructive example of stupidity I ever met with, was
the case of a totally imbecile boy of about eleven years of age, in an
asylum. He had reason, because he spoke and comprehended, but in respect
of understanding he was inferior to many of the lower animals. Whenever I
visited him he noticed an eye-glass which I wore round my neck, and in
which the window of the room and the tops of the trees beyond were
reflected: on every occasion he was greatly surprised and delighted with
this, and was never tired of looking at it with astonishment, because he
did not understand the immediate causation of reflection.

While the difference in degree of the acuteness of the understanding, is
very great between man and man, it is even greater between one species of
animal and another. In all species of animals, even those which are
nearest to plants, there is at least as much understanding as suffices for
the inference from the effect on the immediate object, to the indirectly
known object as its cause, _i.e._, sufficient for perception, for the
apprehension of an object. For it is this that constitutes them animals,
as it gives them the power of movement following on motives, and thereby
the power of seeking for food, or at least of seizing it; whereas plants
have only movement following on stimuli, whose direct influence they must
await, or else decay, for they cannot seek after them nor appropriate
them. We marvel at the great sagacity of the most developed species of
animals, such as the dog, the elephant, the monkey or the fox, whose
cleverness has been so admirably sketched by Buffon. From these most
sagacious animals, we can pretty accurately determine how far
understanding can go without reason, _i.e._, abstract knowledge embodied
in concepts. We could not find this out from ourselves, for in us
understanding and reason always reciprocally support each other. We find
that the manifestation of understanding in animals is sometimes above our
expectation, and sometimes below it. On the one hand, we are surprised at
the sagacity of the elephant, who, after crossing many bridges during his
journey in Europe, once refused to go upon one, because he thought it was
not strong enough to bear his weight, though he saw the rest of the party,
consisting of men and horses, go upon it as usual. On the other hand, we
wonder that the intelligent Orang-outangs, who warm themselves at a fire
they have found, do not keep it alight by throwing wood on it; a proof
that this requires a deliberation which is not possible without abstract
concepts. It is clear that the knowledge of cause and effect, as the
universal form of understanding, belongs to all animals _a priori_,
because to them as to us it is the prior condition of all perception of
the outer world. If any one desires additional proof of this, let him
observe, for example, how a young dog is afraid to jump down from a table,
however much he may wish to do so, because he foresees the effect of the
weight of his body, though he has not been taught this by experience. In
judging of the understanding of animals, we must guard against ascribing
to it the manifestations of instinct, a faculty which is quite distinct
both from understanding and reason, but the action of which is often very
analogous to the combined action of the two. We cannot, however, discuss
this here; it will find its proper place in the second book, when we
consider the harmony or so-called teleology of nature: and the 27th
chapter of the supplementary volume is expressly devoted to it.

Deficiency of _understanding_ we call _stupidity_: deficiency in the
application of _reason_ to practice we shall recognise later as
_foolishness_: deficiency of judgment as _silliness_, and lastly, partial
or entire deficiency of _memory_ as _madness_. But each of these will be
considered in its own place. That which is correctly known by _reason_ is
_truth_, that is, an abstract judgment on sufficient grounds (Essay on the
Principle of Sufficient Reason, § 29 and following paragraphs); that which
is correctly known by _understanding_ is _reality_, that is correct
inference from effect on the immediate object to its cause. _Error_ is
opposed to _truth_, as deception of the _reason_: _illusion_ is opposed to
_reality_, as deception of the _understanding_. The full discussion of all
this will be found in the first chapter of my essay on Light and Colour.
Illusion takes place when the same effect may be attributed to two causes,
of which one occurs very frequently, the other very seldom; the
understanding having no data to decide which of these two causes operates
in any particular case,—for their effects are exactly alike,—always
assumes the presence of the commoner cause, and as the activity of the
understanding is not reflective and discursive, but direct and immediate,
this false cause appears before us as a perceived object, whereas it is
merely illusion. I have explained in the essay referred to, how in this
way double sight and double feeling take place if the organs of sense are
brought into an unusual position; and have thus given an incontrovertible
proof that perception exists only through and for the understanding. As
additional examples of such illusions or deceptions of the understanding,
we may mention the broken appearance of a stick dipped in water; the
reflections in spherical mirrors, which, when the surface is convex appear
somewhat behind it, and when the surface is concave appear a long way in
front of it. To this class also belongs the apparently greater extension
of the moon at the horizon than at the zenith. This appearance is not
optical, for as the micrometre proves, the eye receives the image of the
moon at the zenith, at an even greater angle of vision than at the
horizon. The mistake is due to the understanding, which assumes that the
cause of the feebler light of the moon and of all stars at the horizon is
that they are further off, thus treating them as earthly objects,
according to the laws of atmospheric perspective, and therefore it takes
the moon to be much larger at the horizon than at the zenith, and also
regards the vault of heaven as more extended or flattened out at the
horizon. The same false application of the laws of atmospheric perspective
leads us to suppose that very high mountains, whose summits alone are
visible in pure transparent air, are much nearer than they really are, and
therefore not so high as they are; for example, Mont Blanc seen from
Salenche. All such illusions are immediately present to us as perceptions,
and cannot be dispelled by any arguments of the reason. Reason can only
prevent error, that is, a judgment on insufficient grounds, by opposing to
it a truth; as for example, the abstract knowledge that the cause of the
weaker light of the moon and the stars at the horizon is not greater
distance, but the denser atmosphere; but in all the cases we have referred
to, the illusion remains in spite of every abstract explanation. For the
understanding is in itself, even in the case of man, irrational, and is
completely and sharply distinguished from the reason, which is a faculty
of knowledge that belongs to man alone. The reason can only _know_;
perception remains free from its influence and belongs to the
understanding alone.

§ 7. With reference to our exposition up to this point, it must be
observed that we did not start either from the object or the subject, but
from the idea, which contains and presupposes them both; for the
antithesis of object and subject is its primary, universal and essential
form. We have therefore first considered this form as such; then (though
in this respect reference has for the most part been made to the
introductory essay) the subordinate forms of time, space and causality.
The latter belong exclusively to the _object_, and yet, as they are
essential to the object _as such_, and as the object again is essential to
the subject _as such_, they may be discovered from the subject, _i.e._,
they may be known _a priori_, and so far they are to be regarded as the
common limits of both. But all these forms may be referred to one general
expression, the principle of sufficient reason, as we have explained in
the introductory essay.

This procedure distinguishes our philosophical method from that of all
former systems. For they all start either from the object or from the
subject, and therefore seek to explain the one from the other, and this
according to the principle of sufficient reason. We, on the contrary, deny
the validity of this principle with reference to the relation of subject
and object, and confine it to the object. It may be thought that the
philosophy of identity, which has appeared and become generally known in
our own day, does not come under either of the alternatives we have named,
for it does not start either from the subject or from the object, but from
the absolute, known through “intellectual intuition,” which is neither
object nor subject, but the identity of the two. I will not venture to
speak of this revered identity, and this absolute, for I find myself
entirely devoid of all “intellectual intuition.” But as I take my stand
merely on those manifestoes of the “intellectual intuiter” which are open
to all, even to profane persons like myself, I must yet observe that this
philosophy is not to be excepted from the alternative errors mentioned
above. For it does not escape these two opposite errors in spite of its
identity of subject and object, which is not thinkable, but only
“intellectually intuitable,” or to be experienced by a losing of oneself
in it. On the contrary, it combines them both in itself; for it is divided
into two parts, firstly, transcendental idealism, which is just Fichte’s
doctrine of the _ego_, and therefore teaches that the object is produced
by the subject, or evolved out of it in accordance with the principle of
sufficient reason; secondly, the philosophy of nature, which teaches that
the subject is produced little by little from the object, by means of a
method called construction, about which I understand very little, yet
enough to know that it is a process according to various forms of the
principle of sufficient reason. The deep wisdom itself which that
construction contains, I renounce; for as I entirely lack “intellectual
intuition,” all those expositions which presuppose it must for me remain
as a book sealed with seven seals. This is so truly the case that, strange
to say, I have always been unable to find anything at all in this doctrine
of profound wisdom but atrocious and wearisome bombast.

The systems starting from the object had always the whole world of
perception and its constitution as their problem; yet the object which
they take as their starting-point is not always this whole world of
perception, nor its fundamental element, matter. On the contrary, a
division of these systems may be made, based on the four classes of
possible objects set forth in the introductory essay. Thus Thales and the
Ionic school, Democritus, Epicurus, Giordano Bruno, and the French
materialists, may be said to have started from the first class of objects,
the real world: Spinoza (on account of his conception of substance, which
is purely abstract, and exists only in his definition) and, earlier, the
Eleatics, from the second class, the abstract conception: the Pythagoreans
and Chinese philosophy in Y-King, from the third class, time, and
consequently number: and, lastly, the schoolmen, who teach a creation out
of nothing by the act of will of an extra-mundane personal being, started
from the fourth class of objects, the act of will directed by knowledge.

Of all systems of philosophy which start from the object, the most
consistent, and that which may be carried furthest, is simple materialism.
It regards matter, and with it time and space, as existing absolutely, and
ignores the relation to the subject in which alone all this really exists.
It then lays hold of the law of causality as a guiding principle or clue,
regarding it as a self-existent order (or arrangement) of things, _veritas
aeterna_, and so fails to take account of the understanding, in which and
for which alone causality is. It seeks the primary and most simple state
of matter, and then tries to develop all the others from it; ascending
from mere mechanism, to chemism, to polarity, to the vegetable and to the
animal kingdom. And if we suppose this to have been done, the last link in
the chain would be animal sensibility—that is knowledge—which would
consequently now appear as a mere modification or state of matter produced
by causality. Now if we had followed materialism thus far with clear
ideas, when we reached its highest point we would suddenly be seized with
a fit of the inextinguishable laughter of the Olympians. As if waking from
a dream, we would all at once become aware that its final
result—knowledge, which it reached so laboriously, was presupposed as the
indispensable condition of its very starting-point, mere matter; and when
we imagined that we thought matter, we really thought only the subject
that perceives matter; the eye that sees it, the hand that feels it, the
understanding that knows it. Thus the tremendous _petitio principii_
reveals itself unexpectedly; for suddenly the last link is seen to be the
starting-point, the chain a circle, and the materialist is like Baron
Münchausen who, when swimming in water on horseback, drew the horse into
the air with his legs, and himself also by his cue. The fundamental
absurdity of materialism is that it starts from the _objective_, and takes
as the ultimate ground of explanation something _objective_, whether it be
matter in the abstract, simply as it is _thought_, or after it has taken
form, is empirically given—that is to say, is _substance_, the chemical
element with its primary relations. Some such thing it takes, as existing
absolutely and in itself, in order that it may evolve organic nature and
finally the knowing subject from it, and explain them adequately by means
of it; whereas in truth all that is objective is already determined as
such in manifold ways by the knowing subject through its forms of knowing,
and presupposes them; and consequently it entirely disappears if we think
the subject away. Thus materialism is the attempt to explain what is
immediately given us by what is given us indirectly. All that is
objective, extended, active—that is to say, all that is material—is
regarded by materialism as affording so solid a basis for its explanation,
that a reduction of everything to this can leave nothing to be desired
(especially if in ultimate analysis this reduction should resolve itself
into action and reaction). But we have shown that all this is given
indirectly and in the highest degree determined, and is therefore merely a
relatively present object, for it has passed through the machinery and
manufactory of the brain, and has thus come under the forms of space, time
and causality, by means of which it is first presented to us as extended
in space and ever active in time. From such an indirectly given object,
materialism seeks to explain what is immediately given, the idea (in which
alone the object that materialism starts with exists), and finally even
the will from which all those fundamental forces, that manifest
themselves, under the guidance of causes, and therefore according to law,
are in truth to be explained. To the assertion that thought is a
modification of matter we may always, with equal right, oppose the
contrary assertion that all matter is merely the modification of the
knowing subject, as its idea. Yet the aim and ideal of all natural science
is at bottom a consistent materialism. The recognition here of the obvious
impossibility of such a system establishes another truth which will appear
in the course of our exposition, the truth that all science properly so
called, by which I understand systematic knowledge under the guidance of
the principle of sufficient reason, can never reach its final goal, nor
give a complete and adequate explanation: for it is not concerned with the
inmost nature of the world, it cannot get beyond the idea; indeed, it
really teaches nothing more than the relation of one idea to another.

Every science must start from two principal data. One of these is always
the principle of sufficient reason in some form or another, as organon;
the other is its special object as problem. Thus, for example, geometry
has space as problem, and the ground of existence in space as organon.
Arithmetic has time as problem, and the ground of existence in time as
organon. Logic has the combination of concepts as such as problem, and the
ground of knowledge as organon. History has the past acts of men treated
as a whole as problem, and the law of human motives as organon. Natural
science has matter as problem, and the law of causality as organon. Its
end and aim is therefore, by the guidance of causality, to refer all
possible states of matter to other states, and ultimately to one single
state; and again to deduce these states from each other, and ultimately
from one single state. Thus two states of matter stand over against each
other in natural science as extremes: that state in which matter is
furthest from being the immediate object of the subject, and that state in
which it is most completely such an immediate object, _i.e._, the most
dead and crude matter, the primary element, as the one extreme, and the
human organism as the other. Natural science as chemistry seeks for the
first, as physiology for the second. But as yet neither extreme has been
reached, and it is only in the intermediate ground that something has been
won. The prospect is indeed somewhat hopeless. The chemists, under the
presupposition that the qualitative division of matter is not, like
quantitative division, an endless process, are always trying to decrease
the number of the elements, of which there are still about sixty; and if
they were to succeed in reducing them to two, they would still try to find
the common root of these. For, on the one hand, the law of homogeneity
leads to the assumption of a primary chemical state of matter, which alone
belongs to matter as such, and precedes all others which are not
essentially matter as such, but merely contingent forms and qualities. On
the other hand, we cannot understand how this one state could ever
experience a chemical change, if there did not exist a second state to
affect it. Thus the same difficulty appears in chemistry which Epicurus
met with in mechanics. For he had to show how the first atom departed from
the original direction of its motion. Indeed this contradiction, which
develops entirely of itself and can neither be escaped nor solved, might
quite properly be set up as a chemical _antinomy_. Thus an antinomy
appears in the one extreme of natural science, and a corresponding one
will appear in the other. There is just as little hope of reaching this
opposite extreme of natural science, for we see ever more clearly that
what is chemical can never be referred to what is mechanical, nor what is
organic to what is chemical or electrical. Those who in our own day are
entering anew on this old, misleading path, will soon slink back silent
and ashamed, as all their predecessors have done before them. We shall
consider this more fully in the second book. Natural science encounters
the difficulties which we have cursorily mentioned, in its own province.
Regarded as philosophy, it would further be materialism; but this, as we
have seen, even at its birth, has death in its heart, because it ignores
the subject and the forms of knowledge, which are presupposed, just as
much in the case of the crudest matter, from which it desires to start, as
in that of the organism, at which it desires to arrive. For, “no object
without a subject,” is the principle which renders all materialism for
ever impossible. Suns and planets without an eye that sees them, and an
understanding that knows them, may indeed be spoken of in words, but for
the idea, these words are absolutely meaningless. On the other hand, the
law of causality and the treatment and investigation of nature which is
based upon it, lead us necessarily to the conclusion that, in time, each
more highly organised state of matter has succeeded a cruder state: so
that the lower animals existed before men, fishes before land animals,
plants before fishes, and the unorganised before all that is organised;
that, consequently, the original mass had to pass through a long series of
changes before the first eye could be opened. And yet, the existence of
this whole world remains ever dependent upon the first eye that opened,
even if it were that of an insect. For such an eye is a necessary
condition of the possibility of knowledge, and the whole world exists only
in and for knowledge, and without it is not even thinkable. The world is
entirely idea, and as such demands the knowing subject as the supporter of
its existence. This long course of time itself, filled with innumerable
changes, through which matter rose from form to form till at last the
first percipient creature appeared,—this whole time itself is only
thinkable in the identity of a consciousness whose succession of ideas,
whose form of knowing it is, and apart from which, it loses all meaning
and is nothing at all. Thus we see, on the one hand, the existence of the
whole world necessarily dependent upon the first conscious being, however
undeveloped it may be; on the other hand, this conscious being just as
necessarily entirely dependent upon a long chain of causes and effects
which have preceded it, and in which it itself appears as a small link.
These two contradictory points of view, to each of which we are led with
the same necessity, we might again call an _antinomy_ in our faculty of
knowledge, and set it up as the counterpart of that which we found in the
first extreme of natural science. The fourfold antinomy of Kant will be
shown, in the criticism of his philosophy appended to this volume, to be a
groundless delusion. But the necessary contradiction which at last
presents itself to us here, finds its solution in the fact that, to use
Kant’s phraseology, time, space, and causality do not belong to the
thing-in-itself, but only to its phenomena, of which they are the form;
which in my language means this: The objective world, the world as idea,
is not the only side of the world, but merely its outward side; and it has
an entirely different side—the side of its inmost nature—its kernel—the
thing-in-itself. This we shall consider in the second book, calling it
after the most immediate of its objective manifestations—will. But the
world as idea, with which alone we are here concerned, only appears with
the opening of the first eye. Without this medium of knowledge it cannot
be, and therefore it was not before it. But without that eye, that is to
say, outside of knowledge, there was also no before, no time. Thus time
has no beginning, but all beginning is in time. Since, however, it is the
most universal form of the knowable, in which all phenomena are united
together through causality, time, with its infinity of past and future, is
present in the beginning of knowledge. The phenomenon which fills the
first present must at once be known as causally bound up with and
dependent upon a sequence of phenomena which stretches infinitely into the
past, and this past itself is just as truly conditioned by this first
present, as conversely the present is by the past. Accordingly the past
out of which the first present arises, is, like it, dependent upon the
knowing subject, without which it is nothing. It necessarily happens,
however, that this first present does not manifest itself as the first,
that is, as having no past for its parent, but as being the beginning of
time. It manifests itself rather as the consequence of the past, according
to the principle of existence in time. In the same way, the phenomena
which fill this first present appear as the effects of earlier phenomena
which filled the past, in accordance with the law of causality. Those who
like mythological interpretations may take the birth of Kronos (χρονος),
the youngest of the Titans, as a symbol of the moment here referred to at
which time appears, though, indeed it has no beginning; for with him,
since he ate his father, the crude productions of heaven and earth cease,
and the races of gods and men appear upon the scene.

This explanation at which we have arrived by following the most consistent
of the philosophical systems which start from the object, materialism, has
brought out clearly the inseparable and reciprocal dependence of subject
and object, and at the same time the inevitable antithesis between them.
And this knowledge leads us to seek for the inner nature of the world, the
thing-in-itself, not in either of the two elements of the idea, but in
something quite distinct from it, and which is not encumbered with such a
fundamental and insoluble antithesis.

Opposed to the system we have explained, which starts from the object in
order to derive the subject from it, is the system which starts from the
subject and tries to derive the object from it. The first of these has
been of frequent and common occurrence throughout the history of
philosophy, but of the second we find only one example, and that a very
recent one; the “philosophy of appearance” of J. G. Fichte. In this
respect, therefore, it must be considered; little real worth or inner
meaning as the doctrine itself had. It was indeed for the most part merely
a delusion, but it was delivered with an air of the deepest earnestness,
with sustained loftiness of tone and zealous ardour, and was defended with
eloquent polemic against weak opponents, so that it was able to present a
brilliant exterior and seemed to be something. But the genuine earnestness
which keeps truth always steadfastly before it as its goal, and is
unaffected by any external influences, was entirely wanting to Fichte, as
it is to all philosophers who, like him, concern themselves with questions
of the day. In his case, indeed, it could not have been otherwise. A man
becomes a philosopher by reason of a certain perplexity, from which he
seeks to free himself. This is Plato’s θαυμαξειν, which he calls a μαλα
φιλοσοφικον παθος. But what distinguishes the false philosopher from the
true is this: the perplexity of the latter arises from the contemplation
of the world itself, while that of the former results from some book, some
system of philosophy which is before him. Now Fichte belongs to the class
of the false philosophers. He was made a philosopher by Kant’s doctrine of
the thing-in-itself, and if it had not been for this he would probably
have pursued entirely different ends, with far better results, for he
certainly possessed remarkable rhetorical talent. If he had only
penetrated somewhat deeply into the meaning of the book that made him a
philosopher, “The Critique of Pure Reason,” he would have understood that
its principal teaching about mind is this. The principle of sufficient
reason is not, as all scholastic philosophy maintains, a _veritas
aeterna_—that is to say, it does not possess an unconditioned validity
before, outside of, and above the world. It is relative and conditioned,
and valid only in the sphere of phenomena, and thus it may appear as the
necessary nexus of space and time, or as the law of causality, or as the
law of the ground of knowledge. The inner nature of the world, the
thing-in-itself can never be found by the guidance of this principle, for
all that it leads to will be found to be dependent and relative and merely
phenomenal, not the thing-in-itself. Further, it does not concern the
subject, but is only the form of objects, which are therefore not
things-in-themselves. The subject must exist along with the object, and
the object along with the subject, so that it is impossible that subject
and object can stand to each other in a relation of reason and consequent.
But Fichte did not take up the smallest fragment of all this. All that
interested him about the matter was that the system started from the
subject. Now Kant had chosen this procedure in order to show the fallacy
of the prevalent systems, which started from the object, and through which
the object had come, to be regarded as a thing-in-itself. Fichte, however,
took this departure from the subject for the really important matter, and
like all imitators, he imagined that in going further than Kant he was
surpassing him. Thus he repeated the fallacy with regard to the subject,
which all the previous dogmatism had perpetrated with regard to the
object, and which had been the occasion of Kant’s “Critique”. Fichte then
made no material change, and the fundamental fallacy, the assumption of a
relation of reason and consequent between object and subject, remained
after him as it was before him. The principle of sufficient reason
possessed as before an unconditioned validity, and the only difference was
that the thing-in-itself was now placed in the subject instead of, as
formerly, in the object. The entire relativity of both subject and object,
which proves that the thing-in-itself, or the inner nature of the world,
is not to be sought in them at all, but outside of them, and outside
everything else that exists merely relatively, still remained unknown.
Just as if Kant had never existed, the principle of sufficient reason is
to Fichte precisely what it was to all the schoolmen, a _veritas aeterna_.
As an eternal fate reigned over the gods of old, so these _aeternæ
veritates_, these metaphysical, mathematical and metalogical truths, and
in the case of some, the validity of the moral law also, reigned over the
God of the schoolmen. These _veritates_ alone were independent of
everything, and through their necessity both God and the world existed.
According to the principle of sufficient reason, as such a _veritas
aeterna_, the _ego_ is for Fichte the ground of the world, or of the
_non-ego_, the object, which is just its consequent, its creation. He has
therefore taken good care to avoid examining further or limiting the
principle of sufficient reason. If, however, it is thought I should
specify the form of the principle of sufficient reason under the guidance
of which Fichte derives the _non-ego_ from the _ego_, as a spider spins
its web out of itself, I find that it is the principle of sufficient
reason of existence in space: for it is only as referred to this that some
kind of meaning and sense can be attached to the laboured deductions of
the way in which the _ego_ produces and fabricates the _non-ego_ from
itself, which form the content of the most senseless, and consequently the
most wearisome book that was ever written. This philosophy of Fichte,
otherwise not worth mentioning, is interesting to us only as the tardy
expression of the converse of the old materialism. For materialism was the
most consistent system starting from the object, as this is the most
consistent system starting from the subject. Materialism overlooked the
fact that, with the simplest object, it assumed the subject also; and
Fichte overlooked the fact that with the subject (whatever he may call it)
he assumed the object also, for no subject is thinkable without an object.
Besides this he forgot that all _a priori_ deduction, indeed all
demonstration in general, must rest upon some necessity, and that all
necessity is based on the principle of sufficient reason, because to be
necessary, and to follow from given grounds are convertible
conceptions.(10) But the principle of sufficient reason is just the
universal form of the object as such. Thus it is in the object, but is not
valid before and outside of it; it first produces the object and makes it
appear in conformity with its regulative principle. We see then that the
system which starts from the subject contains the same fallacy as the
system, explained above, which starts from the object; it begins by
assuming what it proposes to deduce, the necessary correlative of its
starting-point.

The method of our own system is _toto genere_ distinct from these two
opposite misconceptions, for we start neither from the object nor from the
subject, but from the _idea_, as the first fact of consciousness. Its
first essential, fundamental form is the antithesis of subject and object.
The form of the object again is the principle of sufficient reason in its
various forms. Each of these reigns so absolutely in its own class of
ideas that, as we have seen, when the special form of the principle of
sufficient reason which governs any class of ideas is known, the nature of
the whole class is known also: for the whole class, as idea, is no more
than this form of the principle of sufficient reason itself; so that time
itself is nothing but the principle of existence in it, _i.e._,
succession; space is nothing but the principle of existence in it, _i.e._,
position; matter is nothing but causality; the concept (as will appear
immediately) is nothing but relation to a ground of knowledge. This
thorough and consistent relativity of the world as idea, both according to
its universal form (subject and object), and according to the form which
is subordinate to this (the principle of sufficient reason) warns us, as
we said before, to seek the inner nature of the world in an aspect of it
which is _quite different and quite distinct from the idea_; and in the
next book we shall find this in a fact which is just as immediate to every
living being as the idea.

But we must first consider that class of ideas which belongs to man alone.
The matter of these is the concept, and the subjective correlative is
reason, just as the subjective correlative of the ideas we have already
considered was understanding and sensibility, which are also to be
attributed to all the lower animals.(11)

§ 8. As from the direct light of the sun to the borrowed light of the
moon, we pass from the immediate idea of perception, which stands by
itself and is its own warrant, to reflection, to the abstract, discursive
concepts of the reason, which obtain their whole content from knowledge of
perception, and in relation to it. As long as we continue simply to
perceive, all is clear, firm, and certain. There are neither questions nor
doubts nor errors; we desire to go no further, can go no further; we find
rest in perceiving, and satisfaction in the present. Perception suffices
for itself, and therefore what springs purely from it, and remains true to
it, for example, a genuine work of art, can never be false, nor can it be
discredited through the lapse of time, for it does not present an opinion
but the thing itself. But with abstract knowledge, with reason, doubt and
error appear in the theoretical, care and sorrow in the practical. In the
idea of perception, illusion may at moments take the place of the real;
but in the sphere of abstract thought, error may reign for a thousand
years, impose its yoke upon whole nations, extend to the noblest impulses
of humanity, and, by the help of its slaves and its dupes, may chain and
fetter those whom it cannot deceive. It is the enemy against which the
wisest men of all times have waged unequal war, and only what they have
won from it has become the possession of mankind. Therefore it is well to
draw attention to it at once, as we already tread the ground to which its
province belongs. It has often been said that we ought to follow truth
even although no utility can be seen in it, because it may have indirect
utility which may appear when it is least expected; and I would add to
this, that we ought to be just as anxious to discover and to root out all
error even when no harm is anticipated from it, because its mischief may
be very indirect, and may suddenly appear when we do not expect it, for
all error has poison at its heart. If it is mind, if it is knowledge, that
makes man the lord of creation, there can be no such thing as harmless
error, still less venerable and holy error. And for the consolation of
those who in any way and at any time may have devoted strength and life to
the noble and hard battle against error, I cannot refrain from adding
that, so long as truth is absent, error will have free play, as owls and
bats in the night; but sooner would we expect to see the owls and the bats
drive back the sun in the eastern heavens, than that any truth which has
once been known and distinctly and fully expressed, can ever again be so
utterly vanquished and overcome that the old error shall once more reign
undisturbed over its wide kingdom. This is the power of truth; its
conquest is slow and laborious, but if once the victory be gained it can
never be wrested back again.

Besides the ideas we have as yet considered, which, according to their
construction, could be referred to time, space, and matter, if we consider
them with reference to the object, or to pure sensibility and
understanding (_i.e._, knowledge of causality), if we consider them with
reference to the subject, another faculty of knowledge has appeared in man
alone of all earthly creatures, an entirely new consciousness, which, with
very appropriate and significant exactness, is called _reflection_. For it
is in fact derived from the knowledge of perception, and is a reflected
appearance of it. But it has assumed a nature fundamentally different. The
forms of perception do not affect it, and even the principle of sufficient
reason which reigns over all objects has an entirely different aspect with
regard to it. It is just this new, more highly endowed, consciousness,
this abstract reflex of all that belongs to perception in that conception
of the reason which has nothing to do with perception, that gives to man
that thoughtfulness which distinguishes his consciousness so entirely from
that of the lower animals, and through which his whole behaviour upon
earth is so different from that of his irrational fellow-creatures. He far
surpasses them in power and also in suffering. They live in the present
alone, he lives also in the future and the past. They satisfy the needs of
the moment, he provides by the most ingenious preparations for the future,
yea for days that he shall never see. They are entirely dependent on the
impression of the moment, on the effect of the perceptible motive; he is
determined by abstract conceptions independent of the present. Therefore
he follows predetermined plans, he acts from maxims, without reference to
his surroundings or the accidental impression of the moment. Thus, for
example, he can make with composure deliberate preparations for his own
death, he can dissemble past finding out, and can carry his secret with
him to the grave; lastly, he has an actual choice between several motives;
for only in the abstract can such motives, present together in
consciousness, afford the knowledge with regard to themselves, that the
one excludes the other, and can thus measure themselves against each other
with reference to their power over the will. The motive that overcomes, in
that it decides the question at issue, is the deliberate determinant of
the will, and is a sure indication of its character. The brute, on the
other hand, is determined by the present impression; only the fear of
present compulsion can constrain its desires, until at last this fear has
become custom, and as such continues to determine it; this is called
training. The brute feels and perceives; man, in addition to this,
_thinks_ and _knows_: both _will_. The brute expresses its feelings and
dispositions by gestures and sounds; man communicates his thought to
others, or, if he wishes, he conceals it, by means of speech. Speech is
the first production, and also the necessary organ of his reason.
Therefore in Greek and Italian, speech and reason are expressed by the
same word; ὁ λογος, _il discorso_. _Vernunft_ is derived from _vernehmen_,
which is not a synonym for the verb to hear, but signifies the
consciousness of the meaning of thoughts communicated in words. It is by
the help of language alone that reason accomplishes its most important
achievements,—the united action of several individuals, the planned
co-operation of many thousands, civilisation, the state; also science, the
storing up of experience, the uniting of common properties in one concept,
the communication of truth, the spread of error, thoughts and poems,
dogmas and superstitions. The brute first knows death when it dies, but
man draws consciously nearer to it every hour that he lives; and this
makes life at times a questionable good even to him who has not recognised
this character of constant annihilation in the whole of life. Principally
on this account man has philosophies and religions, though it is uncertain
whether the qualities we admire most in his conduct, voluntary rectitude
and nobility of feeling, were ever the fruit of either of them. As results
which certainly belong only to them, and as productions of reason in this
sphere, we may refer to the marvellous and monstrous opinions of
philosophers of various schools, and the extraordinary and sometimes cruel
customs of the priests of different religions.

It is the universal opinion of all times and of all nations that these
manifold and far-reaching achievements spring from a common principle,
from that peculiar intellectual power which belongs distinctively to man
and which has been called reason, ὁ λογος, το λογιστικον, το λογιμον,
_ratio_. Besides this, no one finds any difficulty in recognising the
manifestations of this faculty, and in saying what is rational and what is
irrational, where reason appears as distinguished from the other faculties
and qualities of man, or lastly, in pointing out what, on account of the
want of reason, we must never expect even from the most sensible brute.
The philosophers of all ages may be said to be on the whole at one about
this general knowledge of reason, and they have also given prominence to
several very important manifestations of it; such as, the control of the
emotions and passions, the capacity for drawing conclusions and
formulating general principles, even such as are true prior to all
experience, and so forth. Still all their explanations of the peculiar
nature of reason are wavering, not clearly defined, discursive, without
unity and concentration; now laying stress on one manifestation, now on
another, and therefore often at variance with each other. Besides this,
many start from the opposition between reason and revelation, a
distinction which is unknown to philosophy, and which only increases
confusion. It is very remarkable that up till now no philosopher has
referred these manifold expressions of reason to one simple function which
would be recognised in them all, from which they would all be explained,
and which would therefore constitute the real inner nature of reason. It
is true that the excellent Locke in the “Essay on the Human Understanding”
(Book II., ch. xi., §§ 10 and 11), very rightly refers to general concepts
as the characteristic which distinguishes man from the brutes, and
Leibnitz quotes this with full approval in the “Nouveaux Essais sur
l’Entendement Humaine” (Book II., ch. xi., §§ 10 and 11.) But when Locke
(in Book IV., ch. xvii., §§ 2 and 3) comes to the special explanation of
reason he entirely loses sight of this simple, primary characteristic, and
he also falls into a wavering, undetermined, incomplete account of mangled
and derivative manifestations of it. Leibnitz also, in the corresponding
part of his work, behaves in a similar manner, only with more confusion
and indistinctness. In the Appendix, I have fully considered how Kant
confused and falsified the conception of the nature of reason. But whoever
will take the trouble to go through in this reference the mass of
philosophical writing which has appeared since Kant, will find out, that
just as the faults of princes must be expiated by whole nations, the
errors of great minds extend their influence over whole generations, and
even over centuries; they grow and propagate themselves, and finally
degenerate into monstrosities. All this arises from the fact that, as
Berkeley says, “Few men think; yet all will have opinions.”

The understanding has only one function—immediate knowledge of the
relation of cause and effect. Yet the perception of the real world, and
all common sense, sagacity, and inventiveness, however multifarious their
applications may be, are quite clearly seen to be nothing more than
manifestations of that one function. So also the reason has one function;
and from it all the manifestations of reason we have mentioned, which
distinguish the life of man from that of the brutes, may easily be
explained. The application or the non-application of this function is all
that is meant by what men have everywhere and always called rational and
irrational.(12)

§ 9. Concepts form a distinct class of ideas, existing only in the mind of
man, and entirely different from the ideas of perception which we have
considered up till now. We can therefore never attain to a sensuous and,
properly speaking, evident knowledge of their nature, but only to a
knowledge which is abstract and discursive. It would, therefore, be absurd
to demand that they should be verified in experience, if by experience is
meant the real external world, which consists of ideas of perception, or
that they should be brought before the eyes or the imagination like
objects of perception. They can only be thought, not perceived, and only
the effects which men accomplish through them are properly objects of
experience. Such effects are language, preconceived and planned action and
science, and all that results from these. Speech, as an object of outer
experience, is obviously nothing more than a very complete telegraph,
which communicates arbitrary signs with the greatest rapidity and the
finest distinctions of difference. But what do these signs mean? How are
they interpreted? When some one speaks, do we at once translate his words
into pictures of the fancy, which instantaneously flash upon us, arrange
and link themselves together, and assume form and colour according to the
words that are poured forth, and their grammatical inflections? What a
tumult there would be in our brains while we listened to a speech, or to
the reading of a book? But what actually happens is not this at all. The
meaning of a speech is, as a rule, immediately grasped, accurately and
distinctly taken in, without the imagination being brought into play. It
is reason which speaks to reason, keeping within its own province. It
communicates and receives abstract conceptions, ideas that cannot be
presented in perceptions, which are framed once for all, and are
relatively few in number, but which yet encompass, contain, and represent
all the innumerable objects of the actual world. This itself is sufficient
to prove that the lower animals can never learn to speak or comprehend,
although they have the organs of speech and ideas of perception in common
with us. But because words represent this perfectly distinct class of
ideas, whose subjective correlative is reason, they are without sense and
meaning for the brutes. Thus language, like every other manifestation
which we ascribe to reason, and like everything which distinguishes man
from the brutes, is to be explained from this as its one simple
source—conceptions, abstract ideas which cannot be presented in
perception, but are general, and have no individual existence in space and
time. Only in single cases do we pass from the conception to the
perception, do we construct images as _representatives of concepts_ in
perception, to which, however, they are never adequate. These cases are
fully discussed in the essay on the principle of sufficient reason, § 28,
and therefore I shall not repeat my explanation here. It may be compared,
however, with what is said by Hume in the twelfth of his “Philosophical
Essays,” p. 244, and by Herder in the “Metacritik,” pt. i. p. 274 (an
otherwise worthless book). The Platonic idea, the possibility of which
depends upon the union of imagination and reason, is the principal subject
of the third book of this work.

Although concepts are fundamentally different from ideas of perception,
they stand in a necessary relation to them, without which they would be
nothing. This relation therefore constitutes the whole nature and
existence of concepts. Reflection is the necessary copy or repetition of
the originally presented world of perception, but it is a special kind of
copy in an entirely different material. Thus concepts may quite properly
be called ideas of ideas. The principle of sufficient reason has here also
a special form. Now we have seen that the form under which the principle
of sufficient reason appears in a class of ideas always constitutes and
exhausts the whole nature of the class, so far as it consists of ideas, so
that time is throughout succession, and nothing more; space is throughout
position, and nothing more; matter is throughout causation, and nothing
more. In the same way the whole nature of concepts, or the class of
abstract ideas, consists simply in the relation which the principle of
sufficient reason expresses in them; and as this is the relation to the
ground of knowledge, the whole nature of the abstract idea is simply and
solely its relation to another idea, which is its ground of knowledge.
This, indeed, may, in the first instance, be a concept, an abstract idea,
and this again may have only a similar abstract ground of knowledge; but
the chain of grounds of knowledge does not extend _ad infinitum_; it must
end at last in a concept which has its ground in knowledge of perception;
for the whole world of reflection rests on the world of perception as its
ground of knowledge. Hence the class of abstract ideas is in this respect
distinguished from other classes; in the latter the principle of
sufficient reason always demands merely a relation to another idea of the
_same_ class, but in the case of abstract ideas, it at last demands a
relation to an idea of _another_ class.

Those concepts which, as has just been pointed out, are not immediately
related to the world of perception, but only through the medium of one, or
it may be several other concepts, have been called by preference
_abstracta_, and those which have their ground immediately in the world of
perception have been called _concreta_. But this last name is only loosely
applicable to the concepts denoted by it, for they are always merely
_abstracta_, and not ideas of perception. These names, which have
originated in a very dim consciousness of the distinctions they imply, may
yet, with this explanation, be retained. As examples of the first kind of
concepts, _i.e._, _abstracta_ in the fullest sense, we may take
“relation,” “virtue,” “investigation,” “beginning,” and so on. As examples
of the second kind, loosely called _concreta_, we may take such concepts
as “man,” “stone,” “horse,” &c. If it were not a somewhat too pictorial
and therefore absurd simile, we might very appropriately call the latter
the ground floor, and the former the upper stories of the building of
reflection.(13)

It is not, as is commonly supposed, an essential characteristic of a
concept that it should contain much under it, that is to say, that many
ideas of perception, or it may be other abstract ideas, should stand to it
in the relation of its ground of knowledge, _i.e._, be thought through it.
This is merely a derived and secondary characteristic, and, as a matter of
fact, does not always exist, though it must always exist potentially. This
characteristic arises from the fact that a concept is an idea of an idea,
_i.e._, its whole nature consists in its relation to another idea; but as
it is not this idea itself, which is generally an idea of perception and
therefore belongs to quite a different class, the latter may have
temporal, spacial, and other determinations, and in general many relations
which are not thought along with it in the concept. Thus we see that
several ideas which are different in unessential particulars may be
thought by means of one concept, _i.e._, may be brought under it. Yet this
power of embracing several things is not an essential but merely an
accidental characteristic of the concept. There may be concepts through
which only one real object is thought, but which are nevertheless abstract
and general, by no means capable of presentation individually and as
perceptions. Such, for example, is the conception which any one may have
of a particular town which he only knows from geography; although only
this one town is thought under it, it might yet be applied to several
towns differing in certain respects. We see then that a concept is not
general because of being abstracted from several objects; but conversely,
because generality, that is to say, non-determination of the particular,
belongs to the concept as an abstract idea of the reason, different things
can be thought by means of the same one.

It follows from what has been said that every concept, just because it is
abstract and incapable of presentation in perception, and is therefore not
a completely determined idea, has what is called extension or sphere, even
in the case in which only one real object exists that corresponds to it.
Now we always find that the sphere of one concept has something in common
with the sphere of other concepts. That is to say, part of what is thought
under one concept is the same as what is thought under other concepts; and
conversely, part of what is thought under these concepts is the same as
what is thought under the first; although, if they are really different
concepts, each of them, or at least one of them, contains something which
the other does not contain; this is the relation in which every subject
stands to its predicate. The recognition of this relation is called
judgment. The representation of these spheres by means of figures in
space, is an exceedingly happy idea. It first occurred to Gottfried
Plouquet, who used squares for the purpose. Lambert, although later than
him, used only lines, which he placed under each other. Euler carried out
the idea completely with circles. Upon what this complete analogy between
the relations of concepts, and those of figures in space, ultimately
rests, I am unable to say. It is, however, a very fortunate circumstance
for logic that all the relations of concepts, according to their
possibility, _i.e._, _a priori_, may be made plain in perception by the
use of such figures, in the following way:—

(1.) The spheres of two concepts coincide: for example the concept of
necessity and the concept of following from given grounds, in the same way
the concepts of _Ruminantia_ and _Bisulca_ (ruminating and cloven-hoofed
animals), also those of vertebrate and red-blooded animals (although there
might be some doubt about this on account of the annelida): they are
convertible concepts. Such concepts are represented by a single circle
which stands for either of them.

(2.) The sphere of one concept includes that of the other.

        [Illustration: Category "horse" within category "animal".]

(3.) A sphere includes two or more spheres which exclude each other and
fill it.

[Illustration: Circle divided into thirds "right", "acute", and "obtuse".]

(4.) Two spheres include each a part of the other.

   [Illustration: Two overlapping circles, one "flower" and one "red".]

(5.) Two spheres lie in a third, but do not fill it.

   [Illustration: A large circle, "matter", within which are two other
                      circles, "water" and "earth".]

This last case applies to all concepts whose spheres have nothing
immediately in common, for there is always a third sphere, often a much
wider one, which includes both.

To these cases all combinations of concepts may be referred, and from them
the entire doctrine of the judgment, its conversion, contraposition,
equipollence, disjunction (this according to the third figure) may be
deduced. From these also may be derived the properties of the judgment,
upon which Kant based his pretended categories of the understanding, with
the exception however of the hypothetical form, which is not a combination
of concepts, but of judgments. A full account is given in the Appendix of
“Modality,” and indeed of every property of judgments on which the
categories are founded.

With regard to the possible combinations of concepts which we have given,
it has only further to be remarked that they may also be combined with
each other in many ways. For example, the fourth figure with the second.
Only if one sphere, which partly or wholly contains another, is itself
contained in a third sphere, do these together exemplify the syllogism in
the first figure, _i.e._, that combination of judgments, by means of which
it is known that a concept which is partly or wholly contained in another
concept, is also contained in a third concept, which again contains the
first: and also, conversely, the negation; the pictorial representation of
which can, of course, only be two connected spheres which do not lie
within a third sphere. If many spheres are brought together in this way we
get a long train of syllogisms. This schematism of concepts, which has
already been fairly well explained in more than one textbook, may be used
as the foundation of the doctrine of the judgment, and indeed of the whole
syllogistic theory, and in this way the treatment of both becomes very
easy and simple. Because, through it, all syllogistic rules may be seen in
their origin, and may be deduced and explained. It is not necessary,
however, to load the memory with these rules, as logic is never of
practical use, but has only a theoretical interest for philosophy. For
although it may be said that logic is related to rational thinking as
thorough-bass is to music, or less exactly, as ethics is to virtue, or
æsthetics to art; we must yet remember that no one ever became an artist
by the study of æsthetics; that a noble character was never formed by the
study of ethics; that long before Rameau, men composed correctly and
beautifully, and that we do not need to know thorough-bass in order to
detect discords: and just as little do we need to know logic in order to
avoid being misled by fallacies. Yet it must be conceded that
thorough-bass is of the greatest use in the practice of musical
composition, although it may not be necessary for the understanding of it;
and indeed æsthetics and even ethics, though in a much less degree, and
for the most part negatively, may be of some use in practice, so that we
cannot deny them all practical worth, but of logic even this much cannot
be conceded. It is nothing more than the knowledge in the abstract of what
every one knows in the concrete. Therefore we call in the aid of logical
rules, just as little to enable us to construct a correct argument as to
prevent us from consenting to a false one, and the most learned logician
lays aside the rules of logic altogether in his actual thought. This may
be explained in the following way. Every science is a system of general
and therefore abstract truths, laws, and rules with reference to a special
class of objects. The individual case coming under these laws is
determined in accordance with this general knowledge, which is valid once
for all; because such application of the general principle is far easier
than the exhaustive investigation of the particular case; for the general
abstract knowledge which has once been obtained is always more within our
reach than the empirical investigation of the particular case. With logic,
however, it is just the other way. It is the general knowledge of the mode
of procedure of the reason expressed in the form of rules. It is reached
by the introspection of reason, and by abstraction from all content. But
this mode of procedure is necessary and essential to reason, so that it
will never depart from it if left to itself. It is, therefore, easier and
surer to let it proceed itself according to its nature in each particular
case, than to present to it the knowledge abstracted from this procedure
in the form of a foreign and externally given law. It is easier, because,
while in the case of all other sciences, the general rule is more within
our reach than the investigation of the particular case taken by itself;
with the use of reason, on the contrary, its necessary procedure in a
given case is always more within our reach than the general rule
abstracted from it; for that which thinks in us is reason itself. It is
surer, because a mistake may more easily occur in such abstract knowledge,
or in its application, than that a process of reason should take place
which would run contrary to its essence and nature. Hence arises the
remarkable fact, that while in other sciences the particular case is
always proved by the rule, in logic, on the contrary, the rule must always
be proved from the particular case; and even the most practised logician,
if he remark that in some particular case he concludes otherwise than the
rule prescribes, will always expect to find a mistake in the rule rather
than in his own conclusion. To desire to make practical use of logic
means, therefore, to desire to derive with unspeakable trouble, from
general rules, that which is immediately known with the greatest certainty
in the particular case. It is just as if a man were to consult mechanics
as to the motion of his body, and physiology as to his digestion; and
whoever has learnt logic for practical purposes is like him who would
teach a beaver to make its own dam. Logic is, therefore, without practical
utility; but it must nevertheless be retained, because it has
philosophical interest as the special knowledge of the organisation and
action of reason. It is rightly regarded as a definite, self-subsisting,
self-contained, complete, and thoroughly safe discipline; to be treated
scientifically for itself alone and independently of everything else, and
therefore to be studied at the universities. But it has its real value, in
relation to philosophy as a whole, in the inquiry into the nature of
knowledge, and indeed of rational and abstract knowledge. Therefore the
exposition of logic should not have so much the form of a practical
science, should not contain merely naked arbitrary rules for the correct
formation of the judgment, the syllogism, &c., but should rather be
directed to the knowledge of the nature of reason and the concept, and to
the detailed investigation of the principle of sufficient reason of
knowing. For logic is only a paraphrase of this principle, and, more
exactly, only of that exemplification of it in which the ground that gives
truth to the judgment is neither empirical nor metaphysical, but logical
or metalogical. Besides the principle of sufficient reason of knowing, it
is necessary to take account of the three remaining fundamental laws of
thought, or judgments of metalogical truth, so nearly related to it; and
out of these the whole science of reason grows. The nature of thought
proper, that is to say, of the judgment and the syllogism, must be
exhibited in the combination of the spheres of concepts, according to the
analogy of the special schema, in the way shown above; and from all this
the rules of the judgment and the syllogism are to be deduced by
construction. The only practical use we can make of logic is in a debate,
when we can convict our antagonist of his intentional fallacies, rather
than of his actual mistakes, by giving them their technical names. By thus
throwing into the background the practical aim of logic, and bringing out
its connection with the whole scheme of philosophy as one of its chapters,
we do not think that we shall make the study of it less prevalent than it
is just now. For at the present day every one who does not wish to remain
uncultured, and to be numbered with the ignorant and incompetent
multitude, must study speculative philosophy. For the nineteenth century
is a philosophical age, though by this we do not mean either that it has
philosophy, or that philosophy governs it, but rather that it is ripe for
philosophy, and, therefore, stands in need of it. This is a sign of a high
degree of civilisation, and indeed, is a definite stage in the culture of
the ages.(14)

Though logic is of so little practical use, it cannot be denied that it
was invented for practical purposes. It appears to me to have originated
in the following way:—As the love of debating developed among the
Eleatics, the Megarics, and the Sophists, and by degrees became almost a
passion, the confusion in which nearly every debate ended must have made
them feel the necessity of a method of procedure as a guide; and for this
a scientific dialectic had to be sought. The first thing which would have
to be observed would be that both the disputing parties should always be
agreed on some one proposition, to which the disputed points might be
referred. The beginning of the methodical procedure consisted in this,
that the propositions admitted on both sides were formally stated to be
so, and placed at the head of the inquiry. But these propositions were at
first concerned only with the material of the inquiry. It was soon
observed that in the process of going back to the truth admitted on both
sides, and of deducing their assertions from it, each party followed
certain forms and laws about which, without any express agreement, there
was no difference of opinion. And from this it became evident that these
must constitute the peculiar and natural procedure of reason itself, the
form of investigation. Although this was not exposed to any doubt or
difference of opinion, some pedantically systematic philosopher hit upon
the idea that it would look well, and be the completion of the method of
dialectic, if this formal part of all discussion, this regular procedure
of reason itself, were to be expressed in abstract propositions, just like
the substantial propositions admitted on both sides, and placed at the
beginning of every investigation, as the fixed canon of debate to which
reference and appeal must always be made. In this way what had formerly
been followed only by tacit agreement, and instinctively, would be
consciously recognised and formally expressed. By degrees, more or less
perfect expressions were found for the fundamental principles of logic,
such as the principles of contradiction, sufficient reason, excluded
middle, the _dictum de omni et nullo_, as well as the special rules of the
syllogism, as for example, _ex meris particularibus aut negativis nihil
sequitur, a rationato ad rationem non valet consequentia_, and so on. That
all this was only brought about slowly, and with great pains, and up till
the time of Aristotle remained very incomplete, is evident from the
awkward and tedious way in which logical truths are brought out in many of
the Platonic dialogues, and still more from what Sextus Empiricus tells us
of the controversies of the Megarics, about the easiest and simplest
logical rules, and the laborious way in which they were brought into a
definite form (Sext. Emp. adv. Math. l. 8, p. 112). But Aristotle
collected, arranged, and corrected all that had been discovered before his
time, and brought it to an incomparably greater state of perfection. If we
thus observe how the course of Greek culture had prepared the way for, and
led up to the work of Aristotle, we shall be little inclined to believe
the assertion of the Persian author, quoted by Sir William Jones with much
approval, that Kallisthenes found a complete system of logic among the
Indians, and sent it to his uncle Aristotle (Asiatic Researches, vol. iv.
p. 163). It is easy to understand that in the dreary middle ages the
Aristotelian logic would be very acceptable to the controversial spirit of
the schoolmen, which, in the absence of all real knowledge, spent its
energy upon mere formulas and words, and that it would be eagerly adopted
even in its mutilated Arabian form, and presently established as the
centre of all knowledge. Though its authority has since declined, yet up
to our own time logic has retained the credit of a self-contained,
practical, and highly important science. Indeed, in our own day, the
Kantian philosophy, the foundation-stone of which is taken from logic, has
excited a new interest in it; which, in this respect, at any rate, that
is, as the means of the knowledge of the nature of reason, it deserves.

Correct and accurate conclusions may be arrived at if we carefully observe
the relation of the spheres of concepts, and only conclude that one sphere
is contained in a third sphere, when we have clearly seen that this first
sphere is contained in a second, which in its turn is contained in the
third. On the other hand, the art of sophistry lies in casting only a
superficial glance at the relations of the spheres of the concepts, and
then manipulating these relations to suit our purposes, generally in the
following way:—When the sphere of an observed concept lies partly within
that of another concept, and partly within a third altogether different
sphere, we treat it as if it lay entirely within the one or the other, as
may suit our purpose. For example, in speaking of passion, we may subsume
it under the concept of the greatest force, the mightiest agency in the
world, or under the concept of the irrational, and this again under the
concept of impotency or weakness. We may then repeat the process, and
start anew with each concept to which the argument leads us. A concept has
almost always several others, which partially come under it, and each of
these contains part of the sphere of the first, but also includes in its
own sphere something more, which is not in the first. But we draw
attention only to that one of these latter concepts, under which we wish
to subsume the first, and let the others remain unobserved, or keep them
concealed. On the possession of this skill depends the whole art of
sophistry and all finer fallacies; for logical fallacies such as
_mentiens_, _velatus_, _cornatus_, &c., are clearly too clumsy for actual
use. I am not aware that hitherto any one has traced the nature of all
sophistry and persuasion back to this last possible ground of its
existence, and referred it to the peculiar character of concepts, _i.e._,
to the procedure of reason itself. Therefore, as my exposition has led me
to it, though it is very easily understood, I will illustrate it in the
following table by means of a schema. This table is intended to show how
the spheres of concepts overlap each other at many points, and so leave
room for a passage from each concept to whichever one we please of several
other concepts. I hope, however, that no one will be led by this table to
attach more importance to this little explanation, which I have merely
given in passing, than ought to belong to it, from the nature of the
subject. I have chosen as an illustration the concept of travelling. Its
sphere partially includes four others, to any of which the sophist may
pass at will; these again partly include other spheres, several of them
two or more at once, and through these the sophist takes whichever way he
chooses, always as if it were the only way, till at last he reaches, in
good or evil, whatever end he may have in view. In passing from one sphere
to another, it is only necessary always to follow the direction from the
centre (the given chief concept) to the circumference, and never to
reverse this process. Such a piece of sophistry may be either an unbroken
speech, or it may assume the strict syllogistic form, according to what is
the weak side of the hearer. Most scientific arguments, and especially
philosophical demonstrations, are at bottom not much more than this, for
how else would it be possible, that so much, in different ages, has not
only been falsely apprehended (for error itself has a different source),
but demonstrated and proved, and has yet afterwards been found to be
fundamentally wrong, for example, the Leibnitz-Wolfian Philosophy,
Ptolemaic Astronomy, Stahl’s Chemistry, Newton’s Theory of Colours, &c.
&c.(15)

§ 10. Through all this, the question presses ever more upon us, how
_certainty_ is to be attained, how _judgments __ are to be established_,
what constitutes _rational knowledge_, (_wissen_), and _science_, which we
rank with language and deliberate action as the third great benefit
conferred by reason.

Reason is feminine in nature; it can only give after it has received. Of
itself it has nothing but the empty forms of its operation. There is no
absolutely pure rational knowledge except the four principles to which I
have attributed metalogical truth; the principles of identity,
contradiction, excluded middle, and sufficient reason of knowledge. For
even the rest of logic is not absolutely pure rational knowledge. It
presupposes the relations and the combinations of the spheres of concepts.
But concepts in general only exist after experience of ideas of
perception, and as their whole nature consists in their relation to these,
it is clear that they presuppose them. No special content, however, is
presupposed, but merely the existence of a content generally, and so logic
as a whole may fairly pass for pure rational science. In all other
sciences reason has received its content from ideas of perception; in
mathematics from the relations of space and time, presented in intuition
or perception prior to all experience; in pure natural science, that is,
in what we know of the course of nature prior to any experience, the
content of the science proceeds from the pure understanding, _i.e._, from
the _a priori_ knowledge of the law of causality and its connection with
those pure intuitions or perceptions of space and time. In all other
sciences everything that is not derived from the sources we have just
referred to belongs to experience. Speaking generally, _to know
rationally_ (_wissen_) means to have in the power of the mind, and capable
of being reproduced at will, such judgments as have their sufficient
ground of knowledge in something outside themselves, _i.e._, are true.
Thus only abstract cognition is _rational knowledge_ (_wissen_), which is
therefore the result of reason, so that we cannot accurately say of the
lower animals that they _rationally __ know_ (_wissen_) anything, although
they have apprehension of what is presented in perception, and memory of
this, and consequently imagination, which is further proved by the
circumstance that they dream. We attribute consciousness to them, and
therefore although the word (_bewusstsein_) is derived from the verb to
know rationally (_wissen_), the conception of consciousness corresponds
generally with that of idea of whatever kind it may be. Thus we attribute
life to plants, but not consciousness. _Rational knowledge_ (_wissen_) is
therefore abstract consciousness, the permanent possession in concepts of
the reason, of what has become known in another way.

§ 11. In this regard the direct opposite of _rational knowledge_ is
feeling, and therefore we must insert the explanation of feeling here. The
concept which the word feeling denotes has merely a negative content,
which is this, that something which is present in consciousness, _is not a
concept_, _is not abstract rational knowledge_. Except this, whatever it
may be, it comes under the concept of _feeling_. Thus the immeasurably
wide sphere of the concept of feeling includes the most different kinds of
objects, and no one can ever understand how they come together until he
has recognised that they all agree in this negative respect, that they are
not _abstract concepts_. For the most diverse and even antagonistic
elements lie quietly side by side in this concept; for example, religious
feeling, feeling of sensual pleasure, moral feeling, bodily feeling, as
touch, pain, sense of colour, of sounds and their harmonies and discords,
feeling of hate, of disgust, of self-satisfaction, of honour, of disgrace,
of right, of wrong, sense of truth, æsthetic feeling, feeling of power,
weakness, health, friendship, love, &c. &c. There is absolutely nothing in
common among them except the negative quality that they are not abstract
rational knowledge. But this diversity becomes more striking when the
apprehension of space relations presented _a priori_ in perception, and
also the knowledge of the pure understanding is brought under this
concept, and when we say of all knowledge and all truth, of which we are
first conscious only intuitively, and have not yet formulated in abstract
concepts, we _feel_ it. I should like, for the sake of illustration, to
give some examples of this taken from recent books, as they are striking
proofs of my theory. I remember reading in the introduction to a German
translation of Euclid, that we ought to make beginners in geometry draw
the figures before proceeding to demonstrate, for in this way they would
already feel geometrical truth before the demonstration brought them
complete knowledge. In the same way Schleiermacher speaks in his “Critique
of Ethics” of logical and mathematical feeling (p. 339), and also of the
feeling of the sameness or difference of two formulas (p. 342). Again
Tennemann in his “History of Philosophy” (vol. I., p. 361) says, “One
_felt_ that the fallacies were not right, but could not point out the
mistakes.” Now, so long as we do not regard this concept “_feeling_” from
the right point of view, and do not recognise that one negative
characteristic which alone is essential to it, it must constantly give
occasion for misunderstanding and controversy, on account of the excessive
wideness of its sphere, and its entirely negative and very limited content
which is determined in a purely one-sided manner. Since then we have in
German the nearly synonymous word _empfindung_ (sensation), it would be
convenient to make use of it for bodily feeling, as a sub-species. This
concept “feeling,” which is quite out of proportion to all others,
doubtless originated in the following manner. All concepts, and concepts
alone, are denoted by words; they exist only for the reason, and proceed
from it. With concepts, therefore, we are already at a one-sided point of
view; but from such a point of view what is near appears distinct and is
set down as positive, what is farther off becomes mixed up and is soon
regarded as merely negative. Thus each nation calls all others foreign: to
the Greek all others are barbarians; to the Englishman all that is not
England or English is continent or continental; to the believer all others
are heretics, or heathens; to the noble all others are _roturiers_; to the
student all others are Philistines, and so forth. Now, reason itself,
strange as it may seem, is guilty of the same one-sidedness, indeed one
might say of the same crude ignorance arising from vanity, for it classes
under the one concept, “_feeling_,” every modification of consciousness
which does not immediately belong to its own mode of apprehension, that is
to say, which is _not an abstract concept_. It has had to pay the penalty
of this hitherto in misunderstanding and confusion in its own province,
because its own procedure had not become clear to it through thorough
self-knowledge, for a special faculty of feeling has been set up, and new
theories of it are constructed.

§ 12. _Rational knowledge_ (_wissen_) is then all abstract knowledge,—that
is, the knowledge which is peculiar to the reason as distinguished from
the understanding. Its contradictory opposite has just been explained to
be the concept “feeling.” Now, as reason only reproduces, for knowledge,
what has been received in another way, it does not actually extend our
knowledge, but only gives it another form. It enables us to know in the
abstract and generally, what first became known in sense-perception, in
the concrete. But this is much more important than it appears at first
sight when so expressed. For it depends entirely upon the fact that
knowledge has become rational or abstract knowledge (_wissen_), that it
can be safely preserved, that it is communicable and susceptible of
certain and wide-reaching application to practice. Knowledge in the form
of sense-perception is valid only of the particular case, extends only to
what is nearest, and ends with it, for sensibility and understanding can
only comprehend one object at a time. Every enduring, arranged, and
planned activity must therefore proceed from principles,—that is, from
abstract knowledge, and it must be conducted in accordance with them.
Thus, for example, the knowledge of the relation of cause and effect
arrived at by the understanding, is in itself far completer, deeper and
more exhaustive than anything that can be thought about it in the
abstract; the understanding alone knows in perception directly and
completely the nature of the effect of a lever, of a pulley, or a
cog-wheel, the stability of an arch, and so forth. But on account of the
peculiarity of the knowledge of perception just referred to, that it only
extends to what is immediately present, the mere understanding can never
enable us to construct machines and buildings. Here reason must come in;
it must substitute abstract concepts for ideas of perception, and take
them as the guide of action; and if they are right, the anticipated result
will happen. In the same way we have perfect knowledge in pure perception
of the nature and constitution of the parabola, hyperbola, and spiral; but
if we are to make trustworthy application of this knowledge to the real,
it must first become abstract knowledge, and by this it certainly loses
its character of intuition or perception, but on the other hand it gains
the certainty and preciseness of abstract knowledge. The differential
calculus does not really extend our knowledge of the curve, it contains
nothing that was not already in the mere pure perception of the curve; but
it alters the kind of knowledge, it changes the intuitive into an abstract
knowledge, which is so valuable for application. But here we must refer to
another peculiarity of our faculty of knowledge, which could not be
observed until the distinction between the knowledge of the senses and
understanding and abstract knowledge had been made quite clear. It is
this, that relations of space cannot as such be directly translated into
abstract knowledge, but only temporal quantities,—that is, numbers, are
suitable for this. Numbers alone can be expressed in abstract concepts
which accurately correspond to them, not spacial quantities. The concept
“thousand” is just as different from the concept “ten,” as both these
temporal quantities are in perception. We think of a thousand as a
distinct multiple of ten, into which we can resolve it at pleasure for
perception in time,—that is to say, we can count it. But between the
abstract concept of a mile and that of a foot, apart from any concrete
perception of either, and without the help of number, there is no accurate
distinction corresponding to the quantities themselves. In both we only
think of a spacial quantity in general, and if they must be completely
distinguished we are compelled either to call in the assistance of
intuition or perception in space, which would be a departure from abstract
knowledge, or we must think the difference in _numbers_. If then we wish
to have abstract knowledge of space-relations we must first translate them
into time-relations,—that is, into numbers; therefore only arithmetic, and
not geometry, is the universal science of quantity, and geometry must be
translated into arithmetic if it is to be communicable, accurately precise
and applicable in practice. It is true that a space-relation as such may
also be thought in the abstract; for example, “the sine increases as the
angle,” but if the quantity of this relation is to be given, it requires
number for its expression. This necessity, that if we wish to have
abstract knowledge of space-relations (_i.e._, rational knowledge, not
mere intuition or perception), space with its three dimensions must be
translated into time which has only one dimension, this necessity it is,
which makes mathematics so difficult. This becomes very clear if we
compare the perception of curves with their analytical calculation, or the
table of logarithms of the trigonometrical functions with the perception
of the changing relations of the parts of a triangle, which are expressed
by them. What vast mazes of figures, what laborious calculations it would
require to express in the abstract what perception here apprehends at a
glance completely and with perfect accuracy, namely, how the co-sine
diminishes as the sine increases, how the co-sine of one angle is the sine
of another, the inverse relation of the increase and decrease of the two
angles, and so forth. How time, we might say, must complain, that with its
one dimension it should be compelled to express the three dimensions of
space! Yet this is necessary if we wish to possess, for application, an
expression, in abstract concepts, of space-relations. They could not be
translated directly into abstract concepts, but only through the medium of
the pure temporal quantity, number, which alone is directly related to
abstract knowledge. Yet it is worthy of remark, that as space adapts
itself so well to perception, and by means of its three dimensions, even
its complicated relations are easily apprehended, while it eludes the
grasp of abstract knowledge; time, on the contrary, passes easily into
abstract knowledge, but gives very little to perception. Our perceptions
of numbers in their proper element, mere time, without the help of space,
scarcely extends as far as ten, and beyond that we have only abstract
concepts of numbers, no knowledge of them which can be presented in
perception. On the other hand, we connect with every numeral, and with all
algebraical symbols, accurately defined abstract concepts.

We may further remark here that some minds only find full satisfaction in
what is known through perception. What they seek is the reason and
consequent of being in space, sensuously expressed; a demonstration after
the manner of Euclid, or an arithmetical solution of spacial problems,
does not please them. Other minds, on the contrary, seek merely the
abstract concepts which are needful for applying and communicating
knowledge. They have patience and memory for abstract principles,
formulas, demonstrations in long trains of reasoning, and calculations, in
which the symbols represent the most complicated abstractions. The latter
seek preciseness, the former sensible perception. The difference is
characteristic.

The greatest value of rational or abstract knowledge is that it can be
communicated and permanently retained. It is principally on this account
that it is so inestimably important for practice. Any one may have a
direct perceptive knowledge through the understanding alone, of the causal
connection, of the changes and motions of natural bodies, and he may find
entire satisfaction in it; but he cannot communicate this knowledge to
others until it has been made permanent for thought in concepts. Knowledge
of the first kind is even sufficient for practice, if a man puts his
knowledge into practice himself, in an action which can be accomplished
while the perception is still vivid; but it is not sufficient if the help
of others is required, or even if the action is his own but must be
carried out at different times, and therefore requires a pre-conceived
plan. Thus, for example, a practised billiard-player may have a perfect
knowledge of the laws of the impact of elastic bodies upon each other,
merely in the understanding, merely for direct perception; and for him it
is quite sufficient; but on the other hand it is only the man who has
studied the science of mechanics, who has, properly speaking, a rational
knowledge of these laws, that is, a knowledge of them in the abstract.
Such knowledge of the understanding in perception is sufficient even for
the construction of machines, when the inventor of the machine executes
the work himself; as we often see in the case of talented workmen, who
have no scientific knowledge. But whenever a number of men, and their
united action taking place at different times, is required for the
completion of a mechanical work, of a machine, or a building, then he who
conducts it must have thought out the plan in the abstract, and such
co-operative activity is only possible through the assistance of reason.
It is, however, remarkable that in the first kind of activity, in which we
have supposed that one man alone, in an uninterrupted course of action,
accomplishes something, abstract knowledge, the application of reason or
reflection, may often be a hindrance to him; for example, in the case of
billiard-playing, of fighting, of tuning an instrument, or in the case of
singing. Here perceptive knowledge must directly guide action; its passage
through reflection makes it uncertain, for it divides the attention and
confuses the man. Thus savages and untaught men, who are little accustomed
to think, perform certain physical exercises, fight with beasts, shoot
with bows and arrows and the like, with a certainty and rapidity which the
reflecting European never attains to, just because his deliberation makes
him hesitate and delay. For he tries, for example, to hit the right
position or the right point of time, by finding out the mean between two
false extremes; while the savage hits it directly without thinking of the
false courses open to him. In the same way it is of no use to me to know
in the abstract the exact angle, in degrees and minutes, at which I must
apply a razor, if I do not know it intuitively, that is, if I have not got
it in my touch. The knowledge of physiognomy also, is interfered with by
the application of reason. This knowledge must be gained directly through
the understanding. We say that the expression, the meaning of the
features, can only be _felt_, that is, it cannot be put into abstract
concepts. Every man has his direct intuitive method of physiognomy and
pathognomy, yet one man understands more clearly than another these
_signatura rerum_. But an abstract science of physiognomy to be taught and
learned is not possible; for the distinctions of difference are here so
fine that concepts cannot reach them; therefore abstract knowledge is
related to them as a mosaic is to a painting by a Van der Werft or a
Denner. In mosaics, however fine they may be, the limits of the stones are
always there, and therefore no continuous passage from one colour to
another is possible, and this is also the case with regard to concepts,
with their rigidity and sharp delineation; however finely we may divide
them by exact definition, they are still incapable of reaching the finer
modifications of the perceptible, and this is just what happens in the
example we have taken, knowledge of physiognomy.(16)

This quality of concepts by which they resemble the stones of a mosaic,
and on account of which perception always remains their asymptote, is also
the reason why nothing good is produced in art by their means. If the
singer or the virtuoso attempts to guide his execution by reflection he
remains silent. And this is equally true of the composer, the painter, and
the poet. The concept always remains unfruitful in art; it can only direct
the technical part of it, its sphere is science. We shall consider more
fully in the third book, why all true art proceeds from sensuous
knowledge, never from the concept. Indeed, with regard to behaviour also,
and personal agreeableness in society, the concept has only a negative
value in restraining the grosser manifestations of egotism and brutality;
so that a polished manner is its commendable production. But all that is
attractive, gracious, charming in behaviour, all affectionateness and
friendliness, must not proceed from the concepts, for if it does, “we feel
intention, and are put out of tune.” All dissimulation is the work of
reflection; but it cannot be maintained constantly and without
interruption: “_nemo __ potest personam diu ferre fictum_,” says Seneca in
his book _de clementia_; and so it is generally found out and loses its
effect. Reason is needed in the full stress of life, where quick
conclusions, bold action, rapid and sure comprehension are required, but
it may easily spoil all if it gains the upper hand, and by perplexing
hinders the intuitive, direct discovery, and grasp of the right by simple
understanding, and thus induces irresolution.

Lastly, virtue and holiness do not proceed from reflection, but from the
inner depths of the will, and its relation to knowledge. The exposition of
this belongs to another part of our work; this, however, I may remark
here, that the dogmas relating to ethics may be the same in the reason of
whole nations, but the action of every individual different; and the
converse also holds good; action, we say, is guided by _feelings_,—that
is, simply not by concepts, but as a matter of fact by the ethical
character. Dogmas occupy the idle reason; but action in the end pursues
its own course independently of them, generally not according to abstract
rules, but according to unspoken maxims, the expression of which is the
whole man himself. Therefore, however different the religious dogmas of
nations may be, yet in the case of all of them, a good action is
accompanied by unspeakable satisfaction, and a bad action by endless
remorse. No mockery can shake the former; no priest’s absolution can
deliver from the latter. Notwithstanding this, we must allow, that for the
pursuit of a virtuous life, the application of reason is needful; only it
is not its source, but has the subordinate function of preserving
resolutions which have been made, of providing maxims to withstand the
weakness of the moment, and give consistency to action. It plays the same
part ultimately in art also, where it has just as little to do with the
essential matter, but assists in carrying it out, for genius is not always
at call, and yet the work must be completed in all its parts and rounded
off to a whole.(17)

§ 13. All these discussions of the advantages and disadvantages of the
application of reason are intended to show, that although abstract
rational knowledge is the reflex of ideas of perception, and is founded on
them, it is by no means in such entire congruity with them that it could
everywhere take their place: indeed it never corresponds to them quite
accurately. And thus, as we have seen, many human actions can only be
performed by the help of reason and deliberation, and yet there are some
which are better performed without its assistance. This very incongruity
of sensuous and abstract knowledge, on account of which the latter always
merely approximates to the former, as mosaic approximates to painting, is
the cause of a very remarkable phenomenon which, like reason itself, is
peculiar to human nature, and of which the explanations that have ever
anew been attempted, are insufficient: I mean _laughter_. On account of
the source of this phenomenon, we cannot avoid giving the explanation of
it here, though it again interrupts the course of our work to do so. The
cause of laughter in every case is simply the sudden perception of the
incongruity between a concept and the real objects which have been thought
through it in some relation, and laughter itself is just the expression of
this incongruity. It often occurs in this way: two or more real objects
are thought through _one_ concept, and the identity of the concept is
transferred to the objects; it then becomes strikingly apparent from the
entire difference of the objects in other respects, that the concept was
only applicable to them from a one-sided point of view. It occurs just as
often, however, that the incongruity between a single real object and the
concept under which, from one point of view, it has rightly been subsumed,
is suddenly felt. Now the more correct the subsumption of such objects
under a concept may be from one point of view, and the greater and more
glaring their incongruity with it, from another point of view, the greater
is the ludicrous effect which is produced by this contrast. All laughter
then is occasioned by a paradox, and therefore by unexpected subsumption,
whether this is expressed in words or in actions. This, briefly stated, is
the true explanation of the ludicrous.

I shall not pause here to relate anecdotes as examples to illustrate my
theory; for it is so simple and comprehensible that it does not require
them, and everything ludicrous which the reader may remember is equally
valuable as a proof of it. But the theory is confirmed and illustrated by
distinguishing two species into which the ludicrous is divided, and which
result from the theory. Either, we have previously known two or more very
different real objects, ideas of sense-perception, and have intentionally
identified them through the unity of a concept which comprehends them
both; this species of the ludicrous is called _wit_. Or, conversely, the
concept is first present in knowledge, and we pass from it to reality, and
to operation upon it, to action: objects which in other respects are
fundamentally different, but which are all thought in that one concept,
are now regarded and treated in the same way, till, to the surprise and
astonishment of the person acting, the great difference of their other
aspects appears: this species of the ludicrous is called _folly_.
Therefore everything ludicrous is either a flash of wit or a foolish
action, according as the procedure has been from the discrepancy of the
objects to the identity of the concept, or the converse; the former always
intentional, the latter always unintentional, and from without. To seem to
reverse the starting-point, and to conceal wit with the mask of folly, is
the art of the jester and the clown. Being quite aware of the diversity of
the objects, the jester unites them, with secret wit, under one concept,
and then starting from this concept he receives from the subsequently
discovered diversity of the objects the surprise which he himself
prepared. It follows from this short but sufficient theory of the
ludicrous, that, if we set aside the last case, that of the jester, wit
must always show itself in words, folly generally in actions, though also
in words, when it only expresses an intention and does not actually carry
it out, or when it shows itself merely in judgments and opinions.

_Pedantry_ is a form of folly. It arises in this way: a man lacks
confidence in his own understanding, and, therefore, does not wish to
trust to it, to recognise what is right directly in the particular case.
He, therefore, puts it entirely under the control of the reason, and seeks
to be guided by reason in everything; that is to say, he tries always to
proceed from general concepts, rules, and maxims, and to confine himself
strictly to them in life, in art, and even in moral conduct. Hence that
clinging to the form, to the manner, to the expression and word which is
characteristic of pedantry, and which with it takes the place of the real
nature of the matter. The incongruity then between the concept and reality
soon shows itself here, and it becomes evident that the former never
condescends to the particular case, and that with its generality and rigid
definiteness it can never accurately apply to the fine distinctions of
difference and innumerable modifications of the actual. Therefore, the
pedant, with his general maxims, almost always misses the mark in life,
shows himself to be foolish, awkward, useless. In art, in which the
concept is unfruitful, he produces lifeless, stiff, abortive mannerisms.
Even with regard to ethics, the purpose to act rightly or nobly cannot
always be carried out in accordance with abstract maxims; for in many
cases the excessively nice distinctions in the nature of the circumstances
necessitate a choice of the right proceeding directly from the character;
for the application of mere abstract maxims sometimes gives false results,
because the maxims only half apply; and sometimes cannot be carried out,
because they are foreign to the individual character of the actor, and
this never allows itself to be entirely discovered; therefore,
inconsistencies arise. Since then Kant makes it a condition of the moral
worth of an action, that it shall proceed from pure rational abstract
maxims, without any inclination or momentary emotion, we cannot entirely
absolve him from the reproach of encouraging moral pedantry. This reproach
is the significance of Schiller’s epigram, entitled “Scruples of
Conscience.” When we speak, especially in connection with politics, of
doctrinaires, theorists, savants, and so forth, we mean pedants, that is,
persons who know the things well in the abstract, but not in the concrete.
Abstraction consists in thinking away the less general predicates; but it
is precisely upon these that so much depends in practice.

To complete our theory it remains for us to mention a spurious kind of
wit, the play upon words, the _calembourg_, the pun, to which may be added
the equivocation, the _double entendre_, the chief use of which is the
expression of what is obscene. Just as the witticism brings two very
different real objects under one concept, the pun brings two different
concepts, by the assistance of accident, under one word. The same contrast
appears, only familiar and more superficial, because it does not spring
from the nature of things, but merely from the accident of nomenclature.
In the case of the witticism the identity is in the concept, the
difference in the reality, but in the case of the pun the difference is in
the concepts and the identity in the reality, for the terminology is here
the reality. It would only be a somewhat far-fetched comparison if we were
to say that the pun is related to the witticism as the parabola (_sic_) of
the upper inverted cone to that of the lower. The misunderstanding of the
word or the _quid pro quo_ is the unintentional pun, and is related to it
exactly as folly is to wit. Thus the deaf man often affords occasion for
laughter, just as much as the fool, and inferior writers of comedy often
use the former for the latter to raise a laugh.

I have treated laughter here only from the psychical side; with regard to
the physical side, I refer to what is said on the subject in the
“Parerga,” vol. II. ch. vi., § 98.(18)

§ 14. By means of these various discussions it is hoped that both the
difference and the relation between the process of knowledge that belongs
to the reason, rational knowledge, the concept on the one hand, and the
direct knowledge in purely sensuous, mathematical intuition or perception,
and apprehension by the understanding on the other hand, has been clearly
brought out. This remarkable relation of our kinds of knowledge led us
almost inevitably to give, in passing, explanations of feeling and of
laughter, but from all this we now turn back to the further consideration
of science as the third great benefit which reason confers on man, the
other two being speech and deliberate action. The general discussion of
science which now devolves upon us, will be concerned partly with its
form, partly with the foundation of its judgments, and lastly with its
content.

We have seen that, with the exception of the basis of pure logic, rational
knowledge in general has not its source in the reason itself; but having
been otherwise obtained as knowledge of perception, it is stored up in the
reason, for through reason it has entirely changed its character, and has
become abstract knowledge. All rational knowledge, that is, knowledge that
has been raised to consciousness in the abstract, is related to science
strictly so called, as a fragment to the whole. Every one has gained a
rational knowledge of many different things through experience, through
consideration of the individual objects presented to him, but only he who
sets himself the task of acquiring a complete knowledge in the abstract of
a particular class of objects, strives after science. This class can only
be marked off by means of a concept; therefore, at the beginning of every
science there stands a concept, and by means of it the class of objects
concerning which this science promises a complete knowledge in the
abstract, is separated in thought from the whole world of things. For
example, the concept of space-relations, or of the action of unorganised
bodies upon each other, or of the nature of plants, or of animals, or of
the successive changes of the surface of the globe, or of the changes of
the human race as a whole, or of the construction of a language, and so
forth. If science sought to obtain the knowledge of its object, by
investigating each individual thing that is thought through the concept,
till by degrees it had learned the whole, no human memory would be equal
to the task, and no certainty of completeness would be obtainable.
Therefore, it makes use of that property of concept-spheres explained
above, that they include each other, and it concerns itself mainly with
the wider spheres which lie within the concept of its object in general.
When the relations of these spheres to each other have been determined,
all that is thought in them is also generally determined, and can now be
more and more accurately determined by the separation of smaller and
smaller concept-spheres. In this way it is possible for a science to
comprehend its object completely. This path which it follows to knowledge,
the path from the general to the particular, distinguishes it from
ordinary rational knowledge; therefore, systematic form is an essential
and characteristic feature of science. The combination of the most general
concept-spheres of every science, that is, the knowledge of its first
principles, is the indispensable condition of mastering it; how far we
advance from these to the more special propositions is a matter of choice,
and does not increase the thoroughness but only the extent of our
knowledge of the science. The number of the first principles to which all
the rest are subordinated, varies greatly in the different sciences, so
that in some there is more subordination, in others more co-ordination;
and in this respect, the former make greater claims upon the judgment, the
latter upon the memory. It was known to the schoolmen,(19) that, as the
syllogism requires two premises, no science can proceed from a single
first principle which cannot be the subject of further deduction, but must
have several, at least two. The specially classifying sciences: Zoology,
Botany, and also Physics and Chemistry, inasmuch as they refer all
inorganic action to a few fundamental forces, have most subordination;
history, on the other hand, has really none at all; for the general in it
consists merely in the survey of the principal periods, from which,
however, the particular events cannot be deduced, and are only
subordinated to them according to time, but according to the concept are
co-ordinate with them. Therefore, history, strictly speaking, is certainly
rational knowledge, but is not science. In mathematics, according to
Euclid’s treatment, the axioms alone are indemonstrable first principles,
and all demonstrations are in gradation strictly subordinated to them. But
this method of treatment is not essential to mathematics, and in fact each
proposition introduces quite a new space construction, which in itself is
independent of those which precede it, and indeed can be completely
comprehended from itself, quite independently of them, in the pure
intuition or perception of space, in which the most complicated
construction is just as directly evident as the axiom; but of this more
fully hereafter. Meanwhile every mathematical proposition remains always a
universal truth, which is valid for innumerable particular cases; and a
graduated process from the simple to the complicated propositions which
are to be deduced from them, is also essential to mathematics; therefore,
in every respect mathematics is a science. The completeness of a science
as such, that is, in respect of form, consists in there being as much
subordination and as little co-ordination of the principles as possible.
Scientific talent in general is, therefore, the faculty of subordinating
the concept-spheres according to their different determinations, so that,
as Plato repeatedly counsels, a science shall not be constituted by a
general concept and an indefinite multiplicity immediately under it, but
that knowledge shall descend by degrees from the general to the
particular, through intermediate concepts and divisions, according to
closer and closer definitions. In Kantian language this is called
satisfying equally the law of homogeneity and that of specification. It
arises from this peculiar nature of scientific completeness, that the aim
of science is not greater certainty—for certainty may be possessed in just
as high a degree by the most disconnected particular knowledge—but its aim
is rather the facilitating of rational knowledge by means of its form, and
the possibility of the completeness of rational knowledge which this form
affords. It is therefore a very prevalent but perverted opinion that the
scientific character of knowledge consists in its greater certainty, and
just as false is the conclusion following from this, that, strictly
speaking, the only sciences are mathematics and logic, because only in
them, on account of their purely _a priori_ character, is there
unassailable certainty of knowledge. This advantage cannot be denied them,
but it gives them no special claim to be regarded as sciences; for the
special characteristic of science does not lie in certainty but in the
systematic form of knowledge, based on the gradual descent from the
general to the particular. The process of knowledge from the general to
the particular, which is peculiar to the sciences, involves the necessity
that in the sciences much should be established by deduction from
preceding propositions, that is to say, by demonstration; and this has
given rise to the old mistake that only what has been demonstrated is
absolutely true, and that every truth requires a demonstration; whereas,
on the contrary, every demonstration requires an undemonstrated truth,
which ultimately supports it, or it may be, its own demonstration.
Therefore a directly established truth is as much to be preferred to a
truth established by demonstration as water from the spring is to water
from the aqueduct. Perception, partly pure _a priori_, as it forms the
basis of mathematics, partly empirical _a posteriori_, as it forms the
basis of all the other sciences, is the source of all truth and the
foundation of all science. (Logic alone is to be excepted, which is not
founded upon perception but yet upon _direct_ knowledge by the reason of
its own laws.) Not the demonstrated judgments nor their demonstrations,
but judgments which are created directly out of perception, and founded
upon it rather than on any demonstrations, are to science what the sun is
to the world; for all light proceeds from them, and lighted by their light
the others give light also. To establish the truth of such primary
judgments directly from perception, to raise such strongholds of science
from the innumerable multitude of real objects, that is the work of the
_faculty of judgment_, which consists in the power of rightly and
accurately carrying over into abstract consciousness what is known in
perception, and judgment is consequently the mediator between
understanding and reason. Only extraordinary and exceptional strength of
judgment in the individual can actually advance science; but every one who
is possessed of a healthy reason is able to deduce propositions from
propositions, to demonstrate, to draw conclusions. To lay down and make
permanent for reflection, in suitable concepts, what is known through
perception, so that, on the one hand, what is common to many real objects
is thought through _one_ concept, and, on the other hand, their points of
difference are each thought through one concept, so that the different
shall be known and thought as different in spite of a partial agreement,
and the identical shall be known and thought as identical in spite of a
partial difference, all in accordance with the end and intention which in
each case is in view; all this is done by the _faculty of judgment_.
Deficiency in judgment is _silliness_. The silly man fails to grasp, now
the partial or relative difference of concepts which in one aspect are
identical, now the identity of concepts which are relatively or partially
different. To this explanation of the faculty of judgment, moreover,
Kant’s division of it into reflecting and subsuming judgment may be
applied, according as it passes from the perceived objects to the
concepts, or from the latter to the former; in both cases always mediating
between empirical knowledge of the understanding and the reflective
knowledge of the reason. There can be no truth which could be brought out
by means of syllogisms alone; and the necessity of establishing truth by
means of syllogisms is merely relative, indeed subjective. Since all
demonstration is syllogistic, in the case of a new truth we must first
seek, not for a demonstration, but for direct evidence, and only in the
absence of such evidence is a demonstration to be temporarily made use of.
No science is susceptible of demonstration throughout any more than a
building can stand in the air; all its demonstrations must ultimately rest
upon what is perceived, and consequently cannot be demonstrated, for the
whole world of reflection rests upon and is rooted in the world of
perception. All primal, that is, original, _evidence_ is a _perception_,
as the word itself indicates. Therefore it is either empirical or founded
upon the perception _a priori_ of the conditions of possible experience.
In both cases it affords only immanent, not transcendent knowledge. Every
concept has its worth and its existence only in its relation, sometimes
very indirect, to an idea of perception; what is true of the concepts is
also true of the judgments constructed out of them, and of all science.
Therefore it must in some way be possible to know directly without
demonstrations or syllogisms every truth that is arrived at through
syllogisms and communicated by demonstrations. This is most difficult in
the case of certain complicated mathematical propositions at which we only
arrive by chains of syllogisms; for example, the calculation of the chords
and tangents to all arcs by deduction from the proposition of Pythagoras.
But even such a truth as this cannot essentially and solely rest upon
abstract principles, and the space-relations which lie at its foundation
also must be capable of being so presented _a priori_ in pure intuition or
perception that the truth of their abstract expression is directly
established. But of mathematical demonstration we shall speak more fully
shortly.

It is true we often hear men speak in a lofty strain of sciences which
rest entirely upon correct conclusions drawn from sure premises, and which
are consequently unassailable. But through pure logical reasoning, however
true the premises may be, we shall never receive more than an articulate
expression and exposition of what lies already complete in the premises;
thus we shall only _explicitly_ expound what was already _implicitly_
understood. The esteemed sciences referred to are, however, specially the
mathematical sciences, particularly astronomy. But the certainty of
astronomy arises from the fact that it has for its basis the intuition or
perception of space, which is given _a priori_, and is therefore
infallible. All space-relations, however, follow from each other with a
necessity (ground of being) which affords _a priori_ certainty, and they
can therefore be safely deduced from each other. To these mathematical
properties we have only to add one force of nature, gravity, which acts
precisely in relation to the masses and the square of the distance; and,
lastly, the law of inertia, which follows from the law of causality and is
therefore true _a priori_, and with it the empirical datum of the motion
impressed, once for all, upon each of these masses. This is the whole
material of astronomy, which both by its simplicity and its certainty
leads to definite results, which are highly interesting on account of the
vastness and importance of the objects. For example, if I know the mass of
a planet and the distance of its satellite from it, I can tell with
certainty the period of the revolution of the latter according to Kepler’s
second law. But the ground of this law is, that with this distance only
this velocity will both chain the satellite to the planet and prevent it
from falling into it. Thus it is only upon such a geometrical basis, that
is, by means of an intuition or perception _a priori_, and also under the
application of a law of nature, that much can be arrived at by means of
syllogisms, for here they are merely like bridges from _one_ sensuous
apprehension to others; but it is not so with mere pure syllogistic
reasoning in the exclusively logical method. The source of the first
fundamental truths of astronomy is, however, properly induction, that is,
the comprehension of what is given in many perceptions in one true and
directly founded judgment. From this, hypotheses are afterwards
constructed, and their confirmation by experience, as induction
approaching to completeness, affords the proof of the first judgment. For
example, the apparent motion of the planets is known empirically; after
many false hypotheses with regard to the spacial connection of this motion
(planetary course) the right one was at last found, then the laws which it
obeyed (the laws of Kepler), and, lastly, the cause of these laws
(universal gravitation), and the empirically known agreement of all
observed cases with the whole of the hypotheses, and with their
consequences, that is to say, induction, established them with complete
certainty. The invention of the hypotheses was the work of the judgment,
which rightly comprehended the given facts and expressed them accordingly;
but induction, that is, a multitude of perceptions, confirmed their truth.
But their truth could also be known directly, and by a single empirical
perception, if we could pass freely through space and had telescopic eyes.
Therefore, here also syllogisms are not the essential and only source of
knowledge, but really only a makeshift.

As a third example taken from a different sphere we may mention that the
so-called metaphysical truths, that is, such truths as those to which Kant
assigns the position of the metaphysical first principles of natural
science, do not owe their evidence to demonstration. What is _a priori_
certain we know directly; as the form of all knowledge, it is known to us
with the most complete necessity. For example, that matter is permanent,
that is, can neither come into being nor pass away, we know directly as
negative truth; for our pure intuition or perception of space and time
gives the possibility of motion; in the law of causality the understanding
affords us the possibility of change of form and quality, but we lack
powers of the imagination for conceiving the coming into being or passing
away of matter. Therefore that truth has at all times been evident to all
men everywhere, nor has it ever been seriously doubted; and this could not
be the case if it had no other ground of knowledge than the abstruse and
exceedingly subtle proof of Kant. But besides this, I have found Kant’s
proof to be false (as is explained in the Appendix), and have shown above
that the permanence of matter is to be deduced, not from the share which
time has in the possibility of experience, but from the share which
belongs to space. The true foundation of all truths which in this sense
are called metaphysical, that is, abstract expressions of the necessary
and universal forms of knowledge, cannot itself lie in abstract
principles; but only in the immediate consciousness of the forms of the
idea communicating itself in apodictic assertions _a priori_, and fearing
no refutation. But if we yet desire to give a proof of them, it can only
consist in showing that what is to be proved is contained in some truth
about which there is no doubt, either as a part of it or as a
presupposition. Thus, for example, I have shown that all empirical
perception implies the application of the law of causality, the knowledge
of which is hence a condition of all experience, and therefore cannot be
first given and conditioned through experience as Hume thought.
Demonstrations in general are not so much for those who wish to learn as
for those who wish to dispute. Such persons stubbornly deny directly
established insight; now only the truth can be consistent in all
directions, and therefore we must show such persons that they admit under
_one_ form and indirectly, what they deny under another form and directly;
that is, the logically necessary connection between what is denied and
what is admitted.

It is also a consequence of the scientific form, the subordination of
everything particular under a general, and so on always to what is more
general, that the truth of many propositions is only logically
proved,—that is, through their dependence upon other propositions, through
syllogisms, which at the same time appear as proofs. But we must never
forget that this whole form of science is merely a means of rendering
knowledge more easy, not a means to greater certainty. It is easier to
discover the nature of an animal, by means of the species to which it
belongs, and so on through the genus, family, order, and class, than to
examine on every occasion the animal presented to us: but the truth of all
propositions arrived at syllogistically is always conditioned by and
ultimately dependent upon some truth which rests not upon reasoning but
upon perception. If this perception were always as much within our reach
as a deduction through syllogisms, then it would be in every respect
preferable. For every deduction from concepts is exposed to great danger
of error, on account of the fact we have considered above, that so many
spheres lie partly within each other, and that their content is often
vague or uncertain. This is illustrated by a multitude of demonstrations
of false doctrines and sophisms of every kind. Syllogisms are indeed
perfectly certain as regards form, but they are very uncertain on account
of their matter, the concepts. For, on the one hand, the spheres of these
are not sufficiently sharply defined, and, on the other hand, they
intersect each other in so many ways that one sphere is in part contained
in many others, and we may pass at will from it to one or another of
these, and from this sphere again to others, as we have already shown. Or,
in other words, the minor term and also the middle can always be
subordinated to different concepts, from which we may choose at will the
major and the middle, and the nature of the conclusion depends on this
choice. Consequently immediate evidence is always much to be preferred to
reasoned truth, and the latter is only to be accepted when the former is
too remote, and not when it is as near or indeed nearer than the latter.
Accordingly we saw above that, as a matter of fact, in the case of logic,
in which the immediate knowledge in each individual case lies nearer to
hand than deduced scientific knowledge, we always conduct our thought
according to our immediate knowledge of the laws of thought, and leave
logic unused.(20)

§ 15. If now with our conviction that perception is the primary source of
all evidence, and that only direct or indirect connection with it is
absolute truth; and further, that the shortest way to this is always the
surest, as every interposition of concepts means exposure to many
deceptions; if, I say, we now turn with this conviction to mathematics, as
it was established as a science by Euclid, and has remained as a whole to
our own day, we cannot help regarding the method it adopts, as strange and
indeed perverted. We ask that every logical proof shall be traced back to
an origin in perception; but mathematics, on the contrary, is at great
pains deliberately to throw away the evidence of perception which is
peculiar to it, and always at hand, that it may substitute for it a
logical demonstration. This must seem to us like the action of a man who
cuts off his legs in order to go on crutches, or like that of the prince
in the “_Triumph der Empfindsamkeit_” who flees from the beautiful reality
of nature, to delight in a stage scene that imitates it. I must here refer
to what I have said in the sixth chapter of the essay on the principle of
sufficient reason, and take for granted that it is fresh and present in
the memory of the reader; so that I may link my observations on to it
without explaining again the difference between the mere ground of
knowledge of a mathematical truth, which can be given logically, and the
ground of being, which is the immediate connection of the parts of space
and time, known only in perception. It is only insight into the ground of
being that secures satisfaction and thorough knowledge. The mere ground of
knowledge must always remain superficial; it can afford us indeed rational
knowledge _that_ a thing is as it is, but it cannot tell _why_ it is so.
Euclid chose the latter way to the obvious detriment of the science. For
just at the beginning, for example, when he ought to show once for all how
in a triangle the angles and sides reciprocally determine each other, and
stand to each other in the relation of reason and consequent, in
accordance with the form which the principle of sufficient reason has in
pure space, and which there, as in every other sphere, always affords the
necessity that a thing is as it is, because something quite different from
it, is as it is; instead of in this way giving a thorough insight into the
nature of the triangle, he sets up certain disconnected arbitrarily chosen
propositions concerning the triangle, and gives a logical ground of
knowledge of them, through a laborious logical demonstration, based upon
the principle of contradiction. Instead of an exhaustive knowledge of
these space-relations we therefore receive merely certain results of them,
imparted to us at pleasure, and in fact we are very much in the position
of a man to whom the different effects of an ingenious machine are shown,
but from whom its inner connection and construction are withheld. We are
compelled by the principle of contradiction to admit that what Euclid
demonstrates is true, but we do not comprehend _why_ it is so. We have
therefore almost the same uncomfortable feeling that we experience after a
juggling trick, and, in fact, most of Euclid’s demonstrations are
remarkably like such feats. The truth almost always enters by the back
door, for it manifests itself _per accidens_ through some contingent
circumstance. Often a _reductio ad absurdum_ shuts all the doors one after
another, until only one is left through which we are therefore compelled
to enter. Often, as in the proposition of Pythagoras, lines are drawn, we
don’t know why, and it afterwards appears that they were traps which close
unexpectedly and take prisoner the assent of the astonished learner, who
must now admit what remains wholly inconceivable in its inner connection,
so much so, that he may study the whole of Euclid through and through
without gaining a real insight into the laws of space-relations, but
instead of them he only learns by heart certain results which follow from
them. This specially empirical and unscientific knowledge is like that of
the doctor who knows both the disease and the cure for it, but does not
know the connection between them. But all this is the necessary
consequence if we capriciously reject the special kind of proof and
evidence of one species of knowledge, and forcibly introduce in its stead
a kind which is quite foreign to its nature. However, in other respects
the manner in which this has been accomplished by Euclid deserves all the
praise which has been bestowed on him through so many centuries, and which
has been carried so far that his method of treating mathematics has been
set up as the pattern of all scientific exposition. Men tried indeed to
model all the sciences after it, but later they gave up the attempt
without quite knowing why. Yet in our eyes this method of Euclid in
mathematics can appear only as a very brilliant piece of perversity. But
when a great error in life or in science has been intentionally and
methodically carried out with universal applause, it is always possible to
discover its source in the philosophy which prevailed at the time. The
Eleatics first brought out the difference, and indeed often the conflict,
that exists between what is perceived, φαινομενον,(21) and what is
thought, νουμενον, and used it in many ways in their philosophical
epigrams, and also in sophisms. They were followed later by the Megarics,
the Dialecticians, the Sophists, the New-Academy, and the Sceptics; these
drew attention to the illusion, that is to say, to the deception of the
senses, or rather of the understanding which transforms the data of the
senses into perception, and which often causes us to see things to which
the reason unhesitatingly denies reality; for example, a stick broken in
water, and such like. It came to be known that sense-perception was not to
be trusted unconditionally, and it was therefore hastily concluded that
only rational, logical thought could establish truth; although Plato (in
the Parmenides), the Megarics, Pyrrho, and the New-Academy, showed by
examples (in the manner which was afterwards adopted by Sextus Empiricus)
how syllogisms and concepts were also sometimes misleading, and indeed
produced paralogisms and sophisms which arise much more easily and are far
harder to explain than the illusion of sense-perception. However, this
rationalism, which arose in opposition to empiricism, kept the upper hand,
and Euclid constructed the science of mathematics in accordance with it.
He was compelled by necessity to found the axioms upon evidence of
perception (φαινομενον), but all the rest he based upon reasoning
(νουμενον). His method reigned supreme through all the succeeding
centuries, and it could not but do so as long as pure intuition or
perception, _a priori_, was not distinguished from empirical perception.
Certain passages from the works of Proclus, the commentator of Euclid,
which Kepler translated into Latin in his book, “De Harmonia Mundi,” seem
to show that he fully recognised this distinction. But Proclus did not
attach enough importance to the matter; he merely mentioned it by the way,
so that he remained unnoticed and accomplished nothing. Therefore, not
till two thousand years later will the doctrine of Kant, which is destined
to make such great changes in all the knowledge, thought, and action of
European nations, produce this change in mathematics also. For it is only
after we have learned from this great man that the intuitions or
perceptions of space and time are quite different from empirical
perceptions, entirely independent of any impression of the senses,
conditioning it, not conditioned by it, _i.e._, are _a priori_, and
therefore are not exposed to the illusions of sense; only after we have
learned this, I say, can we comprehend that Euclid’s logical method of
treating mathematics is a useless precaution, a crutch for sound legs,
that it is like a wanderer who during the night mistakes a bright, firm
road for water, and carefully avoiding it, toils over the broken ground
beside it, content to keep from point to point along the edge of the
supposed water. Only now can we affirm with certainty that what presents
itself to us as necessary in the perception of a figure, does not come
from the figure on the paper, which is perhaps very defectively drawn, nor
from the abstract concept under which we think it, but immediately from
the form of all knowledge of which we are conscious _a priori_. This is
always the principle of sufficient reason; here as the form of perception,
_i.e._, space, it is the principle of the ground of being, the evidence
and validity of which is, however, just as great and as immediate as that
of the principle of the ground of knowing, _i.e._, logical certainty. Thus
we need not and ought not to leave the peculiar province of mathematics in
order to put our trust only in logical proof, and seek to authenticate
mathematics in a sphere which is quite foreign to it, that of concepts. If
we confine ourselves to the ground peculiar to mathematics, we gain the
great advantage that in it the rational knowledge _that_ something is, is
one with the knowledge _why_ it is so, whereas the method of Euclid
entirely separates these two, and lets us know only the first, not the
second. Aristotle says admirably in the Analyt., post. i. 27: “Ακριβεστερα
δ᾽ επιστημη επιστημης και προτερα, ἡτε του ὁτι και του διοτι ἡ αυτη, αλλα
μη χωρις του ὁτι, της του διοτι” (_Subtilior autem et praestantior ea est
scientia, quâ_ QUOD _aliquid sit, et_ CUR _sit una simulque intelligimus
non separatim_ QUOD, _et_ CUR _sit_). In physics we are only satisfied
when the knowledge that a thing is as it is is combined with the knowledge
why it is so. To know that the mercury in the Torricellian tube stands
thirty inches high is not really rational knowledge if we do not know that
it is sustained at this height by the counterbalancing weight of the
atmosphere. Shall we then be satisfied in mathematics with the _qualitas
occulta_ of the circle that the segments of any two intersecting chords
always contain equal rectangles? That it is so Euclid certainly
demonstrates in the 35th Prop. of the Third Book; _why_ it is so remains
doubtful. In the same way the proposition of Pythagoras teaches us a
_qualitas occulta_ of the right-angled triangle; the stilted and indeed
fallacious demonstration of Euclid forsakes us at the _why_, and a simple
figure, which we already know, and which is present to us, gives at a
glance far more insight into the matter, and firm inner conviction of that
necessity, and of the dependence of that quality upon the right angle:—

                              [Illustration]

In the case of unequal catheti also, and indeed generally in the case of
every possible geometrical truth, it is quite possible to obtain such a
conviction based on perception, because these truths were always
discovered by such an empirically known necessity, and their demonstration
was only thought out afterwards in addition. Thus we only require an
analysis of the process of thought in the first discovery of a geometrical
truth in order to know its necessity empirically. It is the analytical
method in general that I wish for the exposition of mathematics, instead
of the synthetical method which Euclid made use of. Yet this would have
very great, though not insuperable, difficulties in the case of
complicated mathematical truths. Here and there in Germany men are
beginning to alter the exposition of mathematics, and to proceed more in
this analytical way. The greatest effort in this direction has been made
by Herr Kosack, teacher of mathematics and physics in the Gymnasium at
Nordhausen, who added a thorough attempt to teach geometry according to my
principles to the programme of the school examination on the 6th of April
1852.

In order to improve the method of mathematics, it is especially necessary
to overcome the prejudice that demonstrated truth has any superiority over
what is known through perception, or that logical truth founded upon the
principle of contradiction has any superiority over metaphysical truth,
which is immediately evident, and to which belongs the pure intuition or
perception of space.

That which is most certain, and yet always inexplicable, is what is
involved in the principle of sufficient reason, for this principle, in its
different aspects, expresses the universal form of all our ideas and
knowledge. All explanation consists of reduction to it, exemplification in
the particular case of the connection of ideas expressed generally through
it. It is thus the principle of all explanation, and therefore it is
neither susceptible of an explanation itself, nor does it stand in need of
it; for every explanation presupposes it, and only obtains meaning through
it. Now, none of its forms are superior to the rest; it is equally certain
and incapable of demonstration as the principle of the ground of being, or
of change, or of action, or of knowing. The relation of reason and
consequent is a necessity in all its forms, and indeed it is, in general,
the source of the concept of necessity, for necessity has no other
meaning. If the reason is given there is no other necessity than that of
the consequent, and there is no reason that does not involve the necessity
of the consequent. Just as surely then as the consequent expressed in the
conclusion follows from the ground of knowledge given in the premises,
does the ground of being in space determine its consequent in space: if I
know through perception the relation of these two, this certainty is just
as great as any logical certainty. But every geometrical proposition is
just as good an expression of such a relation as one of the twelve axioms;
it is a metaphysical truth, and as such, just as certain as the principle
of contradiction itself, which is a metalogical truth, and the common
foundation of all logical demonstration. Whoever denies the necessity,
exhibited for intuition or perception, of the space-relations expressed in
any proposition, may just as well deny the axioms, or that the conclusion
follows from the premises, or, indeed, he may as well deny the principle
of contradiction itself, for all these relations are equally
undemonstrable, immediately evident and known _a priori_. For any one to
wish to derive the necessity of space-relations, known in intuition or
perception, from the principle of contradiction by means of a logical
demonstration is just the same as for the feudal superior of an estate to
wish to hold it as the vassal of another. Yet this is what Euclid has
done. His axioms only, he is compelled to leave resting upon immediate
evidence; all the geometrical truths which follow are demonstrated
logically, that is to say, from the agreement of the assumptions made in
the proposition with the axioms which are presupposed, or with some
earlier proposition; or from the contradiction between the opposite of the
proposition and the assumptions made in it, or the axioms, or earlier
propositions, or even itself. But the axioms themselves have no more
immediate evidence than any other geometrical problem, but only more
simplicity on account of their smaller content.

When a criminal is examined, a _procès-verbal_ is made of his statement in
order that we may judge of its truth from its consistency. But this is
only a makeshift, and we are not satisfied with it if it is possible to
investigate the truth of each of his answers for itself; especially as he
might lie consistently from the beginning. But Euclid investigated space
according to this first method. He set about it, indeed, under the correct
assumption that nature must everywhere be consistent, and that therefore
it must also be so in space, its fundamental form. Since then the parts of
space stand to each other in a relation of reason and consequent, no
single property of space can be different from what it is without being in
contradiction with all the others. But this is a very troublesome,
unsatisfactory, and roundabout way to follow. It prefers indirect
knowledge to direct, which is just as certain, and it separates the
knowledge that a thing is from the knowledge why it is, to the great
disadvantage of the science; and lastly, it entirely withholds from the
beginner insight into the laws of space, and indeed renders him
unaccustomed to the special investigation of the ground and inner
connection of things, inclining him to be satisfied with a mere historical
knowledge that a thing is as it is. The exercise of acuteness which this
method is unceasingly extolled as affording consists merely in this, that
the pupil practises drawing conclusions, _i.e._, he practises applying the
principle of contradiction, but specially he exerts his memory to retain
all those data whose agreement is to be tested. Moreover, it is worth
noticing that this method of proof was applied only to geometry and not to
arithmetic. In arithmetic the truth is really allowed to come home to us
through perception alone, which in it consists simply in counting. As the
perception of numbers is in _time alone_, and therefore cannot be
represented by a sensuous schema like the geometrical figure, the
suspicion that perception is merely empirical, and possibly illusive,
disappeared in arithmetic, and the introduction of the logical method of
proof into geometry was entirely due to this suspicion. As time has only
one dimension, counting is the only arithmetical operation, to which all
others may be reduced; and yet counting is just intuition or perception _a
priori_, to which there is no hesitation in appealing here, and through
which alone everything else, every sum and every equation, is ultimately
proved. We prove, for example, not that (7 + 9 × 8 - 2)/3 = 42; but we
refer to the pure perception in time, counting thus makes each individual
problem an axiom. Instead of the demonstrations that fill geometry, the
whole content of arithmetic and algebra is thus simply a method of
abbreviating counting. We mentioned above that our immediate perception of
numbers in time extends only to about ten. Beyond this an abstract concept
of the numbers, fixed by a word, must take the place of the perception;
which does not therefore actually occur any longer, but is only indicated
in a thoroughly definite manner. Yet even so, by the important assistance
of the system of figures which enables us to represent all larger numbers
by the same small ones, intuitive or perceptive evidence of every sum is
made possible, even where we make such use of abstraction that not only
the numbers, but indefinite quantities and whole operations are thought
only in the abstract and indicated as so thought, as [sqrt](r^b) so that
we do not perform them, but merely symbolise them.

We might establish truth in geometry also, through pure _a priori_
perception, with the same right and certainty as in arithmetic. It is in
fact always this necessity, known through perception in accordance with
the principle of sufficient reason of being, which gives to geometry its
principal evidence, and upon which in the consciousness of every one, the
certainty of its propositions rests. The stilted logical demonstration is
always foreign to the matter, and is generally soon forgotten, without
weakening our conviction. It might indeed be dispensed with altogether
without diminishing the evidence of geometry, for this is always quite
independent of such demonstration, which never proves anything we are not
convinced of already, through another kind of knowledge. So far then it is
like a cowardly soldier, who adds a wound to an enemy slain by another,
and then boasts that he slew him himself.(22)

After all this we hope there will be no doubt that the evidence of
mathematics, which has become the pattern and symbol of all evidence,
rests essentially not upon demonstration, but upon immediate perception,
which is thus here, as everywhere else, the ultimate ground and source of
truth. Yet the perception which lies at the basis of mathematics has a
great advantage over all other perception, and therefore over empirical
perception. It is _a priori_, and therefore independent of experience,
which is always given only in successive parts; therefore everything is
equally near to it, and we can start either from the reason or from the
consequent, as we please. Now this makes it absolutely reliable, for in it
the consequent is known from the reason, and this is the only kind of
knowledge that has necessity; for example, the equality of the sides is
known as established by the equality of the angles. All empirical
perception, on the other hand, and the greater part of experience,
proceeds conversely from the consequent to the reason, and this kind of
knowledge is not infallible, for necessity only attaches to the consequent
on account of the reason being given, and no necessity attaches to the
knowledge of the reason from the consequent, for the same consequent may
follow from different reasons. The latter kind of knowledge is simply
induction, _i.e._, from many consequents which point to one reason, the
reason is accepted as certain; but as the cases can never be all before
us, the truth here is not unconditionally certain. But all knowledge
through sense-perception, and the great bulk of experience, has only this
kind of truth. The affection of one of the senses induces the
understanding to infer a cause of the effect, but, as a conclusion from
the consequent to the reason is never certain, illusion, which is
deception of the senses, is possible, and indeed often occurs, as was
pointed out above. Only when several of the senses, or it may be all the
five, receive impressions which point to the same cause, the possibility
of illusion is reduced to a minimum; but yet it still exists, for there
are cases, for example, the case of counterfeit money, in which all the
senses are deceived. All empirical knowledge, and consequently the whole
of natural science, is in the same position, except only the pure, or as
Kant calls it, metaphysical part of it. Here also the causes are known
from the effects, consequently all natural philosophy rests upon
hypotheses, which are often false, and must then gradually give place to
more correct ones. Only in the case of purposely arranged experiments,
knowledge proceeds from the cause to the effect, that is, it follows the
method that affords certainty; but these experiments themselves are
undertaken in consequence of hypotheses. Therefore, no branch of natural
science, such as physics, or astronomy, or physiology could be discovered
all at once, as was the case with mathematics and logic, but required and
requires the collected and compared experiences of many centuries. In the
first place, repeated confirmation in experience brings the induction,
upon which the hypothesis rests, so near completeness that in practice it
takes the place of certainty, and is regarded as diminishing the value of
the hypothesis, its source, just as little as the incommensurability of
straight and curved lines diminishes the value of the application of
geometry, or that perfect exactness of the logarithm, which is not
attainable, diminishes the value of arithmetic. For as the logarithm, or
the squaring of the circle, approaches infinitely near to correctness
through infinite fractions, so, through manifold experience, the
induction, _i.e._, the knowledge of the cause from the effects,
approaches, not infinitely indeed, but yet so near mathematical evidence,
_i.e._, knowledge of the effects from the cause, that the possibility of
mistake is small enough to be neglected, but yet the possibility exists;
for example, a conclusion from an indefinite number of cases to all cases,
_i.e._, to the unknown ground on which all depend, is an induction. What
conclusion of this kind seems more certain than that all men have the
heart on the left side? Yet there are extremely rare and quite isolated
exceptions of men who have the heart upon the right side. Sense-perception
and empirical science have, therefore, the same kind of evidence. The
advantage which mathematics, pure natural science, and logic have over
them, as _a priori_ knowledge, rests merely upon this, that the formal
element in knowledge upon which all that is _a priori_ is based, is given
as a whole and at once, and therefore in it we can always proceed from the
cause to the effect, while in the former kind of knowledge we are
generally obliged to proceed from the effect to the cause. In other
respects, the law of causality, or the principle of sufficient reason of
change, which guides empirical knowledge, is in itself just as certain as
the other forms of the principle of sufficient reason which are followed
by the _a priori_ sciences referred to above. Logical demonstrations from
concepts or syllogisms have the advantage of proceeding from the reason to
the consequent, just as much as knowledge through perception _a priori_,
and therefore in themselves, _i.e._, according to their form, they are
infallible. This has greatly assisted to bring demonstration in general
into such esteem. But this infallibility is merely relative; the
demonstration merely subsumes under the first principles of the science,
and it is these which contain the whole material truth of science, and
they must not themselves be demonstrated, but must be founded on
perception. In the few _a priori_ sciences we have named above, this
perception is pure, but everywhere else it is empirical, and is only
raised to universality through induction. If, then, in the empirical
sciences also, the particular is proved from the general, yet the general,
on the other hand, has received its truth from the particular; it is only
a store of collected material, not a self-constituted foundation.

So much for the foundation of truth. Of the source and possibility of
error many explanations have been tried since Plato’s metaphorical
solution of the dove-cot where the wrong pigeons are caught, &c.
(Theætetus, p. 167, _et seq._) Kant’s vague, indefinite explanation of the
source of error by means of the diagram of diagonal motion, will be found
in the “Critique of Pure Reason,” p. 294 of the first edition, and p. 350
of the fifth. As truth is the relation of a judgment to its ground of
knowledge, it is always a problem how the person judging can believe that
he has such a ground of knowledge and yet not have it; that is to say, how
error, the deception of reason, is possible. I find this possibility quite
analogous to that of illusion, or the deception of the understanding,
which has been explained above. My opinion is (and this is what gives this
explanation its proper place here) that _every error is an inference from
the consequent to the reason_, which indeed is valid when we know that the
consequent has that reason and can have no other; but otherwise is not
valid. The person who falls into error, either attributes to a consequent
a reason which it cannot have, in which case he shows actual deficiency of
understanding, _i.e._, deficiency in the capacity for immediate knowledge
of the connection between the cause and the effect, or, as more frequently
happens, he attributes to the effect a cause which is possible, but he
adds to the major proposition of the syllogism, in which he infers the
cause from the effect, that this effect _always_ results only from this
cause. Now he could only be assured of this by a complete induction,
which, however, he assumes without having made it. This “always” is
therefore too wide a concept, and instead of it he ought to have used
“sometimes” or “generally.” The conclusion would then be problematical,
and therefore not erroneous. That the man who errs should proceed in this
way is due either to haste, or to insufficient knowledge of what is
possible, on account of which he does not know the necessity of the
induction that ought to be made. Error then is quite analogous to
illusion. Both are inferences from the effect to the cause; the illusion
brought about always in accordance with the law of causality, and by the
understanding alone, thus directly, in perception itself; the error in
accordance with all the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, and
by the reason, thus in thought itself; yet most commonly in accordance
with the law of causality, as will appear from the three following
examples, which may be taken as types or representatives of the three
kinds of error. (1.) The illusion of the senses (deception of the
understanding) induces error (deception of the reason); for example, if
one mistakes a painting for an alto-relief, and actually takes it for
such; the error results from a conclusion from the following major
premise: “If dark grey passes regularly through all shades to white; the
cause is _always_ the light, which strikes differently upon projections
and depressions, _ergo_—.” (2.) “If there is no money in my safe, the
cause is _always_ that my servant has got a key for it: _ergo_—.” (3.) “If
a ray of sunlight, broken through a prism, _i.e._, bent up or down,
appears as a coloured band instead of round and white as before, the cause
must always be that light consists of homogeneous rays, differently
coloured and refrangible to different degrees, which, when forced asunder
on account of the difference of their refrangibility, give an elongated
and variously-coloured spectrum: _ergo—bibamus!_”—It must be possible to
trace every error to such a conclusion, drawn from a major premise which
is often only falsely generalised, hypothetical, and founded on the
assumption that some particular cause is that of a certain effect. Only
certain mistakes in counting are to be excepted, and they are not really
errors, but merely mistakes. The operation prescribed by the concepts of
the numbers has not been carried out in pure intuition or perception, in
counting, but some other operation instead of it.

As regards the _content_ of the sciences generally, it is, in fact, always
the relation of the phenomena of the world to each other, according to the
principle of sufficient reason, under the guidance of the _why_, which has
validity and meaning only through this principle. _Explanation_ is the
establishment of this relation. Therefore explanation can never go further
than to show two ideas standing to each other in the relation peculiar to
that form of the principle of sufficient reason which reigns in the class
to which they belong. If this is done we cannot further be asked the
question, _why_: for the relation proved is that one which absolutely
cannot be imagined as other than it is, _i.e._, it is the form of all
knowledge. Therefore we do not ask why 2 + 2 = 4; or why the equality of
the angles of a triangle determines the equality of the sides; or why its
effect follows any given cause; or why the truth of the conclusion is
evident from the truth of the premises. Every explanation which does not
ultimately lead to a relation of which no “why” can further be demanded,
stops at an accepted _qualitas occulta_; but this is the character of
every original force of nature. Every explanation in natural science must
ultimately end with such a _qualitas occulta_, and thus with complete
obscurity. It must leave the inner nature of a stone just as much
unexplained as that of a human being; it can give as little account of the
weight, the cohesion, the chemical qualities, &c., of the former, as of
the knowing and acting of the latter. Thus, for example, weight is a
_qualitas occulta_, for it can be thought away, and does not proceed as a
necessity from the form of knowledge; which, on the contrary, is not the
case with the law of inertia, for it follows from the law of causality,
and is therefore sufficiently explained if it is referred to that law.
There are two things which are altogether inexplicable,—that is to say, do
not ultimately lead to the relation which the principle of sufficient
reason expresses. These are, first, the principle of sufficient reason
itself in all its four forms, because it is the principle of all
explanation, which has meaning only in relation to it; secondly, that to
which this principle does not extend, but which is the original source of
all phenomena; the thing-in-itself, the knowledge of which is not subject
to the principle of sufficient reason. We must be content for the present
not to understand this thing-in-itself, for it can only be made
intelligible by means of the following book, in which we shall resume this
consideration of the possible achievements of the sciences. But at the
point at which natural science, and indeed every science, leaves things,
because not only its explanation of them, but even the principle of this
explanation, the principle of sufficient reason, does not extend beyond
this point; there philosophy takes them up and treats them after its own
method, which is quite distinct from the method of science. In my essay on
the principle of sufficient reason, § 51, I have shown how in the
different sciences the chief guiding clue is one or other form of that
principle; and, in fact, perhaps the most appropriate classification of
the sciences might be based upon this circumstance. Every explanation
arrived at by the help of this clue is, as we have said, merely relative;
it explains things in relation to each other, but something which indeed
is presupposed is always left unexplained. In mathematics, for example,
this is space and time; in mechanics, physics, and chemistry it is matter,
qualities, original forces and laws of nature; in botany and zoology it is
the difference of species, and life itself; in history it is the human
race with all its properties of thought and will: in all it is that form
of the principle of sufficient reason which is respectively applicable. It
is peculiar to _philosophy_ that it presupposes nothing as known, but
treats everything as equally external and a problem; not merely the
relations of phenomena, but also the phenomena themselves, and even the
principle of sufficient reason to which the other sciences are content to
refer everything. In philosophy nothing would be gained by such a
reference, as one member of the series is just as external to it as
another; and, moreover, that kind of connection is just as much a problem
for philosophy as what is joined together by it, and the latter again is
just as much a problem after its combination has been explained as before
it. For, as we have said, just what the sciences presuppose and lay down
as the basis and the limits of their explanation, is precisely and
peculiarly the problem of philosophy, which may therefore be said to begin
where science ends. It cannot be founded upon demonstrations, for they
lead from known principles to unknown, but everything is equally unknown
and external to philosophy. There can be no principle in consequence of
which the world with all its phenomena first came into existence, and
therefore it is not possible to construct, as Spinoza wished, a philosophy
which demonstrates _ex firmis principiis_. Philosophy is the most general
rational knowledge, the first principles of which cannot therefore be
derived from another principle still more general. The principle of
contradiction establishes merely the agreement of concepts, but does not
itself produce concepts. The principle of sufficient reason explains the
connections of phenomena, but not the phenomena themselves; therefore
philosophy cannot proceed upon these principles to seek a _causa
efficiens_ or a _causa finalis_ of the whole world. My philosophy, at
least, does not by any means seek to know _whence_ or _wherefore_ the
world exists, but merely _what_ the world is. But the _why_ is here
subordinated to the _what_, for it already belongs to the world, as it
arises and has meaning and validity only through the form of its
phenomena, the principle of sufficient reason. We might indeed say that
every one knows what the world is without help, for he is himself that
subject of knowledge of which the world is the idea; and so far this would
be true. But that knowledge is empirical, is in the concrete; the task of
philosophy is to reproduce this in the abstract to raise to permanent
rational knowledge the successive changing perceptions, and in general,
all that is contained under the wide concept of feeling and merely
negatively defined as not abstract, distinct, rational knowledge. It must
therefore consist of a statement in the abstract, of the nature of the
whole world, of the whole, and of all the parts. In order then that it may
not lose itself in the endless multitude of particular judgments, it must
make use of abstraction and think everything individual in the universal,
and its differences also in the universal. It must therefore partly
separate and partly unite, in order to present to rational knowledge the
whole manifold of the world generally, according to its nature,
comprehended in a few abstract concepts. Through these concepts, in which
it fixes the nature of the world, the whole individual must be known as
well as the universal, the knowledge of both therefore must be bound
together to the minutest point. Therefore the capacity for philosophy
consists just in that in which Plato placed it, the knowledge of the one
in the many, and the many in the one. Philosophy will therefore be a
sum-total of general judgments, whose ground of knowledge is immediately
the world itself in its entirety, without excepting anything; thus all
that is to be found in human consciousness; it will be _a complete
recapitulation, as it were, a reflection, of the world in abstract
concepts_, which is only possible by the union of the essentially
identical in _one_ concept and the relegation of the different to another.
This task was already prescribed to philosophy by Bacon of Verulam when he
said: _ea demum vera est philosophia, quae mundi ipsius voces fidelissime
reddit, et veluti dictante mundo conscripta est, et nihil aliud est, quam
ejusdem_ SIMULACRUM ET REFLECTIO, _neque addit quidquam de proprio, sed
tantum iterat et resonat_ (De Augm. Scient., L. 2, c. 13). But we take
this in a wider sense than Bacon could then conceive.

The agreement which all the sides and parts of the world have with each
other, just because they belong to a whole, must also be found in this
abstract copy of it. Therefore the judgments in this sum-total could to a
certain extent be deduced from each other, and indeed always reciprocally
so deduced. Yet to make the first judgment possible, they must all be
present, and thus implied as prior to it in the knowledge of the world in
the concrete, especially as all direct proof is more certain than indirect
proof; their harmony with each other by virtue of which they come together
into the unity of _one_ thought, and which arises from the harmony and
unity of the world of perception itself, which is their common ground of
knowledge, is not therefore to be made use of to establish them, as that
which is prior to them, but is only added as a confirmation of their
truth. This problem itself can only become quite clear in being
solved.(23)

§ 16. After this full consideration of reason as a special faculty of
knowledge belonging to man alone, and the results and phenomena peculiar
to human nature brought about by it, it still remains for me to speak of
reason, so far as it is the guide of human action, and in this respect may
be called _practical_. But what there is to say upon this point has found
its place elsewhere in the appendix to this work, where I controvert the
existence of the so-called practical reason of Kant, which he (certainly
very conveniently) explained as the immediate source of virtue, and as the
seat of an absolute (_i.e._, fallen from heaven) imperative. The detailed
and thorough refutation of this Kantian principle of morality I have given
later in the “Fundamental Problems of Ethics.” There remains, therefore,
but little for me to say here about the actual influence of reason, in the
true sense of the word, upon action. At the commencement of our treatment
of reason we remarked, in general terms, how much the action and behaviour
of men differs from that of brutes, and that this difference is to be
regarded as entirely due to the presence of abstract concepts in
consciousness. The influence of these upon our whole existence is so
penetrating and significant that, on account of them, we are related to
the lower animals very much as those animals that see are related to those
that have no eyes (certain larvae, worms, and zoophytes). Animals without
eyes know only by touch what is immediately present to them in space, what
comes into contact with them; those which see, on the contrary, know a
wide circle of near and distant objects. In the same way the absence of
reason confines the lower animals to the ideas of perception, _i.e._, the
real objects which are immediately present to them in time; we, on the
contrary, on account of knowledge in the abstract, comprehend not only the
narrow actual present, but also the whole past and future, and the wide
sphere of the possible; we view life freely on all its sides, and go far
beyond the present and the actual. Thus what the eye is in space and for
sensuous knowledge, reason is, to a certain extent, in time and for inner
knowledge. But as the visibility of objects has its worth and meaning only
in the fact that it informs us of their tangibility, so the whole worth of
abstract knowledge always consists in its relation to what is perceived.
Therefore men naturally attach far more worth to immediate and perceived
knowledge than to abstract concepts, to that which is merely thought; they
place empirical knowledge before logical. But this is not the opinion of
men who live more in words than in deeds, who have seen more on paper and
in books than in actual life, and who in their greatest degeneracy become
pedants and lovers of the mere letter. Thus only is it conceivable that
Leibnitz and Wolf and all their successors could go so far astray as to
explain knowledge of perception, after the example of Duns Scotus, as
merely confused abstract knowledge! To the honour of Spinoza, I must
mention that his truer sense led him, on the contrary, to explain all
general concepts as having arisen from the confusion of that which was
known in perception (Eth. II., prop. 40, Schol. 1). It is also a result of
perverted opinion that in mathematics the evidence proper to it was
rejected, and logical evidence alone accepted; that everything in general
which was not abstract knowledge was comprehended under the wide name of
feeling, and consequently was little valued; and lastly that the Kantian
ethics regarded the good will which immediately asserts itself upon
knowledge of the circumstances, and guides to right and good action as
mere feeling and emotion, and consequently as worthless and without merit,
and would only recognise actions which proceed from abstract maxims as
having moral worth.

The many-sided view of life as a whole which man, as distinguished from
the lower animals, possesses through reason, may be compared to a
geometrical, colourless, abstract, reduced plan of his actual life. He,
therefore, stands to the lower animals as the navigator who, by means of
chart, compass, and quadrant, knows accurately his course and his position
at any time upon the sea, stands to the uneducated sailors who see only
the waves and the heavens. Thus it is worth noticing, and indeed
wonderful, how, besides his life in the concrete, man always lives another
life in the abstract. In the former he is given as a prey to all the
storms of actual life, and to the influence of the present; he must
struggle, suffer, and die like the brute. But his life in the abstract, as
it lies before his rational consciousness, is the still reflection of the
former, and of the world in which he lives; it is just that reduced chart
or plan to which we have referred. Here in the sphere of quiet
deliberation, what completely possessed him and moved him intensely
before, appears to him cold, colourless, and for the moment external to
him; he is merely the spectator, the observer. In respect of this
withdrawal into reflection he may be compared to an actor who has played
his part in one scene, and who takes his place among the audience till it
is time for him to go upon the stage again, and quietly looks on at
whatever may happen, even though it be the preparation for his own death
(in the piece), but afterwards he again goes on the stage and acts and
suffers as he must. From this double life proceeds that quietness peculiar
to human beings, so very different from the thoughtlessness of the brutes,
and with which, in accordance with previous reflection, or a formed
determination, or a recognised necessity, a man suffers or accomplishes in
cold blood, what is of the utmost and often terrible importance to him;
suicide, execution, the duel, enterprises of every kind fraught with
danger to life, and, in general, things against which his whole animal
nature rebels. Under such circumstances we see to what an extent reason
has mastered the animal nature, and we say to the strong: σιδηρειον νυ τοι
ἡτορ! (_ferreum certe tibi cor_), Il. 24, 521. Here we can say truly that
reason manifests itself practically, and thus wherever action is guided by
reason, where the motives are abstract concepts, wherever we are not
determined by particular ideas of perception, nor by the impression of the
moment which guides the brutes, there _practical reason_ shows itself. But
I have fully explained in the Appendix, and illustrated by examples, that
this is entirely different from and unrelated to the ethical worth of
actions; that rational action and virtuous action are two entirely
different things; that reason may just as well find itself in connection
with great evil as with great good, and by its assistance may give great
power to the one as well as to the other; that it is equally ready and
valuable for the methodical and consistent carrying out of the noble and
of the bad intention, of the wise as of the foolish maxim; which all
results from the constitution of its nature, which is feminine, receptive,
retentive, and not spontaneous; all this I have shown in detail in the
Appendix, and illustrated by examples. What is said there would have been
placed here, but on account of my polemic against Kant’s pretended
practical reason I have been obliged to relegate it to the Appendix, to
which I therefore refer.

The ideal explained in the _Stoical philosophy_ is the most complete
development of _practical reason_ in the true and genuine sense of the
word; it is the highest summit to which man can attain by the mere use of
his reason, and in it his difference from the brutes shows itself most
distinctly. For the ethics of Stoicism are originally and essentially, not
a doctrine of virtue, but merely a guide to a rational life, the end and
aim of which is happiness through peace of mind. Virtuous conduct appears
in it as it were merely by accident, as the means, not as the end.
Therefore the ethical theory of Stoicism is in its whole nature and point
of view fundamentally different from the ethical systems which lay stress
directly upon virtue, such as the doctrines of the Vedas, of Plato, of
Christianity, and of Kant. The aim of Stoical ethics is happiness: τελος
το ευδαι μονειν (_virtutes omnes finem habere beatitudinem_) it is called
in the account of the Stoa by Stobæus (Ecl., L. ii. c. 7, p. 114, and also
p. 138). Yet the ethics of Stoicism teach that happiness can only be
attained with certainty through inward peace and quietness of spirit
(αταραξια), and that this again can only be reached through virtue; this
is the whole meaning of the saying that virtue is the highest good. But if
indeed by degrees the end is lost sight of in the means, and virtue is
inculcated in a way which discloses an interest entirely different from
that of one’s own happiness, for it contradicts this too distinctly; this
is just one of those inconsistencies by means of which, in every system,
the immediately known, or, as it is called, felt truth leads us back to
the right way in defiance of syllogistic reasoning; as, for example, we
see clearly in the ethical teaching of Spinoza, which deduces a pure
doctrine of virtue from the egoistical _suum utile quærere_ by means of
palpable sophisms. According to this, as I conceive the spirit of the
Stoical ethics, their source lies in the question whether the great
prerogative of man, reason, which, by means of planned action and its
results, relieves life and its burdens so much, might not also be capable
of freeing him at once, directly, _i.e._, through mere knowledge,
completely, or nearly so, of the sorrows and miseries of every kind of
which his life is full. They held that it was not in keeping with the
prerogative of reason that the nature given with it, which by means of it
comprehends and contemplates an infinity of things and circumstances,
should yet, through the present, and the accidents that can be contained
in the few years of a life that is short, fleeting, and uncertain, be
exposed to such intense pain, to such great anxiety and suffering, as
arise from the tempestuous strain of the desires and the antipathies; and
they believed that the due application of reason must raise men above
them, and can make them invulnerable. Therefore Antisthenes says: Δει
κτασθαι νουν, η βροχον (_aut mentem parandam, aut laqueum._ Plut. de
stoic. repugn., c. 14), _i.e._, life is so full of troubles and vexations,
that one must either rise above it by means of corrected thoughts, or
leave it. It was seen that want and suffering did not directly and of
necessity spring from not having, but from desiring to have and not
having; that therefore this desire to have is the necessary condition
under which alone it becomes a privation not to have and begets pain. Ου
πενια λυπην εργαζεται, αλλα επιθυμια (_non paupertas dolorem efficit, sed
cupiditas_), Epict., fragm. 25. Men learned also from experience that it
is only the hope of what is claimed that begets and nourishes the wish;
therefore neither the many unavoidable evils which are common to all, nor
unattainable blessings, disquiet or trouble us, but only the trifling more
or less of those things which we can avoid or attain; indeed, not only
what is absolutely unavoidable or unattainable, but also what is merely
relatively so, leaves us quite undisturbed; therefore the ills that have
once become joined to our individuality, or the good things that must of
necessity always be denied us, are treated with indifference, in
accordance with the peculiarity of human nature that every wish soon dies
and can no more beget pain if it is not nourished by hope. It followed
from all this that happiness always depends upon the proportion between
our claims and what we receive. It is all one whether the quantities thus
related be great or small, and the proportion can be established just as
well by diminishing the amount of the first as by increasing the amount of
the second; and in the same way it also follows that all suffering
proceeds from the want of proportion between what we demand and expect and
what we get. Now this want of proportion obviously lies only in knowledge,
and it could be entirely abolished through fuller insight.(24) Therefore
Chrysippus says: δει ζῃν κατ᾽ εμπειριαν των φυσει συμβαινοντων (Stob.
Ecl., L. ii. c. 7, p. 134), that is, one ought to live with a due
knowledge of the transitory nature of the things of the world. For as
often as a man loses self-command, or is struck down by a misfortune, or
grows angry, or becomes faint-hearted, he shows that he finds things
different from what he expected, consequently that he was caught in error,
and did not know the world and life, did not know that the will of the
individual is crossed at every step by the chance of inanimate nature and
the antagonism of aims and the wickedness of other individuals: he has
therefore either not made use of his reason in order to arrive at a
general knowledge of this characteristic of life, or he lacks judgment, in
that he does not recognise in the particular what he knows in general, and
is therefore surprised by it and loses his self-command.(25) Thus also
every keen pleasure is an error and an illusion, for no attained wish can
give lasting satisfaction; and, moreover, every possession and every
happiness is but lent by chance for an uncertain time, and may therefore
be demanded back the next hour. All pain rests on the passing away of such
an illusion; thus both arise from defective knowledge; the wise man
therefore holds himself equally aloof from joy and sorrow, and no event
disturbs his αταραξια.

In accordance with this spirit and aim of the Stoa, Epictetus began and
ended with the doctrine as the kernel of his philosophy, that we should
consider well and distinguish what depends upon us and what does not, and
therefore entirely avoid counting upon the latter, whereby we shall
certainly remain free from all pain, sorrow, and anxiety. But that which
alone is dependent upon us is the will; and here a transition gradually
takes place to a doctrine of virtue, for it is observed that as the outer
world, which is independent of us, determines good and bad fortune, so
inner contentment with ourselves, or the absence of it, proceeds from the
will. But it was then asked whether we ought to apply the words _bonum_
and _malum_ to the two former or to the two latter? This was indeed
arbitrary and a matter of choice, and did not make any real difference,
but yet the Stoics disputed everlastingly with the Peripatetics and
Epicureans about it, and amused themselves with the inadmissible
comparison of two entirely incommensurable quantities, and the
antithetical, paradoxical judgments which proceeded from them, and which
they flung at each other. The _Paradoxa_ of Cicero afford us an
interesting collection of these from the Stoical side.

Zeno, the founder, seems originally to have followed a somewhat different
path. The starting-point with him was that for the attainment of the
highest good, _i.e._, blessedness and spiritual peace, one must live in
harmony with oneself (ὁμολογουμενους ξῃν; δ᾽ εστι καθ᾽ ἑνα λογον και
συμφωνον ξῃν.—_Consonanter vivere: hoc est secundum unam rationem et
concordem sibi vivere._ Stob. Ecl. eth. L. ii., c. 7, p. 132. Also: Αρετην
διαθεσιν ειναι ψυχης συμφωνον ἑαυτῃ περι ὁλον τον βιον. _Virtutem esse
animi affectiomem secum per totam vitam consentientem_, _ibid._, p. 104.)
Now this was only possible for a man if he determined himself entirely
rationally, according to concepts, not according to changing impressions
and moods; since, however, only the maxims of our conduct, not the
consequences nor the outward circumstances, are in our power, in order to
be always consistent we must set before us as our aim only the maxims and
not the consequences and circumstances, and thus again a doctrine of
virtue is introduced.

But the ethical principle of Zeno—to live in harmony with oneself—appeared
even to his immediate successors to be too formal and empty. They
therefore gave it material content by the addition—“to live in harmony
with nature” (ὁμολογουμενως τῃ φυσει ζῃν), which, as Stobæus mentions in
another place, was first added by Kleanthes, and extended the matter very
much on account of the wide sphere of the concept and the vagueness of the
expression. For Kleanthes meant the whole of nature in general, while
Chrysippus meant human nature in particular (Diog. Laert., 7, 89). It
followed that what alone was adapted to the latter was virtue, just as the
satisfaction of animal desires was adapted to animal natures; and thus
ethics had again to be forcibly united to a doctrine of virtue, and in
some way or other established through physics. For the Stoics always aimed
at unity of principle, as for them God and the world were not dissevered.

The ethical system of Stoicism, regarded as a whole, is in fact a very
valuable and estimable attempt to use the great prerogative of man,
reason, for an important and salutary end; to raise him above the
suffering and pain to which all life is exposed, by means of a maxim—


    “_Qua ratione queas traducere leniter œvum:_
    _Ne te semper inops agitet vexetque cupido,_
    _Ne pavor et rerum mediocriter utilium spes,_”


and thus to make him partake, in the highest degree, of the dignity which
belongs to him as a rational being, as distinguished from the brutes; a
dignity of which, in this sense at any rate, we can speak, though not in
any other. It is a consequence of my view of the ethical system of
Stoicism that it must be explained at the part of my work at which I
consider what reason is and what it can do. But although it may to a
certain extent be possible to attain that end through the application of
reason, and through a purely rational system of ethics, and although
experience shows that the happiest men are those purely rational
characters commonly called practical philosophers,—and rightly so, because
just as the true, that is, the theoretical philosopher carries life into
the concept, they carry the concept into life,—yet it is far from the case
that perfection can be attained in this way, and that the reason, rightly
used, can really free us from the burden and sorrow of life, and lead us
to happiness. Rather, there lies an absolute contradiction in wishing to
live without suffering, and this contradiction is also implied in the
commonly used expression, “blessed life.” This will become perfectly clear
to whoever comprehends the whole of the following exposition. In this
purely rational system of ethics the contradiction reveals itself thus,
the Stoic is obliged in his doctrine of the way to the blessed life (for
that is what his ethical system always remains) to insert a recommendation
of suicide (as among the magnificent ornaments and apparel of Eastern
despots there is always a costly vial of poison) for the case in which the
sufferings of the body, which cannot be philosophised away by any
principles or syllogistic reasonings, are paramount and incurable; thus
its one aim, blessedness, is rendered vain, and nothing remains as a mode
of escape from suffering except death; in such a case then death must be
voluntarily accepted, just as we would take any other medicine. Here then
a marked antagonism is brought out between the ethical system of Stoicism
and all those systems referred to above which make virtue in itself
directly, and accompanied by the most grievous sorrows, their aim, and
will not allow a man to end his life in order to escape from suffering.
Not one of them, however, was able to give the true reason for the
rejection of suicide, but they laboriously collected illusory explanations
from all sides: the true reason will appear in the Fourth Book in the
course of the development of our system. But the antagonism referred to
reveals and establishes the essential difference in fundamental principle
between Stoicism, which is just a special form of endæmonism, and those
doctrines we have mentioned, although both are often at one in their
results, and are apparently related. And the inner contradiction referred
to above, with which the ethical system of Stoicism is affected even in
its fundamental thought, shows itself further in the circumstance that its
ideal, the Stoic philosopher, as the system itself represents him, could
never obtain life or inner poetic truth, but remains a wooden, stiff
lay-figure of which nothing can be made. He cannot himself make use of his
wisdom, and his perfect peace, contentment, and blessedness directly
contradict the nature of man, and preclude us from forming any concrete
idea of him. When compared with him, how entirely different appear the
overcomers of the world, and voluntary hermits that Indian philosophy
presents to us, and has actually produced; or indeed, the holy man of
Christianity, that excellent form full of deep life, of the greatest
poetic truth, and the highest significance, which stands before us in
perfect virtue, holiness, and sublimity, yet in a state of supreme
suffering.(26)





SECOND BOOK. THE WORLD AS WILL.




First Aspect. The Objectification Of The Will.


    Nos habitat, non tartara, sed nec sidera coeli:
    Spiritus, in nobis qui viget, illa facit.


§ 17. In the first book we considered the idea merely as such, that is,
only according to its general form. It is true that as far as the abstract
idea, the concept, is concerned, we obtained a knowledge of it in respect
of its content also, because it has content and meaning only in relation
to the idea of perception, without which it would be worthless and empty.
Accordingly, directing our attention exclusively to the idea of
perception, we shall now endeavour to arrive at a knowledge of its
content, its more exact definition, and the forms which it presents to us.
And it will specially interest us to find an explanation of its peculiar
significance, that significance which is otherwise merely felt, but on
account of which it is that these pictures do not pass by us entirely
strange and meaningless, as they must otherwise do, but speak to us
directly, are understood, and obtain an interest which concerns our whole
nature.

We direct our attention to mathematics, natural science, and philosophy,
for each of these holds out the hope that it will afford us a part of the
explanation we desire. Now, taking philosophy first, we find that it is
like a monster with many heads, each of which speaks a different language.
They are not, indeed, all at variance on the point we are here
considering, the significance of the idea of perception. For, with the
exception of the Sceptics and the Idealists, the others, for the most
part, speak very much in the same way of an _object_ which constitutes the
_basis_ of the idea, and which is indeed different in its whole being and
nature from the idea, but yet is in all points as like it as one egg is to
another. But this does not help us, for we are quite unable to distinguish
such an object from the idea; we find that they are one and the same; for
every object always and for ever presupposes a subject, and therefore
remains idea, so that we recognised objectivity as belonging to the most
universal form of the idea, which is the division into subject and object.
Further, the principle of sufficient reason, which is referred to in
support of this doctrine, is for us merely the form of the idea, the
orderly combination of one idea with another, but not the combination of
the whole finite or infinite series of ideas with something which is not
idea at all, and which cannot therefore be presented in perception. Of the
Sceptics and Idealists we spoke above, in examining the controversy about
the reality of the outer world.

If we turn to mathematics to look for the fuller knowledge we desire of
the idea of perception, which we have, as yet, only understood generally,
merely in its form, we find that mathematics only treats of these ideas so
far as they fill time and space, that is, so far as they are quantities.
It will tell us with the greatest accuracy the how-many and the how-much;
but as this is always merely relative, that is to say, merely a comparison
of one idea with others, and a comparison only in the one respect of
quantity, this also is not the information we are principally in search
of.

Lastly, if we turn to the wide province of natural science, which is
divided into many fields, we may, in the first place, make a general
division of it into two parts. It is either the description of forms,
which I call _Morphology_, or the explanation of changes, which I call
_Etiology_. The first treats of the permanent forms, the second of the
changing matter, according to the laws of its transition from one form to
another. The first is the whole extent of what is generally called natural
history. It teaches us, especially in the sciences of botany and zoology,
the various permanent, organised, and therefore definitely determined
forms in the constant change of individuals; and these forms constitute a
great part of the content of the idea of perception. In natural history
they are classified, separated, united, arranged according to natural and
artificial systems, and brought under concepts which make a general view
and knowledge of the whole of them possible. Further, an infinitely fine
analogy both in the whole and in the parts of these forms, and running
through them all (_unité de plan_), is established, and thus they may be
compared to innumerable variations on a theme which is not given. The
passage of matter into these forms, that is to say, the origin of
individuals, is not a special part of natural science, for every
individual springs from its like by generation, which is everywhere
equally mysterious, and has as yet evaded definite knowledge. The little
that is known on the subject finds its place in physiology, which belongs
to that part of natural science I have called etiology. Mineralogy also,
especially where it becomes geology, inclines towards etiology, though it
principally belongs to morphology. Etiology proper comprehends all those
branches of natural science in which the chief concern is the knowledge of
cause and effect. The sciences teach how, according to an invariable rule,
one condition of matter is necessarily followed by a certain other
condition; how one change necessarily conditions and brings about a
certain other change; this sort of teaching is called _explanation_. The
principal sciences in this department are mechanics, physics, chemistry,
and physiology.

If, however, we surrender ourselves to its teaching, we soon become
convinced that etiology cannot afford us the information we chiefly
desire, any more than morphology. The latter presents to us innumerable
and infinitely varied forms, which are yet related by an unmistakable
family likeness. These are for us ideas, and when only treated in this
way, they remain always strange to us, and stand before us like
hieroglyphics which we do not understand. Etiology, on the other hand,
teaches us that, according to the law of cause and effect, this particular
condition of matter brings about that other particular condition, and thus
it has explained it and performed its part. However, it really does
nothing more than indicate the orderly arrangement according to which the
states of matter appear in space and time, and teach in all cases what
phenomenon must necessarily appear at a particular time in a particular
place. It thus determines the position of phenomena in time and space,
according to a law whose special content is derived from experience, but
whose universal form and necessity is yet known to us independently of
experience. But it affords us absolutely no information about the inner
nature of any one of these phenomena: this is called a _force of nature_,
and it lies outside the province of causal explanation, which calls the
constant uniformity with which manifestations of such a force appear
whenever their known conditions are present, a _law of nature_. But this
law of nature, these conditions, and this appearance in a particular place
at a particular time, are all that it knows or ever can know. The force
itself which manifests itself, the inner nature of the phenomena which
appear in accordance with these laws, remains always a secret to it,
something entirely strange and unknown in the case of the simplest as well
as of the most complex phenomena. For although as yet etiology has most
completely achieved its aim in mechanics, and least completely in
physiology, still the force on account of which a stone falls to the
ground or one body repels another is, in its inner nature, not less
strange and mysterious than that which produces the movements and the
growth of an animal. The science of mechanics presupposes matter, weight,
impenetrability, the possibility of communicating motion by impact,
inertia and so forth as ultimate facts, calls them forces of nature, and
their necessary and orderly appearance under certain conditions a law of
nature. Only after this does its explanation begin, and it consists in
indicating truly and with mathematical exactness, how, where and when each
force manifests itself, and in referring every phenomenon which presents
itself to the operation of one of these forces. Physics, chemistry, and
physiology proceed in the same way in their province, only they presuppose
more and accomplish less. Consequently the most complete etiological
explanation of the whole of nature can never be more than an enumeration
of forces which cannot be explained, and a reliable statement of the rule
according to which phenomena appear in time and space, succeed, and make
way for each other. But the inner nature of the forces which thus appear
remains unexplained by such an explanation, which must confine itself to
phenomena and their arrangement, because the law which it follows does not
extend further. In this respect it may be compared to a section of a piece
of marble which shows many veins beside each other, but does not allow us
to trace the course of the veins from the interior of the marble to its
surface. Or, if I may use an absurd but more striking comparison, the
philosophical investigator must always have the same feeling towards the
complete etiology of the whole of nature, as a man who, without knowing
how, has been brought into a company quite unknown to him, each member of
which in turn presents another to him as his friend and cousin, and
therefore as quite well known, and yet the man himself, while at each
introduction he expresses himself gratified, has always the question on
his lips: “But how the deuce do I stand to the whole company?”

Thus we see that, with regard to those phenomena which we know only as our
ideas, etiology can never give us the desired information that shall carry
us beyond this point. For, after all its explanations, they still remain
quite strange to us, as mere ideas whose significance we do not
understand. The causal connection merely gives us the rule and the
relative order of their appearance in space and time, but affords us no
further knowledge of that which so appears. Moreover, the law of causality
itself has only validity for ideas, for objects of a definite class, and
it has meaning only in so far as it presupposes them. Thus, like these
objects themselves, it always exists only in relation to a subject, that
is, conditionally; and so it is known just as well if we start from the
subject, _i.e._, _a priori_, as if we start from the object, _i.e._, _a
posteriori_. Kant indeed has taught us this.

But what now impels us to inquiry is just that we are not satisfied with
knowing that we have ideas, that they are such and such, and that they are
connected according to certain laws, the general expression of which is
the principle of sufficient reason. We wish to know the significance of
these ideas; we ask whether this world is merely idea; in which case it
would pass by us like an empty dream or a baseless vision, not worth our
notice; or whether it is also something else, something more than idea,
and if so, what. Thus much is certain, that this something we seek for
must be completely and in its whole nature different from the idea; that
the forms and laws of the idea must therefore be completely foreign to it;
further, that we cannot arrive at it from the idea under the guidance of
the laws which merely combine objects, ideas, among themselves, and which
are the forms of the principle of sufficient reason.

Thus we see already that we can never arrive at the real nature of things
from without. However much we investigate, we can never reach anything but
images and names. We are like a man who goes round a castle seeking in
vain for an entrance, and sometimes sketching the façades. And yet this is
the method that has been followed by all philosophers before me.

§ 18. In fact, the meaning for which we seek of that world which is
present to us only as our idea, or the transition from the world as mere
idea of the knowing subject to whatever it may be besides this, would
never be found if the investigator himself were nothing more than the pure
knowing subject (a winged cherub without a body). But he is himself rooted
in that world; he finds himself in it as an _individual_, that is to say,
his knowledge, which is the necessary supporter of the whole world as
idea, is yet always given through the medium of a body, whose affections
are, as we have shown, the starting-point for the understanding in the
perception of that world. His body is, for the pure knowing subject, an
idea like every other idea, an object among objects. Its movements and
actions are so far known to him in precisely the same way as the changes
of all other perceived objects, and would be just as strange and
incomprehensible to him if their meaning were not explained for him in an
entirely different way. Otherwise he would see his actions follow upon
given motives with the constancy of a law of nature, just as the changes
of other objects follow upon causes, stimuli, or motives. But he would not
understand the influence of the motives any more than the connection
between every other effect which he sees and its cause. He would then call
the inner nature of these manifestations and actions of his body which he
did not understand a force, a quality, or a character, as he pleased, but
he would have no further insight into it. But all this is not the case;
indeed the answer to the riddle is given to the subject of knowledge who
appears as an individual, and the answer is _will_. This and this alone
gives him the key to his own existence, reveals to him the significance,
shows him the inner mechanism of his being, of his action, of his
movements. The body is given in two entirely different ways to the subject
of knowledge, who becomes an individual only through his identity with it.
It is given as an idea in intelligent perception, as an object among
objects and subject to the laws of objects. And it is also given in quite
a different way as that which is immediately known to every one, and is
signified by the word _will_. Every true act of his will is also at once
and without exception a movement of his body. The act of will and the
movement of the body are not two different things objectively known, which
the bond of causality unites; they do not stand in the relation of cause
and effect; they are one and the same, but they are given in entirely
different ways,—immediately, and again in perception for the
understanding. The action of the body is nothing but the act of the will
objectified, _i.e._, passed into perception. It will appear later that
this is true of every movement of the body, not merely those which follow
upon motives, but also involuntary movements which follow upon mere
stimuli, and, indeed, that the whole body is nothing but objectified will,
_i.e._, will become idea. All this will be proved and made quite clear in
the course of this work. In one respect, therefore, I shall call the body
the _objectivity of will_; as in the previous book, and in the essay on
the principle of sufficient reason, in accordance with the one-sided point
of view intentionally adopted there (that of the idea), I called it _the
immediate object_. Thus in a certain sense we may also say that will is
the knowledge _a priori_ of the body, and the body is the knowledge _a
posteriori_ of the will. Resolutions of the will which relate to the
future are merely deliberations of the reason about what we shall will at
a particular time, not real acts of will. Only the carrying out of the
resolve stamps it as will, for till then it is never more than an
intention that may be changed, and that exists only in the reason _in
abstracto_. It is only in reflection that to will and to act are
different; in reality they are one. Every true, genuine, immediate act of
will is also, at once and immediately, a visible act of the body. And,
corresponding to this, every impression upon the body is also, on the
other hand, at once and immediately an impression upon the will. As such
it is called pain when it is opposed to the will; gratification or
pleasure when it is in accordance with it. The degrees of both are widely
different. It is quite wrong, however, to call pain and pleasure ideas,
for they are by no means ideas, but immediate affections of the will in
its manifestation, the body; compulsory, instantaneous willing or
not-willing of the impression which the body sustains. There are only a
few impressions of the body which do not touch the will, and it is through
these alone that the body is an immediate object of knowledge, for, as
perceived by the understanding, it is already an indirect object like all
others. These impressions are, therefore, to be treated directly as mere
ideas, and excepted from what has been said. The impressions we refer to
are the affections of the purely objective senses of sight, hearing, and
touch, though only so far as these organs are affected in the way which is
specially peculiar to their specific nature. This affection of them is so
excessively weak an excitement of the heightened and specifically modified
sensibility of these parts that it does not affect the will, but only
furnishes the understanding with the data out of which the perception
arises, undisturbed by any excitement of the will. But every stronger or
different kind of affection of these organs of sense is painful, that is
to say, against the will, and thus they also belong to its objectivity.
Weakness of the nerves shows itself in this, that the impressions which
have only such a degree of strength as would usually be sufficient to make
them data for the understanding reach the higher degree at which they
influence the will, that is to say, give pain or pleasure, though more
often pain, which is, however, to some extent deadened and inarticulate,
so that not only particular tones and strong light are painful to us, but
there ensues a generally unhealthy and hypochondriacal disposition which
is not distinctly understood. The identity of the body and the will shows
itself further, among other ways, in the circumstance that every vehement
and excessive movement of the will, _i.e._, every emotion, agitates the
body and its inner constitution directly, and disturbs the course of its
vital functions. This is shown in detail in “Will in Nature,” p. 27 of the
second edition and p. 28 of the third.

Lastly, the knowledge which I have of my will, though it is immediate,
cannot be separated from that which I have of my body. I know my will, not
as a whole, not as a unity, not completely, according to its nature, but I
know it only in its particular acts, and therefore in time, which is the
form of the phenomenal aspect of my body, as of every object. Therefore
the body is a condition of the knowledge of my will. Thus, I cannot really
imagine this will apart from my body. In the essay on the principle of
sufficient reason, the will, or rather the subject of willing, is treated
as a special class of ideas or objects. But even there we saw this object
become one with the subject; that is, we saw it cease to be an object. We
there called this union the miracle κατ᾽ εξοχην, and the whole of the
present work is to a certain extent an explanation of this. So far as I
know my will specially as object, I know it as body. But then I am again
at the first class of ideas laid down in that essay, _i.e._, real objects.
As we proceed we shall see always more clearly that these ideas of the
first class obtain their explanation and solution from those of the fourth
class given in the essay, which could no longer be properly opposed to the
subject as object, and that, therefore, we must learn to understand the
inner nature of the law of causality which is valid in the first class,
and of all that happens in accordance with it from the law of motivation
which governs the fourth class.

The identity of the will and the body, of which we have now given a
cursory explanation, can only be proved in the manner we have adopted
here. We have proved this identity for the first time, and shall do so
more and more fully in the course of this work. By “proved” we mean raised
from the immediate consciousness, from knowledge in the concrete to
abstract knowledge of the reason, or carried over into abstract knowledge.
On the other hand, from its very nature it can never be demonstrated, that
is, deduced as indirect knowledge from some other more direct knowledge,
just because it is itself the most direct knowledge; and if we do not
apprehend it and stick to it as such, we shall expect in vain to receive
it again in some indirect way as derivative knowledge. It is knowledge of
quite a special kind, whose truth cannot therefore properly be brought
under any of the four rubrics under which I have classified all truth in
the essay on the principle of sufficient reason, § 29, the logical, the
empirical, the metaphysical, and the metalogical, for it is not, like all
these, the relation of an abstract idea to another idea, or to the
necessary form of perceptive or of abstract ideation, but it is the
relation of a judgment to the connection which an idea of perception, the
body, has to that which is not an idea at all, but something _toto genere_
different, will. I should like therefore to distinguish this from all
other truth, and call it κατ᾽ εξοχην _philosophical truth_. We can turn
the expression of this truth in different ways and say: My body and my
will are one;—or, What as an idea of perception I call my body, I call my
will, so far as I am conscious of it in an entirely different way which
cannot be compared to any other;—or, My body is the _objectivity_ of my
will;—or, My body considered apart from the fact that it is my idea is
still my will, and so forth.(27)

§ 19. In the first book we were reluctantly driven to explain the human
body as merely idea of the subject which knows it, like all the other
objects of this world of perception. But it has now become clear that what
enables us consciously to distinguish our own body from all other objects
which in other respects are precisely the same, is that our body appears
in consciousness in quite another way _toto genere_ different from idea,
and this we denote by the word _will_; and that it is just this double
knowledge which we have of our own body that affords us information about
it, about its action and movement following on motives, and also about
what it experiences by means of external impressions; in a word, about
what it is, not as idea, but as more than idea; that is to say, what it is
_in itself_. None of this information have we got directly with regard to
the nature, action, and experience of other real objects.

It is just because of this special relation to one body that the knowing
subject is an individual. For regarded apart from this relation, his body
is for him only an idea like all other ideas. But the relation through
which the knowing subject is an _individual_, is just on that account a
relation which subsists only between him and one particular idea of all
those which he has. Therefore he is conscious of this _one_ idea, not
merely as an idea, but in quite a different way as a will. If, however, he
abstracts from that special relation, from that twofold and completely
heterogeneous knowledge of what is one and the same, then that _one_, the
body, is an idea like all other ideas. Therefore, in order to understand
the matter, the individual who knows must either assume that what
distinguishes that one idea from others is merely the fact that his
knowledge stands in this double relation to it alone; that insight in two
ways at the same time is open to him only in the case of this one object
of perception, and that this is to be explained not by the difference of
this object from all others, but only by the difference between the
relation of his knowledge to this one object, and its relation to all
other objects. Or else he must assume that this object is essentially
different from all others; that it alone of all objects is at once both
will and idea, while the rest are only ideas, _i.e._, only phantoms. Thus
he must assume that his body is the only real individual in the world,
_i.e._, the only phenomenon of will and the only immediate object of the
subject. That other objects, considered merely as _ideas_, are like his
body, that is, like it, fill space (which itself can only be present as
idea), and also, like it, are causally active in space, is indeed
demonstrably certain from the law of causality which is _a priori_ valid
for ideas, and which admits of no effect without a cause; but apart from
the fact that we can only reason from an effect to a cause generally, and
not to a similar cause, we are still in the sphere of mere ideas, in which
alone the law of causality is valid, and beyond which it can never take
us. But whether the objects known to the individual only as ideas are yet,
like his own body, manifestations of a will, is, as was said in the First
Book, the proper meaning of the question as to the reality of the external
world. To deny this is _theoretical egoism_, which on that account regards
all phenomena that are outside its own will as phantoms, just as in a
practical reference exactly the same thing is done by practical egoism.
For in it a man regards and treats himself alone as a person, and all
other persons as mere phantoms. Theoretical egoism can never be
demonstrably refuted, yet in philosophy it has never been used otherwise
than as a sceptical sophism, _i.e._, a pretence. As a serious conviction,
on the other hand, it could only be found in a madhouse, and as such it
stands in need of a cure rather than a refutation. We do not therefore
combat it any further in this regard, but treat it as merely the last
stronghold of scepticism, which is always polemical. Thus our knowledge,
which is always bound to individuality and is limited by this
circumstance, brings with it the necessity that each of us can only _be
one_, while, on the other hand, each of us can _know all_; and it is this
limitation that creates the need for philosophy. We therefore who, for
this very reason, are striving to extend the limits of our knowledge
through philosophy, will treat this sceptical argument of theoretical
egoism which meets us, as an army would treat a small frontier fortress.
The fortress cannot indeed be taken, but the garrison can never sally
forth from it, and therefore we pass it by without danger, and are not
afraid to have it in our rear.

The double knowledge which each of us has of the nature and activity of
his own body, and which is given in two completely different ways, has now
been clearly brought out. We shall accordingly make further use of it as a
key to the nature of every phenomenon in nature, and shall judge of all
objects which are not our own bodies, and are consequently not given to
our consciousness in a double way but only as ideas, according to the
analogy of our own bodies, and shall therefore assume that as in one
aspect they are idea, just like our bodies, and in this respect are
analogous to them, so in another aspect, what remains of objects when we
set aside their existence as idea of the subject, must in its inner nature
be the same as that in us which we call _will_. For what other kind of
existence or reality should we attribute to the rest of the material
world? Whence should we take the elements out of which we construct such a
world? Besides will and idea nothing is known to us or thinkable. If we
wish to attribute the greatest known reality to the material world which
exists immediately only in our idea, we give it the reality which our own
body has for each of us; for that is the most real thing for every one.
But if we now analyse the reality of this body and its actions, beyond the
fact that it is idea, we find nothing in it except the will; with this its
reality is exhausted. Therefore we can nowhere find another kind of
reality which we can attribute to the material world. Thus if we hold that
the material world is something more than merely our idea, we must say
that besides being idea, that is, in itself and according to its inmost
nature, it is that which we find immediately in ourselves as _will_. I say
according to its inmost nature; but we must first come to know more
accurately this real nature of the will, in order that we may be able to
distinguish from it what does not belong to itself, but to its
manifestation, which has many grades. Such, for example, is the
circumstance of its being accompanied by knowledge, and the determination
by motives which is conditioned by this knowledge. As we shall see farther
on, this does not belong to the real nature of will, but merely to its
distinct manifestation as an animal or a human being. If, therefore, I
say,—the force which attracts a stone to the earth is according to its
nature, in itself, and apart from all idea, will, I shall not be supposed
to express in this proposition the insane opinion that the stone moves
itself in accordance with a known motive, merely because this is the way
in which will appears in man.(28) We shall now proceed more clearly and in
detail to prove, establish, and develop to its full extent what as yet has
only been provisionally and generally explained.(29)

§ 20. As we have said, the will proclaims itself primarily in the
voluntary movements of our own body, as the inmost nature of this body, as
that which it is besides being object of perception, idea. For these
voluntary movements are nothing else than the visible aspect of the
individual acts of will, with which they are directly coincident and
identical, and only distinguished through the form of knowledge into which
they have passed, and in which alone they can be known, the form of idea.

But these acts of will have always a ground or reason outside themselves
in motives. Yet these motives never determine more than what I will at
_this_ time, in _this_ place, and under _these_ circumstances, not _that_
I will in general, or _what_ I will in general, that is, the maxims which
characterise my volition generally. Therefore the inner nature of my
volition cannot be explained from these motives; but they merely determine
its manifestation at a given point of time: they are merely the occasion
of my will showing itself; but the will itself lies outside the province
of the law of motivation, which determines nothing but its appearance at
each point of time. It is only under the presupposition of my empirical
character that the motive is a sufficient ground of explanation of my
action. But if I abstract from my character, and then ask, why, in
general, I will this and not that, no answer is possible, because it is
only the manifestation of the will that is subject to the principle of
sufficient reason, and not the will itself, which in this respect is to be
called _groundless_. At this point I presuppose Kant’s doctrine of the
empirical and intelligible character, and also my own treatment of the
subject in “The Fundamental Problems of Ethics,” pp. 48, 58, and 178, _et
seq._, of first edition (p. 174, _et seq._, of second edition). I shall
also have to speak more fully on the question in the Fourth Book. For the
present, I have only to draw attention to this, that the fact of one
manifestation being established through another, as here the deed through
the motive, does not at all conflict with the fact that its real nature is
will, which itself has no _ground_; for as the principle of sufficient
reason in all its aspects is only the form of knowledge, its validity
extends only to the idea, to the phenomena, to the visibility of the will,
but not to the will itself, which becomes visible.

If now every action of my body is the manifestation of an act of will in
which my will itself in general, and as a whole, thus my character,
expresses itself under given motives, manifestation of the will must be
the inevitable condition and presupposition of every action. For the fact
of its manifestation cannot depend upon something which does not exist
directly and only through it, which consequently is for it merely
accidental, and through which its manifestation itself would be merely
accidental. Now that condition is just the whole body itself. Thus the
body itself must be manifestation of the will, and it must be related to
my will as a whole, that is, to my intelligible character, whose
phenomenal appearance in time is my empirical character, as the particular
action of the body is related to the particular act of the will. The whole
body, then, must be simply my will become visible, must be my will itself,
so far as this is object of perception, an idea of the first class. It has
already been advanced in confirmation of this that every impression upon
my body also affects my will at once and immediately, and in this respect
is called pain or pleasure, or, in its lower degrees, agreeable or
disagreeable sensation; and also, conversely, that every violent movement
of the will, every emotion or passion, convulses the body and disturbs the
course of its functions. Indeed we can also give an etiological account,
though a very incomplete one, of the origin of my body, and a somewhat
better account of its development and conservation, and this is the
substance of physiology. But physiology merely explains its theme in
precisely the same way as motives explain action. Thus the physiological
explanation of the functions of the body detracts just as little from the
philosophical truth that the whole existence of this body and the sum
total of its functions are merely the objectification of that will which
appears in its outward actions in accordance with a motive, as the
establishment of the individual action through the motive and the
necessary sequence of the action from the motive conflicts with the fact
that action in general, and according to its nature, is only the
manifestation of a will which itself has no ground. If, however,
physiology tries to refer even these outward actions, the immediate
voluntary movements, to causes in the organism,—for example, if it
explains the movement of the muscles as resulting from the presence of
fluids (“like the contraction of a cord when it is wet,” says Reil in his
“Archiv für Physiologie,” vol. vi. p. 153), even supposing it really could
give a thorough explanation of this kind, yet this would never invalidate
the immediately certain truth that every voluntary motion (_functiones
animales_) is the manifestation of an act of will. Now, just as little can
the physiological explanation of vegetative life (_functiones naturales
vitales_), however far it may advance, ever invalidate the truth that the
whole animal life which thus develops itself is the manifestation of will.
In general, then, as we have shown above, no etiological explanation can
ever give us more than the necessarily determined position in time and
space of a particular manifestation, its necessary appearance there,
according to a fixed law; but the inner nature of everything that appears
in this way remains wholly inexplicable, and is presupposed by every
etiological explanation, and merely indicated by the names, force, or law
of nature, or, if we are speaking of action, character or will. Thus,
although every particular action, under the presupposition of the definite
character, necessarily follows from the given motive, and although growth,
the process of nourishment, and all the changes of the animal body take
place according to necessarily acting causes (stimuli), yet the whole
series of actions, and consequently every individual act, and also its
condition, the whole body itself which accomplishes it, and therefore also
the process through which and in which it exists, are nothing but the
manifestation of the will, the becoming visible, _the objectification of
the will_. Upon this rests the perfect suitableness of the human and
animal body to the human and animal will in general, resembling, though
far surpassing, the correspondence between an instrument made for a
purpose and the will of the maker, and on this account appearing as
design, _i.e._, the teleological explanation of the body. The parts of the
body must, therefore, completely correspond to the principal desires
through which the will manifests itself; they must be the visible
expression of these desires. Teeth, throat, and bowels are objectified
hunger; the organs of generation are objectified sexual desire; the
grasping hand, the hurrying feet, correspond to the more indirect desires
of the will which they express. As the human form generally corresponds to
the human will generally, so the individual bodily structure corresponds
to the individually modified will, the character of the individual, and
therefore it is throughout and in all its parts characteristic and full of
expression. It is very remarkable that Parmenides already gave expression
to this in the following verses, quoted by Aristotle (Metaph. iii. 5):—


    Ὁς γαρ ἑκαστος εχει κρασιν μελεων πολυκαμπτων
    Τως νοος ανθρωποισι παρεστηκεν; το γαρ αυτο
    Εστιν, ὁπερ φρονεει, μελεων φυσις ανθρωποισι
    Και πασιν και παντι; το γαρ πλεον εστι νοημα.


(Ut enim cuique complexio membrorum flexibilium se habet, ita mens
hominibus adest: idem namque est, quod sapit, membrorum natura hominibus,
et omnibus et omni: quod enim plus est, intelligentia est.)(30)

§ 21. Whoever has now gained from all these expositions a knowledge _in
abstracto_, and therefore clear and certain, of what every one knows
directly _in concreto_, _i.e._, as feeling, a knowledge that his will is
the real inner nature of his phenomenal being, which manifests itself to
him as idea, both in his actions and in their permanent substratum, his
body, and that his will is that which is most immediate in his
consciousness, though it has not as such completely passed into the form
of idea in which object and subject stand over against each other, but
makes itself known to him in a direct manner, in which he does not quite
clearly distinguish subject and object, yet is not known as a whole to the
individual himself, but only in its particular acts,—whoever, I say, has
with me gained this conviction will find that of itself it affords him the
key to the knowledge of the inmost being of the whole of nature; for he
now transfers it to all those phenomena which are not given to him, like
his own phenomenal existence, both in direct and indirect knowledge, but
only in the latter, thus merely one-sidedly as _idea_ alone. He will
recognise this will of which we are speaking not only in those phenomenal
existences which exactly resemble his own, in men and animals as their
inmost nature, but the course of reflection will lead him to recognise the
force which germinates and vegetates in the plant, and indeed the force
through which the crystal is formed, that by which the magnet turns to the
north pole, the force whose shock he experiences from the contact of two
different kinds of metals, the force which appears in the elective
affinities of matter as repulsion and attraction, decomposition and
combination, and, lastly, even gravitation, which acts so powerfully
throughout matter, draws the stone to the earth and the earth to the
sun,—all these, I say, he will recognise as different only in their
phenomenal existence, but in their inner nature as identical, as that
which is directly known to him so intimately and so much better than
anything else, and which in its most distinct manifestation is called
_will_. It is this application of reflection alone that prevents us from
remaining any longer at the phenomenon, and leads us to the _thing in
itself_. Phenomenal existence is idea and nothing more. All idea, of
whatever kind it may be, all _object_, is _phenomenal_ existence, but the
_will_ alone is a _thing in itself_. As such, it is throughout not idea,
but _toto genere_ different from it; it is that of which all idea, all
object, is the phenomenal appearance, the visibility, the objectification.
It is the inmost nature, the kernel, of every particular thing, and also
of the whole. It appears in every blind force of nature and also in the
preconsidered action of man; and the great difference between these two is
merely in the degree of the manifestation, not in the nature of what
manifests itself.

§ 22. Now, if we are to think as an object this thing-in-itself (we wish
to retain the Kantian expression as a standing formula), which, as such,
is never object, because all object is its mere manifestation, and
therefore cannot be it itself, we must borrow for it the name and concept
of an object, of something in some way objectively given, consequently of
one of its own manifestations. But in order to serve as a clue for the
understanding, this can be no other than the most complete of all its
manifestations, _i.e._, the most distinct, the most developed, and
directly enlightened by knowledge. Now this is the human will. It is,
however, well to observe that here, at any rate, we only make use of a
_denominatio a potiori_, through which, therefore, the concept of will
receives a greater extension than it has hitherto had. Knowledge of the
identical in different phenomena, and of difference in similar phenomena,
is, as Plato so often remarks, a _sine qua non_ of philosophy. But
hitherto it was not recognised that every kind of active and operating
force in nature is essentially identical with will, and therefore the
multifarious kinds of phenomena were not seen to be merely different
species of the same genus, but were treated as heterogeneous. Consequently
there could be no word to denote the concept of this genus. I therefore
name the genus after its most important species, the direct knowledge of
which lies nearer to us and guides us to the indirect knowledge of all
other species. But whoever is incapable of carrying out the required
extension of the concept will remain involved in a permanent
misunderstanding. For by the word _will_ he understands only that species
of it which has hitherto been exclusively denoted by it, the will which is
guided by knowledge, and whose manifestation follows only upon motives,
and indeed merely abstract motives, and thus takes place under the
guidance of the reason. This, we have said, is only the most prominent
example of the manifestation of will. We must now distinctly separate in
thought the inmost essence of this manifestation which is known to us
directly, and then transfer it to all the weaker, less distinct
manifestations of the same nature, and thus we shall accomplish the
desired extension of the concept of will. From another point of view I
should be equally misunderstood by any one who should think that it is all
the same in the end whether we denote this inner nature of all phenomena
by the word _will_ or by any other. This would be the case if the
thing-in-itself were something whose existence we merely _inferred_, and
thus knew indirectly and only in the abstract. Then, indeed, we might call
it what we pleased; the name would stand merely as the symbol of an
unknown quantity. But the word _will_, which, like a magic spell,
discloses to us the inmost being of everything in nature, is by no means
an unknown quantity, something arrived at only by inference, but is fully
and immediately comprehended, and is so familiar to us that we know and
understand what will is far better than anything else whatever. The
concept of will has hitherto commonly been subordinated to that of force,
but I reverse the matter entirely, and desire that every force in nature
should be thought as will. It must not be supposed that this is mere
verbal quibbling or of no consequence; rather, it is of the greatest
significance and importance. For at the foundation of the concept of
force, as of all other concepts, there ultimately lies the knowledge in
sense-perception of the objective world, that is to say, the phenomenon,
the idea; and the concept is constructed out of this. It is an abstraction
from the province in which cause and effect reign, _i.e._, from ideas of
perception, and means just the causal nature of causes at the point at
which this causal nature is no further etiologically explicable, but is
the necessary presupposition of all etiological explanation. The concept
will, on the other hand, is of all possible concepts the only one which
has its source _not_ in the phenomenal, _not_ in the mere idea of
perception, but comes from within, and proceeds from the most immediate
consciousness of each of us, in which each of us knows his own
individuality, according to its nature, immediately, apart from all form,
even that of subject and object, and which at the same time is this
individuality, for here the subject and the object of knowledge are one.
If, therefore, we refer the concept of _force_ to that of _will_, we have
in fact referred the less known to what is infinitely better known;
indeed, to the one thing that is really immediately and fully known to us,
and have very greatly extended our knowledge. If, on the contrary, we
subsume the concept of will under that of force, as has hitherto always
been done, we renounce the only immediate knowledge which we have of the
inner nature of the world, for we allow it to disappear in a concept which
is abstracted from the phenomenal, and with which we can therefore never
go beyond the phenomenal.

§ 23. The _will_ as a thing in itself is quite different from its
phenomenal appearance, and entirely free from all the forms of the
phenomenal, into which it first passes when it manifests itself, and which
therefore only concern its _objectivity_, and are foreign to the will
itself. Even the most universal form of all idea, that of being object for
a subject, does not concern it; still less the forms which are subordinate
to this and which collectively have their common expression in the
principle of sufficient reason, to which we know that time and space
belong, and consequently multiplicity also, which exists and is possible
only through these. In this last regard I shall call time and space the
_principium individuationis_, borrowing an expression from the old
schoolmen, and I beg to draw attention to this, once for all. For it is
only through the medium of time and space that what is one and the same,
both according to its nature and to its concept, yet appears as different,
as a multiplicity of co-existent and successive phenomena. Thus time and
space are the _principium individuationis_, the subject of so many
subtleties and disputes among the schoolmen, which may be found collected
in Suarez (Disp. 5, Sect. 3). According to what has been said, the will as
a thing-in-itself lies outside the province of the principle of sufficient
reason in all its forms, and is consequently completely groundless,
although all its manifestations are entirely subordinated to the principle
of sufficient reason. Further, it is free from all _multiplicity_,
although its manifestations in time and space are innumerable. It is
itself one, though not in the sense in which an object is one, for the
unity of an object can only be known in opposition to a possible
multiplicity; nor yet in the sense in which a concept is one, for the
unity of a concept originates only in abstraction from a multiplicity; but
it is one as that which lies outside time and space, the _principium
individuationis_, _i.e._, the possibility of multiplicity. Only when all
this has become quite clear to us through the subsequent examination of
the phenomena and different manifestations of the will, shall we fully
understand the meaning of the Kantian doctrine that time, space and
causality do not belong to the thing-in-itself, but are only forms of
knowing.

The uncaused nature of will has been actually recognised, where it
manifests itself most distinctly, as the will of man, and this has been
called free, independent. But on account of the uncaused nature of the
will itself, the necessity to which its manifestation is everywhere
subjected has been overlooked, and actions are treated as free, which they
are not. For every individual action follows with strict necessity from
the effect of the motive upon the character. All necessity is, as we have
already said, the relation of the consequent to the reason, and nothing
more. The principle of sufficient reason is the universal form of all
phenomena, and man in his action must be subordinated to it like every
other phenomenon. But because in self-consciousness the will is known
directly and in itself, in this consciousness lies also the consciousness
of freedom. The fact is, however, overlooked that the individual, the
person, is not will as a thing-in-itself, but is a _phenomenon_ of will,
is already determined as such, and has come under the form of the
phenomenal, the principle of sufficient reason. Hence arises the strange
fact that every one believes himself _a priori_ to be perfectly free, even
in his individual actions, and thinks that at every moment he can commence
another manner of life, which just means that he can become another
person. But _a posteriori_, through experience, he finds to his
astonishment that he is not free, but subjected to necessity; that in
spite of all his resolutions and reflections he does not change his
conduct, and that from the beginning of his life to the end of it, he must
carry out the very character which he himself condemns, and as it were
play the part he has undertaken to the end. I cannot pursue this subject
further at present, for it belongs, as ethical, to another part of this
work. In the meantime, I only wish to point out here that the _phenomenon_
of the will which in itself is uncaused, is yet as such subordinated to
the law of necessity, that is, the principle of sufficient reason, so that
in the necessity with which the phenomena of nature follow each other, we
may find nothing to hinder us from recognising in them the manifestations
of will.

Only those changes which have no other ground than a motive, _i.e._, an
idea, have hitherto been regarded as manifestations of will. Therefore in
nature a will has only been attributed to man, or at the most to animals;
for knowledge, the idea, is of course, as I have said elsewhere, the true
and exclusive characteristic of animal life. But that the will is also
active where no knowledge guides it, we see at once in the instinct and
the mechanical skill of animals.(31) That they have ideas and knowledge is
here not to the point, for the end towards which they strive as definitely
as if it were a known motive, is yet entirely unknown to them. Therefore
in such cases their action takes place without motive, is not guided by
the idea, and shows us first and most distinctly how the will may be
active entirely without knowledge. The bird of a year old has no idea of
the eggs for which it builds a nest; the young spider has no idea of the
prey for which it spins a web; nor has the ant-lion any idea of the ants
for which he digs a trench for the first time. The larva of the
stag-beetle makes the hole in the wood, in which it is to await its
metamorphosis, twice as big if it is going to be a male beetle as if it is
going to be a female, so that if it is a male there may be room for the
horns, of which, however, it has no idea. In such actions of these
creatures the will is clearly operative as in their other actions, but it
is in blind activity, which is indeed accompanied by knowledge but not
guided by it. If now we have once gained insight into the fact, that idea
as motive is not a necessary and essential condition of the activity of
the will, we shall more easily recognise the activity of will where it is
less apparent. For example, we shall see that the house of the snail is no
more made by a will which is foreign to the snail itself, than the house
which we build is produced through another will than our own; but we shall
recognise in both houses the work of a will which objectifies itself in
both the phenomena—a will which works in us according to motives, but in
the snail still blindly as formative impulse directed outwards. In us also
the same will is in many ways only blindly active: in all the functions of
our body which are not guided by knowledge, in all its vital and
vegetative processes, digestion, circulation, secretion, growth,
reproduction. Not only the actions of the body, but the whole body itself
is, as we have shown above, phenomenon of the will, objectified will,
concrete will. All that goes on in it must therefore proceed through will,
although here this will is not guided by knowledge, but acts blindly
according to causes, which in this case are called _stimuli_.

I call a _cause_, in the narrowest sense of the word, that state of
matter, which, while it introduces another state with necessity, yet
suffers just as great a change itself as that which it causes; which is
expressed in the rule, “action and reaction are equal.” Further, in the
case of what is properly speaking a cause, the effect increases directly
in proportion to the cause, and therefore also the reaction. So that, if
once the mode of operation be known, the degree of the effect may be
measured and calculated from the degree of the intensity of the cause; and
conversely the degree of the intensity of the cause may be calculated from
the degree of the effect. Such causes, properly so called, operate in all
the phenomena of mechanics, chemistry, and so forth; in short, in all the
changes of unorganised bodies. On the other hand, I call a _stimulus_,
such a cause as sustains no reaction proportional to its effect, and the
intensity of which does not vary directly in proportion to the intensity
of its effect, so that the effect cannot be measured by it. On the
contrary, a small increase of the stimulus may cause a very great increase
of the effect, or conversely, it may eliminate the previous effect
altogether, and so forth. All effects upon organised bodies as such are of
this kind. All properly organic and vegetative changes of the animal body
must therefore be referred to stimuli, not to mere causes. But the
stimulus, like every cause and motive generally, never determines more
than the point of time and space at which the manifestation of every force
is to take place, and does not determine the inner nature of the force
itself which is manifested. This inner nature we know, from our previous
investigation, is will, to which therefore we ascribe both the unconscious
and the conscious changes of the body. The stimulus holds the mean, forms
the transition between the motive, which is causality accompanied
throughout by knowledge, and the cause in the narrowest sense. In
particular cases it is sometimes nearer a motive, sometimes nearer a
cause, but yet it can always be distinguished from both. Thus, for
example, the rising of the sap in a plant follows upon stimuli, and cannot
be explained from mere causes, according to the laws of hydraulics or
capillary attraction; yet it is certainly assisted by these, and
altogether approaches very near to a purely causal change. On the other
hand, the movements of the _Hedysarum gyrans_ and the _Mimosa pudica_,
although still following upon mere stimuli, are yet very like movements
which follow upon motives, and seem almost to wish to make the transition.
The contraction of the pupils of the eyes as the light is increased is due
to stimuli, but it passes into movement which is due to motive; for it
takes place, because too strong lights would affect the retina painfully,
and to avoid this we contract the pupils. The occasion of an erection is a
motive, because it is an idea, yet it operates with the necessity of a
stimulus, _i.e._, it cannot be resisted, but we must put the idea away in
order to make it cease to affect us. This is also the case with disgusting
things, which excite the desire to vomit. Thus we have treated the
instinct of animals as an actual link, of quite a distinct kind, between
movement following upon stimuli, and action following upon a known motive.
Now we might be asked to regard breathing as another link of this kind. It
has been disputed whether it belongs to the voluntary or the involuntary
movements, that is to say, whether it follows upon motive or stimulus, and
perhaps it may be explained as something which is between the two.
Marshall Hall (“On the Diseases of the Nervous System,” § 293 sq.)
explains it as a mixed function, for it is partly under the influence of
the cerebral (voluntary), and partly under that of the spinal
(non-voluntary) nerves. However, we are finally obliged to number it with
the expressions of will which result from motives. For other motives,
_i.e._, mere ideas, can determine the will to check it or accelerate it,
and, as is the case with every other voluntary action, it seems to us that
we could give up breathing altogether and voluntarily suffocate. And in
fact we could do so if any other motive influenced the will sufficiently
strongly to overcome the pressing desire for air. According to some
accounts Diogenes actually put an end to his life in this way (Diog.
Laert. VI. 76). Certain negroes also are said to have done this (F. B.
Osiander “On Suicide” [1813] pp. 170-180). If this be true, it affords us
a good example of the influence of abstract motives, _i.e._, of the
victory of distinctively rational over merely animal will. For, that
breathing is at least partially conditioned by cerebral activity is shown
by the fact that the primary cause of death from prussic acid is that it
paralyses the brain, and so, indirectly, restricts the breathing; but if
the breathing be artificially maintained till the stupefaction of the
brain has passed away, death will not ensue. We may also observe in
passing that breathing affords us the most obvious example of the fact
that motives act with just as much necessity as stimuli, or as causes in
the narrowest sense of the word, and their operation can only be
neutralised by antagonistic motives, as action is neutralised by
re-action. For, in the case of breathing, the illusion that we can stop
when we like is much weaker than in the case of other movements which
follow upon motives; because in breathing the motive is very powerful,
very near to us, and its satisfaction is very easy, for the muscles which
accomplish it are never tired, nothing, as a rule, obstructs it, and the
whole process is supported by the most inveterate habit of the individual.
And yet all motives act with the same necessity. The knowledge that
necessity is common to movements following upon motives, and those
following upon stimuli, makes it easier for us to understand that that
also which takes place in our bodily organism in accordance with stimuli
and in obedience to law, is yet, according to its inner nature—will, which
in all its manifestations, though never in itself, is subordinated to the
principle of sufficient reason, that is, to necessity.(32) Accordingly, we
shall not rest contented with recognising that animals, both in their
actions and also in their whole existence, bodily structure and
organisation, are manifestations of will; but we shall extend to plants
also this immediate knowledge of the essential nature of things which is
given to us alone. Now all the movements of plants follow upon stimuli;
for the absence of knowledge, and the movement following upon motives
which is conditioned by knowledge, constitutes the only essential
difference between animals and plants. Therefore, what appears for the
idea as plant life, as mere vegetation, as blindly impelling force, we
shall claim, according to its inner nature, for will, and recognise it as
just that which constitutes the basis of our own phenomenal being, as it
expresses itself in our actions, and also in the whole existence of our
body itself.

It only remains for us to take the final step, the extension of our way of
looking at things to all those forces which act in nature in accordance
with universal, unchangeable laws, in conformity with which the movements
of all those bodies take place, which are wholly without organs, and have
therefore no susceptibility for stimuli, and have no knowledge, which is
the necessary condition of motives. Thus we must also apply the key to the
understanding of the inner nature of things, which the immediate knowledge
of our own existence alone can give us, to those phenomena of the
unorganised world which are most remote from us. And if we consider them
attentively, if we observe the strong and unceasing impulse with which the
waters hurry to the ocean, the persistency with which the magnet turns
ever to the north pole, the readiness with which iron flies to the magnet,
the eagerness with which the electric poles seek to be re-united, and
which, just like human desire, is increased by obstacles; if we see the
crystal quickly and suddenly take form with such wonderful regularity of
construction, which is clearly only a perfectly definite and accurately
determined impulse in different directions, seized and retained by
crystallisation; if we observe the choice with which bodies repel and
attract each other, combine and separate, when they are set free in a
fluid state, and emancipated from the bonds of rigidness; lastly, if we
feel directly how a burden which hampers our body by its gravitation
towards the earth, unceasingly presses and strains upon it in pursuit of
its one tendency; if we observe all this, I say, it will require no great
effort of the imagination to recognise, even at so great a distance, our
own nature. That which in us pursues its ends by the light of knowledge;
but here, in the weakest of its manifestations, only strives blindly and
dumbly in a one-sided and unchangeable manner, must yet in both cases come
under the name of will, as it is everywhere one and the same—just as the
first dim light of dawn must share the name of sunlight with the rays of
the full mid-day. For the name _will_ denotes that which is the inner
nature of everything in the world, and the one kernel of every phenomenon.

Yet the remoteness, and indeed the appearance of absolute difference
between the phenomena of unorganised nature and the will which we know as
the inner reality of our own being, arises chiefly from the contrast
between the completely determined conformity to law of the one species of
phenomena, and the apparently unfettered freedom of the other. For in man,
individuality makes itself powerfully felt. Every one has a character of
his own; and therefore the same motive has not the same influence over
all, and a thousand circumstances which exist in the wide sphere of the
knowledge of the individual, but are unknown to others, modify its effect.
Therefore action cannot be predetermined from the motive alone, for the
other factor is wanting, the accurate acquaintance with the individual
character, and with the knowledge which accompanies it. On the other hand,
the phenomena of the forces of nature illustrate the opposite extreme.
They act according to universal laws, without variation, without
individuality in accordance with openly manifest circumstances, subject to
the most exact predetermination; and the same force of nature appears in
its million phenomena in precisely the same way. In order to explain this
point and prove the identity of the _one_ indivisible will in all its
different phenomena, in the weakest as in the strongest, we must first of
all consider the relation of the will as thing-in-itself to its phenomena,
that is, the relation of the world as will to the world as idea; for this
will open to us the best way to a more thorough investigation of the whole
subject we are considering in this second book.(33)

§ 24. We have learnt from the great Kant that time, space, and causality,
with their entire constitution, and the possibility of all their forms,
are present in our consciousness quite independently of the objects which
appear in them, and which constitute their content; or, in other words,
they can be arrived at just as well if we start from the subject as if we
start from the object. Therefore, with equal accuracy, we may call them
either forms of intuition or perception of the subject, or qualities of
the object _as object_ (with Kant, phenomenon), _i.e._, _idea_. We may
also regard these forms as the irreducible boundary between object and
subject. All objects must therefore exist in them, yet the subject,
independently of the phenomenal object, possesses and surveys them
completely. But if the objects appearing in these forms are not to be
empty phantoms, but are to have a meaning, they must refer to something,
must be the expression of something which is not, like themselves, object,
idea, a merely relative existence for a subject, but which exists without
such dependence upon something which stands over against it as a condition
of its being, and independent of the forms of such a thing, _i.e._, _is
not idea_, but a _thing-in-itself_. Consequently it may at least be asked:
Are these ideas, these objects, something more than or apart from the fact
that they are ideas, objects of the subject? And what would they be in
this sense? What is that other side of them which is _toto genere_
different from idea? What is the thing-in-itself? _The will_, we have
answered, but for the present I set that answer aside.

Whatever the thing-in-itself may be, Kant is right in his conclusion that
time, space, and causality (which we afterwards found to be forms of the
principle of sufficient reason, the general expression of the forms of the
phenomenon) are not its properties, but come to it only after, and so far
as, it has become idea. That is, they belong only to its phenomenal
existence, not to itself. For since the subject fully understands and
constructs them out of itself, independently of all object, they must be
dependent upon _existence as idea_ as such, not upon that which becomes
idea. They must be the form of the idea as such; but not qualities of that
which has assumed this form. They must be already given with the mere
antithesis of subject and object (not as concepts but as facts), and
consequently they must be only the more exact determination of the form of
knowledge in general, whose most universal determination is that
antithesis itself. Now, that in the phenomenon, in the object, which is in
its turn conditioned by time, space and causality, inasmuch as it can only
become idea by means of them, namely _multiplicity_, through co-existence
and succession, _change_ and _permanence_ through the law of causality,
_matter_ which can only become idea under the presupposition of causality,
and lastly, all that becomes idea only by means of these,—all this, I say,
as a whole, does not in reality belong to that which appears, to that
which has passed into the form of idea, but belongs merely to this form
itself. And conversely, that in the phenomenon which is not conditioned
through time, space and causality, and which cannot be referred to them,
nor explained in accordance with them, is precisely that in which the
thing manifested, the thing-in-itself, directly reveals itself. It follows
from this that the most complete capacity for being known, that is to say,
the greatest clearness, distinctness, and susceptibility of exhaustive
explanation, will necessarily belong to that which pertains to knowledge
_as such_, and thus to the _form_ of knowledge; but not to that which in
itself is not idea, not object, but which has become knowledge only
through entering these forms; in other words, has become idea, object.
Thus only that which depends entirely upon being an object of knowledge,
upon existing as idea in general and _as such_ (not upon that which
_becomes_ known, and has only _become_ idea), which therefore belongs
without distinction to everything that is known, and which, on that
account, is found just as well if we start from the subject as if we start
from the object,—this alone can afford us without reserve a sufficient,
exhaustive knowledge, a knowledge which is clear to the very foundation.
But this consists of nothing but those forms of all phenomena of which we
are conscious _a priori_, and which may be generally expressed as the
principle of sufficient reason. Now, the forms of this principle which
occur in knowledge of perception (with which alone we are here concerned)
are time, space, and causality. The whole of pure mathematics and pure
natural science _a priori_ is based entirely upon these. Therefore it is
only in these sciences that knowledge finds no obscurity, does not rest
upon what is incomprehensible (groundless, _i.e._, will), upon what cannot
be further deduced. It is on this account that Kant wanted, as we have
said, to apply the name science specially and even exclusively to these
branches of knowledge together with logic. But, on the other hand, these
branches of knowledge show us nothing more than mere connections,
relations of one idea to another, form devoid of all content. All content
which they receive, every phenomenon which fills these forms, contains
something which is no longer completely knowable in its whole nature,
something which can no longer be entirely explained through something
else, something then which is groundless, through which consequently the
knowledge loses its evidence and ceases to be completely lucid. This that
withholds itself from investigation, however, is the thing-in-itself, is
that which is essentially not idea, not object of knowledge, but has only
become knowable by entering that form. The form is originally foreign to
it, and the thing-in-itself can never become entirely one with it, can
never be referred to mere form, and, since this form is the principle of
sufficient reason, can never be completely explained. If therefore all
mathematics affords us an exhaustive knowledge of that which in the
phenomena is quantity, position, number, in a word, spatial and temporal
relations; if all etiology gives us a complete account of the regular
conditions under which phenomena, with all their determinations, appear in
time and space, but, with it all, teaches us nothing more than why in each
case this particular phenomenon must appear just at this time here, and at
this place now; it is clear that with their assistance we can never
penetrate to the inner nature of things. There always remains something
which no explanation can venture to attack, but which it always
presupposes; the forces of nature, the definite mode of operation of
things, the quality and character of every phenomenon, that which is
without ground, that which does not depend upon the form of the
phenomenal, the principle of sufficient reason, but is something to which
this form in itself is foreign, something which has yet entered this form,
and now appears according to its law, a law, however, which only
determines the appearance, not that which appears, only the how, not the
what, only the form, not the content. Mechanics, physics, and chemistry
teach the rules and laws according to which the forces of impenetrability,
gravitation, rigidity, fluidity, cohesion, elasticity, heat, light,
affinity, magnetism, electricity, &c., operate; that is to say, the law,
the rule which these forces observe whenever they enter time and space.
But do what we will, the forces themselves remain _qualitates occultæ_.
For it is just the thing-in-itself, which, because it is manifested,
exhibits these phenomena, which are entirely different from itself. In its
manifestation, indeed, it is completely subordinated to the principle of
sufficient reason as the form of the idea, but it can never itself be
referred to this form, and therefore cannot be fully explained
etiologically, can never be completely fathomed. It is certainly perfectly
comprehensible so far as it has assumed that form, that is, so far as it
is phenomenon, but its inner nature is not in the least explained by the
fact that it can thus be comprehended. Therefore the more necessity any
knowledge carries with it, the more there is in it of that which cannot be
otherwise thought or presented in perception—as, for example,
space-relations—the clearer and more sufficing then it is, the less pure
objective content it has, or the less reality, properly so called, is
given in it. And conversely, the more there is in it which must be
conceived as mere chance, and the more it impresses us as given merely
empirically, the more proper objectivity and true reality is there in such
knowledge, and at the same time, the more that is inexplicable, that is,
that cannot be deduced from anything else.

It is true that at all times an etiology, unmindful of its real aim, has
striven to reduce all organised life to chemism or electricity; all
chemism, that is to say quality, again to mechanism (action determined by
the shape of the atom), this again sometimes to the object of phoronomy,
_i.e._, the combination of time and space, which makes motion possible,
sometimes to the object of mere geometry, _i.e._, position in space (much
in the same way as we rightly deduce the diminution of an effect from the
square of the distance, and the theory of the lever in a purely
geometrical manner): geometry may finally be reduced to arithmetic, which,
on account of its one dimension, is of all the forms of the principle of
sufficient reason, the most intelligible, comprehensible, and completely
susceptible of investigation. As instances of the method generally
indicated here, we may refer to the atoms of Democritus, the vortex of
Descartes, the mechanical physics of Lesage, which towards the end of last
century tried to explain both chemical affinities and gravitation
mechanically by impact and pressure, as may be seen in detail in “_Lucrèce
Neutonien_;” Reil’s form and combination as the cause of animal life, also
tends in this direction. Finally, the crude materialism which even now in
the middle of the nineteenth century has been served up again under the
ignorant delusion that it is original, belongs distinctly to this class.
It stupidly denies vital force, and first of all tries to explain the
phenomena of life from physical and chemical forces, and those again from
the mechanical effects of the matter, position, form, and motion of
imagined atoms, and thus seeks to reduce all the forces of nature to
action and reaction as its thing-in-itself. According to this teaching,
light is the mechanical vibration or undulation of an imaginary ether,
postulated for this end. This ether, if it reaches the eye, beats rapidly
upon the retina, and gives us the knowledge of colour. Thus, for example,
four hundred and eighty-three billion beats in a second give red, and
seven hundred and twenty-seven billion beats in a second give violet. Upon
this theory, persons who are colour-blind must be those who are unable to
count the beats, must they not? Such crass, mechanical, clumsy, and
certainly knotty theories, which remind one of Democritus, are quite
worthy of those who, fifty years after the appearance of Goethe’s doctrine
of colour, still believe in Newton’s homogeneous light, and are not
ashamed to say so. They will find that what is overlooked in the child
(Democritus) will not be forgiven to the man. They might indeed, some day,
come to an ignominious end; but then every one would slink away and
pretend that he never had anything to do with them. We shall soon have to
speak again of this false reduction of the forces of nature to each other;
so much for the present. Supposing this theory were possible, all would
certainly be explained and established and finally reduced to an
arithmetical problem, which would then be the holiest thing in the temple
of wisdom, to which the principle of sufficient reason would at last have
happily conducted us. But all content of the phenomenon would have
disappeared, and the mere form would remain. The “what appears” would be
referred to the “how it appears,” and this “how” would be what is _a
priori_ knowable, therefore entirely dependent on the subject, therefore
only for the subject, therefore, lastly, mere phantom, idea and form of
idea, through and through: no thing-in-itself could be demanded.
Supposing, then, that this were possible, the whole world would be derived
from the subject, and in fact, that would be accomplished which Fichte
wanted to _seem_ to accomplish by his empty bombast. But it is not
possible: phantasies, sophisms, castles in the air, have been constructed
in this way, but science never. The many and multifarious phenomena in
nature have been successfully referred to particular original forces, and
as often as this has been done, a real advance has been made. Several
forces and qualities, which were at first regarded as different, have been
derived from each other, and thus their number has been curtailed. (For
example, magnetism from electricity.) Etiology will have reached its goal
when it has recognised and exhibited as such all the original forces of
nature, and established their mode of operation, _i.e._, the law according
to which, under the guidance of causality, their phenomena appear in time
and space, and determine their position with regard to each other. But
certain original forces will always remain over; there will always remain
as an insoluble residuum a content of phenomena which cannot be referred
to their form, and thus cannot be explained from something else in
accordance with the principle of sufficient reason. For in everything in
nature there is something of which no ground can ever be assigned, of
which no explanation is possible, and no ulterior cause is to be sought.
This is the specific nature of its action, _i.e._, the nature of its
existence, its being. Of each particular effect of the thing a cause may
be certainly indicated, from which it follows that it must act just at
this time and in this place; but no cause can ever be found from which it
follows that a thing acts in general, and precisely in the way it does. If
it has no other qualities, if it is merely a mote in a sunbeam, it yet
exhibits this unfathomable something, at least as weight and
impenetrability. But this, I say, is to the mote what his will is to a
man; and, like the human will, it is, according to its inner nature, not
subject to explanation; nay, more—it is in itself identical with this
will. It is true that a motive may be given for every manifestation of
will, for every act of will at a particular time and in a particular
place, upon which it must necessarily follow, under the presupposition of
the character of the man. But no reason can ever be given that the man has
this character; that he wills at all; that, of several motives, just this
one and no other, or indeed that any motive at all, moves his will. That
which in the case of man is the unfathomable character which is
presupposed in every explanation of his actions from motives is, in the
case of every unorganised body, its definitive quality—the mode of its
action, the manifestations of which are occasioned by impressions from
without, while it itself, on the contrary, is determined by nothing
outside itself, and thus is also inexplicable. Its particular
manifestations, through which alone it becomes visible, are subordinated
to the principle of sufficient reason; it itself is groundless. This was
in substance rightly understood by the schoolmen, who called it _forma
substantialis_. (Cf. Suarez, Disput. Metaph., disp. xv. sect. 1.)

It is a greater and a commoner error that the phenomena which we best
understand are those which are of most frequent occurrence, and which are
most universal and simple; for, on the contrary, these are just the
phenomena that we are most accustomed to see about us, and to be ignorant
of. It is just as inexplicable to us that a stone should fall to the earth
as that an animal should move itself. It has been supposed, as we have
remarked above, that, starting from the most universal forces of nature
(gravitation, cohesion, impenetrability), it was possible to explain from
them the rarer forces, which only operate under a combination of
circumstances (for example, chemical quality, electricity, magnetism),
and, lastly, from these to understand the organism and the life of
animals, and even the nature of human knowing and willing. Men resigned
themselves without a word to starting from mere _qualitates occultæ_, the
elucidation of which was entirely given up, for they intended to build
upon them, not to investigate them. Such an intention cannot, as we have
already said, be carried out. But apart from this, such structures would
always stand in the air. What is the use of explanations which ultimately
refer us to something which is quite as unknown as the problem with which
we started? Do we in the end understand more of the inner nature of these
universal natural forces than of the inner nature of an animal? Is not the
one as much a sealed book to us as the other? Unfathomable because it is
without ground, because it is the content, that which the phenomenon is,
and which can never be referred to the form, to the how, to the principle
of sufficient reason. But we, who have in view not etiology but
philosophy, that is, not relative but unconditioned knowledge of the real
nature of the world, take the opposite course, and start from that which
is immediately and most completely known to us, and fully and entirely
trusted by us—that which lies nearest to us, in order to understand that
which is known to us only at a distance, one-sidedly and indirectly. From
the most powerful, most significant, and most distinct phenomenon we seek
to arrive at an understanding of those that are less complete and weaker.
With the exception of my own body, all things are known to me only on
_one_ side, that of the idea. Their inner nature remains hidden from me
and a profound secret, even if I know all the causes from which their
changes follow. Only by comparison with that which goes on in me if my
body performs an action when I am influenced by a motive—only by
comparison, I say, with what is the inner nature of my own changes
determined by external reasons, can I obtain insight into the way in which
these lifeless bodies change under the influence of causes, and so
understand what is their inner nature. For the knowledge of the causes of
the manifestation of this inner nature affords me merely the rule of its
appearance in time and space, and nothing more. I can make this comparison
because my body is the only object of which I know not merely the _one_
side, that of the idea, but also the other side which is called will.
Thus, instead of believing that I would better understand my own
organisation, and then my own knowing and willing, and my movements
following upon motives, if I could only refer them to movements due to
electrical, chemical, and mechanical causes, I must, seeing that I seek
philosophy and not etiology, learn to understand from my own movements
following upon motives the inner nature of the simplest and commonest
movements of an unorganised body which I see following upon causes. I must
recognise the inscrutable forces which manifest themselves in all natural
bodies as identical in kind with that which in me is the will, and as
differing from it only in degree. That is to say, the fourth class of
ideas given in the Essay on the Principle of Sufficient Reason must be the
key to the knowledge of the inner nature of the first class, and by means
of the law of motivation I must come to understand the inner meaning of
the law of causation.

Spinoza (Epist. 62) says that if a stone which has been projected through
the air had consciousness, it would believe that it was moving of its own
will. I add to this only that the stone would be right. The impulse given
it is for the stone what the motive is for me, and what in the case of the
stone appears as cohesion, gravitation, rigidity, is in its inner nature
the same as that which I recognise in myself as will, and what the stone
also, if knowledge were given to it, would recognise as will. In the
passage referred to, Spinoza had in view the necessity with which the
stone flies, and he rightly desires to transfer this necessity to that of
the particular act of will of a person. I, on the other hand, consider the
inner being, which alone imparts meaning and validity to all real
necessity (_i.e._, effect following upon a cause) as its presupposition.
In the case of men this is called character; in the case of a stone it is
called quality, but it is the same in both. When it is immediately known
it is called will. In the stone it has the weakest, and in man the
strongest degree of visibility, of objectivity. St. Augustine recognises,
with a true instinct, this identity of the tendencies of all things with
our own willing, and I cannot refrain from quoting his naïve account of
the matter:—“_Si pecora essemus, carnalem vitam et quod secundum sensum
ejusdem est amaremus, idque esset sufficiens bonum nostrum, et secundum
hoc si esset nobis bene, nihil aliud quæreremus. Item, si arbores essemus,
nihil quidem sentientes motu amare possemus: verumtamen id quasi appetere
videremur, quo feracius essemus, uberiusque fructuosæ. Si essemus lapides,
aut fluctus, aut ventus, aut flamma, vel quid ejusmodi, sine ullo quidem
sensu atque vita, non tamen nobis deesset quasi quidam nostrorum locorum
atque ordinis appetitus. Nam velut amores corporum momenta sunt ponderum,
sive deorsum gravitate, sive sursum levitate nitantur: ita enim corpus
pondere, sicut animus amore fertur quocunque fertur_” (De Civ. Dei, xi.
28).

It ought further to be mentioned that Euler saw that the inner nature of
gravitation must ultimately be referred to an “inclination and desire”
(thus will) peculiar to material bodies (in the 68th letter to the
Princess). Indeed, it is just this that makes him averse to the conception
of gravitation as it existed for Newton, and he is inclined to try a
modification of it in accordance with the earlier Cartesian theory, and so
to derive gravitation from the impact of an ether upon the bodies, as
being “more rational and more suitable for persons who like clear and
intelligible principles.” He wishes to banish attraction from physics as a
_qualitas occulta_. This is only in keeping with the dead view of nature
which prevailed at Euler’s time as the correlative of the immaterial soul.
It is only worth noticing because of its bearing upon the fundamental
truth established by me, which even at that time this fine intellect saw
glimmering in the distance. He hastened to turn in time, and then, in his
anxiety at seeing all the prevalent fundamental views endangered, he
sought safety in the old and already exploded absurdities.

We know that _multiplicity_ in general is necessarily conditioned by space
and time, and is only thinkable in them. In this respect they are called
the _principium individuationis_. But we have found that space and time
are forms of the principle of sufficient reason. In this principle all our
knowledge _a priori_ is expressed, but, as we showed above, this _a
priori_ knowledge, as such, only applies to the knowableness of things,
not to the things themselves, _i.e._, it is only our form of knowledge, it
is not a property of the thing-in-itself. The thing-in-itself is, as such,
free from all forms of knowledge, even the most universal, that of being
an object for the subject. In other words, the thing-in-itself is
something altogether different from the idea. If, now, this
thing-in-itself is _the will_, as I believe I have fully and convincingly
proved it to be, then, regarded as such and apart from its manifestation,
it lies outside time and space, and therefore knows no multiplicity, and
is consequently _one_. Yet, as I have said, it is not one in the sense in
which an individual or a concept is one, but as something to which the
condition of the possibility of multiplicity, the _principium
individuationis_, is foreign. The multiplicity of things in space and
time, which collectively constitute the objectification of will, does not
affect the will itself, which remains indivisible notwithstanding it. It
is not the case that, in some way or other, a smaller part of will is in
the stone and a larger part in the man, for the relation of part and whole
belongs exclusively to space, and has no longer any meaning when we go
beyond this form of intuition or perception. The more and the less have
application only to the phenomenon of will, that is, its visibility, its
objectification. Of this there is a higher grade in the plant than in the
stone; in the animal a higher grade than in the plant: indeed, the passage
of will into visibility, its objectification, has grades as innumerable as
exist between the dimmest twilight and the brightest sunshine, the loudest
sound and the faintest echo. We shall return later to the consideration of
these grades of visibility which belong to the objectification of the
will, to the reflection of its nature. But as the grades of its
objectification do not directly concern the will itself, still less is it
concerned by the multiplicity of the phenomena of these different grades,
_i.e._, the multitude of individuals of each form, or the particular
manifestations of each force. For this multiplicity is directly
conditioned by time and space, into which the will itself never enters.
The will reveals itself as completely and as much in _one_ oak as in
millions. Their number and multiplication in space and time has no meaning
with regard to it, but only with regard to the multiplicity of individuals
who know in space and time, and who are themselves multiplied and
dispersed in these. The multiplicity of these individuals itself belongs
not to the will, but only to its manifestation. We may therefore say that
if, _per impossibile_, a single real existence, even the most
insignificant, were to be entirely annihilated, the whole world would
necessarily perish with it. The great mystic Angelus Silesius feels this
when he says—


    “I know God cannot live an instant without me,
    He must give up the ghost if I should cease to be.”


Men have tried in various ways to bring the immeasurable greatness of the
material universe nearer to the comprehension of us all, and then they
have seized the opportunity to make edifying remarks. They have referred
perhaps to the relative smallness of the earth, and indeed of man; or, on
the contrary, they have pointed out the greatness of the mind of this man
who is so insignificant—the mind that can solve, comprehend, and even
measure the greatness of the universe, and so forth. Now, all this is very
well, but to me, when I consider the vastness of the world, the most
important point is this, that the thing-in-itself, whose manifestation is
the world—whatever else it may be—cannot have its true self spread out and
dispersed after this fashion in boundless space, but that this endless
extension belongs only to its manifestation. The thing-in-itself, on the
contrary, is present entire and undivided in every object of nature and in
every living being. Therefore we lose nothing by standing still beside any
single individual thing, and true wisdom is not to be gained by measuring
out the boundless world, or, what would be more to the purpose, by
actually traversing endless space. It is rather to be attained by the
thorough investigation of any individual thing, for thus we seek to arrive
at a full knowledge and understanding of its true and peculiar nature.

The subject which will therefore be fully considered in the next book, and
which has, doubtless, already presented itself to the mind of every
student of Plato, is, that these different grades of the objectification
of will which are manifested in innumerable individuals, and exist as
their unattained types or as the eternal forms of things, not entering
themselves into time and space, which are the medium of individual things,
but remaining fixed, subject to no change, always being, never becoming,
while the particular things arise and pass away, always become and never
are,—that these _grades of the objectification of will_ are, I say, simply
_Plato’s Ideas_. I make this passing reference to the matter here in order
that I may be able in future to use the word _Idea_ in this sense. In my
writings, therefore, the word is always to be understood in its true and
original meaning given to it by Plato, and has absolutely no reference to
those abstract productions of dogmatising scholastic reason, which Kant
has inaptly and illegitimately used this word to denote, though Plato had
already appropriated and used it most fitly. By Idea, then, I understand
every definite and fixed grade of the objectification of will, so far as
it is thing-in-itself, and therefore has no multiplicity. These grades are
related to individual things as their eternal forms or prototypes. The
shortest and most concise statement of this famous Platonic doctrine is
given us by Diogenes Laertes (iii. 12): “ὁ Πλατων φησι, εν τῃ φυσει τας
ιδεας ἑσταναι, καθαπερ παραδειγματα, τα δ᾽ αλλα ταυταις εοικεναι, τουτων
ὁμοιωματα καθεστωτα”—(“_Plato ideas in natura velut exemplaria dixit
subsistere; cetera his esse similia, ad istarum similitudinem
consistentia_”). Of Kant’s misuse of the word I take no further notice;
what it is needful to say about it will be found in the Appendix.

§ 26. The lowest grades of the objectification of will are to be found in
those most universal forces of nature which partly appear in all matter
without exception, as gravity and impenetrability, and partly have shared
the given matter among them, so that certain of them reign in one species
of matter and others in another species, constituting its specific
difference, as rigidity, fluidity, elasticity, electricity, magnetism,
chemical properties and qualities of every kind. They are in themselves
immediate manifestations of will, just as much as human action; and as
such they are groundless, like human character. Only their particular
manifestations are subordinated to the principle of sufficient reason,
like the particular actions of men. They themselves, on the other hand,
can never be called either effect or cause, but are the prior and
presupposed conditions of all causes and effects through which their real
nature unfolds and reveals itself. It is therefore senseless to demand a
cause of gravity or electricity, for they are original forces. Their
expressions, indeed, take place in accordance with the law of cause and
effect, so that every one of their particular manifestations has a cause,
which is itself again just a similar particular manifestation which
determines that this force must express itself here, must appear in space
and time; but the force itself is by no means the effect of a cause, nor
the cause of an effect. It is therefore a mistake to say “gravity is the
cause of a stone falling;” for the cause in this case is rather the
nearness of the earth, because it attracts the stone. Take the earth away
and the stone will not fall, although gravity remains. The force itself
lies quite outside the chain of causes and effects, which presupposes
time, because it only has meaning in relation to it; but the force lies
outside time. The individual change always has for its cause another
change just as individual as itself, and not the force of which it is the
expression. For that which always gives its efficiency to a cause, however
many times it may appear, is a force of nature. As such, it is groundless,
_i.e._, it lies outside the chain of causes and outside the province of
the principle of sufficient reason in general, and is philosophically
known as the immediate objectivity of will, which is the “in-itself” of
the whole of nature; but in etiology, which in this reference is physics,
it is set down as an original force, _i.e._, a _qualitas occulta_.

In the higher grades of the objectivity of will we see individuality
occupy a prominent position, especially in the case of man, where it
appears as the great difference of individual characters, _i.e._, as
complete personality, outwardly expressed in strongly marked individual
physiognomy, which influences the whole bodily form. None of the brutes
have this individuality in anything like so high a degree, though the
higher species of them have a trace of it; but the character of the
species completely predominates over it, and therefore they have little
individual physiognomy. The farther down we go, the more completely is
every trace of the individual character lost in the common character of
the species, and the physiognomy of the species alone remains. We know the
physiological character of the species, and from that we know exactly what
is to be expected from the individual; while, on the contrary, in the
human species every individual has to be studied and fathomed for himself,
which, if we wish to forecast his action with some degree of certainty,
is, on account of the possibility of concealment that first appears with
reason, a matter of the greatest difficulty. It is probably connected with
this difference of the human species from all others, that the folds and
convolutions of the brain, which are entirely wanting in birds, and very
weakly marked in rodents, are even in the case of the higher animals far
more symmetrical on both sides, and more constantly the same in each
individual, than in the case of human beings.(34) It is further to be
regarded as a phenomenon of this peculiar individual character which
distinguishes men from all the lower animals, that in the case of the
brutes the sexual instinct seeks its satisfaction without observable
choice of objects, while in the case of man this choice is, in a purely
instinctive manner and independent of all reflection, carried so far that
it rises into a powerful passion. While then every man is to be regarded
as a specially determined and characterised phenomenon of will, and indeed
to a certain extent as a special Idea, in the case of the brutes this
individual character as a whole is wanting, because only the species has a
special significance. And the farther we go from man, the fainter becomes
the trace of this individual character, so that plants have no individual
qualities left, except such as may be fully explained from the favourable
or unfavourable external influences of soil, climate, and other accidents.
Finally, in the inorganic kingdom of nature all individuality disappears.
The crystal alone is to be regarded as to a certain extent individual. It
is a unity of the tendency in definite directions, fixed by
crystallisation, which makes the trace of this tendency permanent. It is
at the same time a cumulative repetition of its primitive form, bound into
unity by an idea, just as the tree is an aggregate of the single
germinating fibre which shows itself in every rib of the leaves, in every
leaf, in every branch; which repeats itself, and to some extent makes each
of these appear as a separate growth, nourishing itself from the greater
as a parasite, so that the tree, resembling the crystal, is a systematic
aggregate of small plants, although only the whole is the complete
expression of an individual Idea, _i.e._, of this particular grade of the
objectification of will. But the individuals of the same species of
crystal can have no other difference than such as is produced by external
accidents; indeed we can make at pleasure large or small crystals of every
species. The individual, however, as such, that is, with traces of an
individual character, does not exist further in unorganised nature. All
its phenomena are expressions of general forces of nature, _i.e._, of
those grades of the objectification of will which do not objectify
themselves (as is the case in organised nature), by means of the
difference of the individualities which collectively express the whole of
the Idea, but show themselves only in the species, and as a whole, without
any variation in each particular example of it. Time, space, multiplicity,
and existence conditioned by causes, do not belong to the will or to the
Idea (the grade of the objectification of will), but only to their
particular phenomena. Therefore such a force of nature as, for example,
gravity or electricity, must show itself as such in precisely the same way
in all its million phenomena, and only external circumstances can modify
these. This unity of its being in all its phenomena, this unchangeable
constancy of the appearance of these, whenever, under the guidance of
causality, the necessary conditions are present, is called a _law of
nature_. If such a law is once learned from experience, then the
phenomenon of that force of nature, the character of which is expressed
and laid down in it, may be accurately forecast and counted upon. But it
is just this conformity to law of the phenomena of the lower grades of the
objectification of will which gives them such a different aspect from the
phenomena of the same will in the higher, _i.e._, the more distinct,
grades of its objectification, in animals, and in men and their actions,
where the stronger or weaker influence of the individual character and the
susceptibility to motives which often remain hidden from the spectator,
because they lie in knowledge, has had the result that the identity of the
inner nature of the two kinds of phenomena has hitherto been entirely
overlooked.

If we start from the knowledge of the particular, and not from that of the
Idea, there is something astonishing, and sometimes even terrible, in the
absolute uniformity of the laws of nature. It might astonish us that
nature never once forgets her laws; that if, for example, it has once been
according to a law of nature that where certain materials are brought
together under given conditions, a chemical combination will take place,
or gas will be evolved, or they will go on fire; if these conditions are
fulfilled, whether by our interposition or entirely by chance (and in this
case the accuracy is the more astonishing because unexpected), to-day just
as well as a thousand years ago, the determined phenomenon will take place
at once and without delay. We are most vividly impressed with the
marvellousness of this fact in the case of rare phenomena, which only
occur under very complex circumstances, but which we are previously
informed will take place if these conditions are fulfilled. For example,
when we are told that if certain metals, when arranged alternately in
fluid with which an acid has been mixed, are brought into contact, silver
leaf brought between the extremities of this combination will suddenly be
consumed in a green flame; or that under certain conditions the hard
diamond turns into carbonic acid. It is the ghostly omnipresence of
natural forces that astonishes us in such cases, and we remark here what
in the case of phenomena which happen daily no longer strikes us, how the
connection between cause and effect is really as mysterious as that which
is imagined between a magic formula and a spirit that must appear when
invoked by it. On the other hand, if we have attained to the philosophical
knowledge that a force of nature is a definite grade of the
objectification of will, that is to say, a definite grade of that which we
recognise as our own inmost nature, and that this will, in itself, and
distinguished from its phenomena and their forms, lies outside time and
space, and that, therefore, the multiplicity, which is conditioned by time
and space, does not belong to it, nor directly to the grade of its
objectification, _i.e._, the Idea, but only to the phenomena of the Idea;
and if we remember that the law of causality has significance only in
relation to time and space, inasmuch as it determines the position of the
multitude of phenomena of the different Ideas in which the will reveals
itself, governing the order in which they must appear; if, I say, in this
knowledge the inner meaning of the great doctrine of Kant has been fully
grasped, the doctrine that time, space, and causality do not belong to the
thing-in-itself, but merely to the phenomenon, that they are only the
forms of our knowledge, not qualities of things in themselves; then we
shall understand that this astonishment at the conformity to law and
accurate operation of a force of nature, this astonishment at the complete
sameness of all its million phenomena and the infallibility of their
occurrence, is really like that of a child or a savage who looks for the
first time through a glass with many facets at a flower, and marvels at
the complete similarity of the innumerable flowers which he sees, and
counts the leaves of each of them separately.

Thus every universal, original force of nature is nothing but a low grade
of the objectification of will, and we call every such grade an eternal
_Idea_ in Plato’s sense. But a _law of nature_ is the relation of the Idea
to the form of its manifestation. This form is time, space, and causality,
which are necessarily and inseparably connected and related to each other.
Through time and space the Idea multiplies itself in innumerable
phenomena, but the order according to which it enters these forms of
multiplicity is definitely determined by the law of causality; this law is
as it were the norm of the limit of these phenomena of different Ideas, in
accordance with which time, space, and matter are assigned to them. This
norm is therefore necessarily related to the identity of the aggregate of
existing matter, which is the common substratum of all those different
phenomena. If all these were not directed to that common matter in the
possession of which they must be divided, there would be no need for such
a law to decide their claims. They might all at once and together fill a
boundless space throughout an endless time. Therefore, because all these
phenomena of the eternal Ideas are directed to one and the same matter,
must there be a rule for their appearance and disappearance; for if there
were not, they would not make way for each other. Thus the law of
causality is essentially bound up with that of the permanence of
substance; they reciprocally derive significance from each other. Time and
space, again, are related to them in the same way. For time is merely the
possibility of conflicting states of the same matter, and space is merely
the possibility of the permanence of the same matter under all sorts of
conflicting states. Accordingly, in the preceding book we explained matter
as the union of space and time, and this union shows itself as change of
the accidents in the permanence of the substance, of which causality or
becoming is the universal possibility. And accordingly, we said that
matter is through and through causality. We explained the understanding as
the subjective correlative of causality, and said matter (and thus the
whole world as idea) exists only for the understanding; the understanding
is its condition, its supporter as its necessary correlative. I repeat all
this in passing, merely to call to mind what was demonstrated in the First
Book, for it is necessary for the complete understanding of these two
books that their inner agreement should be observed, since what is
inseparably united in the actual world as its two sides, will and idea,
has, in order that we might understand each of them more clearly in
isolation, been dissevered in these two books.

It may not perhaps be superfluous to elucidate further by an example how
the law of causality has meaning only in relation to time and space, and
the matter which consists in the union of the two. For it determines the
limits in accordance with which the phenomena of the forces of nature
divide themselves in the possession of matter, while the original forces
of nature, as the immediate objectification of will, which, as a thing in
itself, is not subordinated to the principle of sufficient reason, lie
outside these forms, within which alone all etiological explanation has
validity and meaning, and just on that account can never lead us to the
inner reality of nature. For this purpose let us think of some kind of
machine constructed according to the laws of mechanics. Iron weights begin
the motion by their gravity; copper wheels resist by their rigidity,
affect and raise each other and the lever by their impenetrability, and so
on. Here gravity, rigidity, and impenetrability are original unexplained
forces; mechanics only gives us the condition under which, and the manner
in which, they manifest themselves, appear, and govern a definite matter,
time, and place. If, now, a strong magnet is made to attract the iron of
the weight, and overcome its gravity, the movement of the machine stops,
and the matter becomes forthwith the scene of quite a different force of
nature—magnetism, of which etiology again gives no further explanation
than the condition under which it appears. Or let us suppose that the
copper discs of such a machine are laid upon zinc plates, and an acid
solution introduced between them. At once the same matter of the machine
has become subject to another original force, galvanism, which now governs
it according to its own laws, and reveals itself in it through its
phenomena; and etiology can again tell us nothing about this force except
the conditions under which, and the laws in accordance with which, it
manifests itself. Let us now raise the temperature and add pure acid; the
whole machine burns; that is to say, once more an entirely different force
of nature, chemical energy, asserts at this time and in this place
irresistible claims to this particular matter, and reveals itself in it as
Idea, as a definite grade of the objectification of will. The calcined
metal thus produced now unites with an acid, and a salt is obtained which
forms itself into crystals. These are the phenomena of another Idea, which
in itself is again quite inexplicable, while the appearance of its
phenomena is dependent upon certain conditions which etiology can give us.
The crystals dissolve, mix with other materials, and vegetation springs up
from them—a new phenomenon of will: and so the same permanent matter may
be followed _ad infinitum_, to observe how now this and now that natural
force obtains a right to it and temporarily takes possession of it, in
order to appear and reveal its own nature. The condition of this right,
the point of time and space at which it becomes valid, is given by
causality, but the explanation founded upon this law only extends thus
far. The force itself is a manifestation of will, and as such is not
subject to the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, that is, it is
groundless. It lies outside all time, is omnipresent, and seems as it were
to wait constantly till the circumstances occur under which it can appear
and take possession of a definite matter, supplanting the forces which
have reigned in it till then. All time exists only for the phenomena of
such a force, and is without significance for the force itself. Through
thousands of years chemical forces slumber in matter till the contact with
the reagents sets them free; then they appear; but time exists only for
the phenomena, not for the forces themselves. For thousands of years
galvanism slumbered in copper and zinc, and they lay quietly beside
silver, which must be consumed in flame as soon as all three are brought
together under the required conditions. Even in the organic kingdom we see
a dry seed preserve the slumbering force through three thousand years, and
when at last the favourable circumstances occur, grow up as a plant.(35)

If by this exposition the difference between a force of nature and all its
phenomena has been made quite distinct; if we have seen clearly that the
former is the will itself at this particular grade of its objectification,
but that multiplicity comes to phenomena only through time and space, and
that the law of causality is nothing but the determination of the position
of these phenomena in time and space; then we shall recognise the complete
truth and the deep meaning of Malebranche’s doctrine of occasional causes
(_causes occasionelles_). It is well worth while comparing this doctrine
of his, as he explains it in the “_Recherches de la Vérite_,” both in the
3rd Chapter of the second part of the 6th Book, and in the
_éclaircissements_ appended to this chapter, with this exposition of mine,
and observing the complete agreement of the two doctrines in the case of
such different systems of thought. Indeed I cannot help admiring how
Malebranche, though thoroughly involved in the positive dogmas which his
age inevitably forced upon him, yet, in such bonds and under such a
burden, hit the truth so happily, so correctly, and even knew how to
combine it with these dogmas, at all events verbally.

For the power of truth is incredibly great and of unspeakable endurance.
We find constant traces of it in all, even the most eccentric and absurd
dogmas, of different times and different lands,—often indeed in strange
company, curiously mixed up with other things, but still recognisable. It
is like a plant that germinates under a heap of great stones, but still
struggles up to the light, working itself through with many deviations and
windings, disfigured, worn out, stunted in its growth,—but yet, to the
light.

In any case Malebranche is right: every natural cause is only an
occasional cause. It only gives opportunity or occasion for the
manifestation of the one indivisible will which is the “in-itself” of all
things, and whose graduated objectification is the whole visible world.
Only the appearance, the becoming visible, in this place, at this time, is
brought about by the cause and is so far dependent on it, but not the
whole of the phenomenon, nor its inner nature. This is the will itself, to
which the principle of sufficient reason has not application, and which is
therefore groundless. Nothing in the world has a sufficient cause of its
existence generally, but only a cause of existence just here and just now.
That a stone exhibits now gravity, now rigidity, now electricity, now
chemical qualities, depends upon causes, upon impressions upon it from
without, and is to be explained from these. But these qualities
themselves, and thus the whole inner nature of the stone which consists in
them, and therefore manifests itself in all the ways referred to; thus, in
general, that the stone is such as it is, that it exists generally—all
this, I say, has no ground, but is the visible appearance of the
groundless will. Every cause is thus an occasional cause. We have found it
to be so in nature, which is without knowledge, and it is also precisely
the same when motives and not causes or stimuli determine the point at
which the phenomena are to appear, that is to say, in the actions of
animals and human beings. For in both cases it is one and the same will
which appears; very different in the grades of its manifestation,
multiplied in the phenomena of these grades, and, in respect of these,
subordinated to the principle of sufficient reason, but in itself free
from all this. Motives do not determine the character of man, but only the
phenomena of his character, that is, his actions; the outward fashion of
his life, not its inner meaning and content. These proceed from the
character which is the immediate manifestation of the will, and is
therefore groundless. That one man is bad and another good, does not
depend upon motives or outward influences, such as teaching and preaching,
and is in this sense quite inexplicable. But whether a bad man shows his
badness in petty acts of injustice, cowardly tricks, and low knavery which
he practises in the narrow sphere of his circumstances, or whether as a
conqueror he oppresses nations, throws a world into lamentation, and sheds
the blood of millions; this is the outward form of his manifestation, that
which is unessential to it, and depends upon the circumstances in which
fate has placed him, upon his surroundings, upon external influences, upon
motives; but his decision upon these motives can never be explained from
them; it proceeds from the will, of which this man is a manifestation. Of
this we shall speak in the Fourth Book. The manner in which the character
discloses its qualities is quite analogous to the way in which those of
every material body in unconscious nature are disclosed. Water remains
water with its intrinsic qualities, whether as a still lake it reflects
its banks, or leaps in foam from the cliffs, or, artificially confined,
spouts in a long jet into the air. All that depends upon external causes;
the one form is as natural to it as the other, but it will always show the
same form in the same circumstances; it is equally ready for any, but in
every case true to its character, and at all times revealing this alone.
So will every human character under all circumstances reveal itself, but
the phenomena which proceed from it will always be in accordance with the
circumstances.

§ 27. If, from the foregoing consideration of the forces of nature and
their phenomena, we have come to see clearly how far an explanation from
causes can go, and where it must stop if it is not to degenerate into the
vain attempt to reduce the content of all phenomena to their mere form, in
which case there would ultimately remain nothing but form, we shall be
able to settle in general terms what is to be demanded of etiology as a
whole. It must seek out the causes of all phenomena in nature, _i.e._, the
circumstances under which they invariably appear. Then it must refer the
multitude of phenomena which have various forms in various circumstances
to what is active in every phenomenon, and is presupposed in the
cause,—original forces of nature. It must correctly distinguish between a
difference of the phenomenon which arises from a difference of the force,
and one which results merely from a difference of the circumstances under
which the force expresses itself; and with equal care it must guard
against taking the expressions of one and the same force under different
circumstances for the manifestations of different forces, and conversely
against taking for manifestations of one and the same force what
originally belongs to different forces. Now this is the direct work of the
faculty of judgment, and that is why so few men are capable of increasing
our insight in physics, while all are able to enlarge experience.
Indolence and ignorance make us disposed to appeal too soon to original
forces. This is exemplified with an exaggeration that savours of irony in
the entities and quidities of the schoolmen. Nothing is further from my
desire than to favour their resuscitation. We have just as little right to
appeal to the objectification of will, instead of giving a physical
explanation, as we have to appeal to the creative power of God. For
physics demands causes, and the will is never a cause. Its whole relation
to the phenomenon is not in accordance with the principle of sufficient
reason. But that which in itself is the will exists in another aspect as
idea; that is to say, is phenomenon. As such, it obeys the laws which
constitute the form of the phenomenon. Every movement, for example,
although it is always a manifestation of will, must yet have a cause from
which it is to be explained in relation to a particular time and space;
that is, not in general in its inner nature, but as a _particular_
phenomenon. In the case of the stone, this is a mechanical cause; in that
of the movement of a man, it is a motive; but in no case can it be
wanting. On the other hand, the universal common nature of all phenomena
of one particular kind, that which must be presupposed if the explanation
from causes is to have any sense and meaning, is the general force of
nature, which, in physics, must remain a _qualitas occulta_, because with
it the etiological explanation ends and the metaphysical begins. But the
chain of causes and effects is never broken by an original force to which
it has been necessary to appeal. It does not run back to such a force as
if it were its first link, but the nearest link, as well as the remotest,
presupposes the original force, and could otherwise explain nothing. A
series of causes and effects may be the manifestation of the most
different kinds of forces, whose successive visible appearances are
conducted through it, as I have illustrated above by the example of a
metal machine. But the difference of these original forces, which cannot
be referred to each other, by no means breaks the unity of that chain of
causes, and the connection between all its links. The etiology and the
philosophy of nature never do violence to each other, but go hand in hand,
regarding the same object from different points of view. Etiology gives an
account of the causes which necessarily produce the particular phenomenon
to be explained. It exhibits, as the foundation of all its explanations,
the universal forces which are active in all these causes and effects. It
accurately defines, enumerates, and distinguishes these forces, and then
indicates all the different effects in which each force appears, regulated
by the difference of the circumstances, always in accordance with its own
peculiar character, which it discloses in obedience to an invariable rule,
called _a law of nature_. When all this has been thoroughly accomplished
by physics in every particular, it will be complete, and its work will be
done. There will then remain no unknown force in unorganised nature, nor
any effect, which has not been proved to be the manifestation of one of
these forces under definite circumstances, in accordance with a law of
nature. Yet a law of nature remains merely the observed rule according to
which nature invariably proceeds whenever certain definite circumstances
occur. Therefore a law of nature may be defined as a fact expressed
generally—_un fait généralisé_—and thus a complete enumeration of all the
laws of nature would only be a complete register of facts. The
consideration of nature as a whole is thus completed in _morphology_,
which enumerates, compares, and arranges all the enduring forms of
organised nature. Of the causes of the appearance of the individual
creature it has little to say, for in all cases this is procreation (the
theory of which is a separate matter), and in rare cases the _generatio
æquivoca_. But to this last belongs, strictly speaking, the manner in
which all the lower grades of the objectification of will, that is to say,
physical and chemical phenomena, appear as individual, and it is precisely
the task of etiology to point out the conditions of this appearance.
Philosophy, on the other hand, concerns itself only with the universal, in
nature as everywhere else. The original forces themselves are here its
object, and it recognises in them the different grades of the objectivity
of will, which is the inner nature, the “in-itself” of this world; and
when it regards the world apart from will, it explains it as merely the
idea of the subject. But if etiology, instead of preparing the way for
philosophy, and supplying its doctrines with practical application by
means of instances, supposes that its aim is rather to deny the existence
of all original forces, except perhaps _one_, the most general, for
example, impenetrability, which it imagines it thoroughly understands, and
consequently seeks forcibly to refer all the others to it—it forsakes its
own province and can only give us error instead of truth. The content of
nature is supplanted by its form, everything is ascribed to the
circumstances which work from without, and nothing to the inner nature of
the thing. Now if it were possible to succeed by this method, a problem in
arithmetic would ultimately, as we have already remarked, solve the riddle
of the universe. But this is the method adopted by those, referred to
above, who think that all physiological effects ought to be reduced to
form and combination, this, perhaps, to electricity, and this again to
chemism, and chemism to mechanism. The mistake of Descartes, for example,
and of all the Atomists, was of this last description. They referred the
movements of the globe to the impact of a fluid, and the qualities of
matter to the connection and form of the atoms, and hence they laboured to
explain all the phenomena of nature as merely manifestations of
impenetrability and cohesion. Although this has been given up, precisely
the same error is committed in our own day by the electrical, chemical,
and mechanical physiologists, who obstinately attempt to explain the whole
of life and all the functions of the organism from “form and combination.”
In Meckel’s “Archiv für Physiologie” (1820, vol. v. p. 185) we still find
it stated that the aim of physiological explanation is the reduction of
organic life to the universal forces with which physics deals. Lamarck
also, in his “_Philosophie Zoologique_,” explains life as merely the
effect of warmth and electricity: _le calorique et la matière électrique
suffisent parfaitement pour composer ensemble cette cause essentielle de
la vie_ (p. 16). According to this, warmth and electricity would be the
“thing-in-itself,” and the world of animals and plants its phenomenal
appearance. The absurdity of this opinion becomes glaringly apparent at
the 306th and following pages of that work. It is well known that all
these opinions, that have been so often refuted, have reappeared quite
recently with renewed confidence. If we carefully examine the foundation
of these views, we shall find that they ultimately involve the
presupposition that the organism is merely an aggregate of phenomena of
physical, chemical, and mechanical forces, which have come together here
by chance, and produced the organism as a freak of nature without further
significance. The organism of an animal or of a human being would
therefore be, if considered philosophically, not the exhibition of a
special Idea, that is, not itself immediate objectivity of the will at a
definite higher grade, but in it would appear only those Ideas which
objectify the will in electricity, in chemism, and in mechanism. Thus the
organism would be as fortuitously constructed by the concurrence of these
forces as the forms of men and beasts in clouds and stalactites, and would
therefore in itself be no more interesting than they are. However, we
shall see immediately how far the application of physical and chemical
modes of explanation to the organism may yet, within certain limits, be
allowable and useful; for I shall explain that the vital force certainly
avails itself of and uses the forces of unorganised nature; yet these
forces no more constitute the vital force than a hammer and anvil make a
blacksmith. Therefore even the most simple example of plant life can never
be explained from these forces by any theory of capillary attraction and
endosmose, much less animal life. The following observations will prepare
the way for this somewhat difficult discussion.

It follows from all that has been said that it is certainly an error on
the part of natural science to seek to refer the higher grades of the
objectification of will to the lower; for the failure to recognise, or the
denial of, original and self-existing forces of nature is just as wrong as
the groundless assumption of special forces when what occurs is merely a
peculiar kind of manifestation of what is already known. Thus Kant rightly
says that it would be absurd to hope for a blade of grass from a Newton,
that is, from one who reduced the blade of grass to the manifestations of
physical and chemical forces, of which it was the chance product, and
therefore a mere freak of nature, in which no special Idea appeared,
_i.e._, the will did not directly reveal itself in it in a higher and
specific grade, but just as in the phenomena of unorganised nature and by
chance in this form. The schoolmen, who certainly would not have allowed
such a doctrine, would rightly have said that it was a complete denial of
the _forma substantialis_, and a degradation of it to the _forma
accidentalis_. For the _forma substantialis_ of Aristotle denotes exactly
what I call the grade of the objectification of will in a thing. On the
other hand, it is not to be overlooked that in all Ideas, that is, in all
forces of unorganised, and all forms of organised nature, it is _one and
the same_ will that reveals itself, that is to say, which enters the form
of the idea and passes into _objectivity_. Its unity must therefore be
also recognisable through an inner relationship between all its phenomena.
Now this reveals itself in the higher grades of the objectification of
will, where the whole phenomenon is more distinct, thus in the vegetable
and animal kingdoms, through the universally prevailing analogy of all
forms, the fundamental type which recurs in all phenomena. This has,
therefore, become the guiding principle of the admirable zoological system
which was originated by the French in this century, and it is most
completely established in comparative anatomy as _l’unité de plan_,
_l’uniformité de l’élément anatomique_. To discover this fundamental type
has been the chief concern, or at any rate the praiseworthy endeavour, of
the natural philosophers of the school of Schelling, who have in this
respect considerable merit, although in many cases their hunt after
analogies in nature degenerated into mere conceits. They have, however,
rightly shown that that general relationship and family likeness exists
also in the Ideas of unorganised nature; for example, between electricity
and magnetism, the identity of which was afterwards established; between
chemical attraction and gravitation, and so forth. They specially called
attention to the fact that _polarity_, that is, the sundering of a force
into two qualitatively different and opposed activities striving after
reunion, which also shows itself for the most part in space as a
dispersion in opposite directions, is a fundamental type of almost all the
phenomena of nature, from the magnet and the crystal to man himself. Yet
this knowledge has been current in China from the earliest times, in the
doctrine of opposition of Yin and Yang. Indeed, since all things in the
world are the objectification of one and the same will, and therefore in
their inner nature identical, it must not only be the case that there is
that unmistakable analogy between them, and that in every phenomenon the
trace, intimation, and plan of the higher phenomenon that lies next to it
in point of development shows itself, but also because all these forms
belong to the world as _idea_, it is indeed conceivable that even in the
most universal forms of the idea, in that peculiar framework of the
phenomenal world space and time, it may be possible to discern and
establish the fundamental type, intimation, and plan of what fills the
forms. It seems to have been a dim notion of this that was the origin of
the Cabala and all the mathematical philosophy of the Pythagoreans, and
also of the Chinese in Y-king. In the school of Schelling also, to which
we have already referred, we find, among their efforts to bring to light
the similarity among the phenomena of nature, several attempts (though
rather unfortunate ones) to deduce laws of nature from the laws of pure
space and time. However, one can never tell to what extent a man of genius
will realise both endeavours.

Now, although the difference between phenomenon and thing-in-itself is
never lost sight of, and therefore the identity of the will which
objectifies itself in all Ideas can never (because it has different grades
of its objectification) be distorted to mean identity of the particular
Ideas themselves in which it appears, so that, for example, chemical or
electrical attraction can never be reduced to the attraction of
gravitation, although this inner analogy is known, and the former may be
regarded as, so to speak, higher powers of the latter, just as little does
the similarity of the construction of all animals warrant us in mixing and
identifying the species and explaining the more developed as mere
variations of the less developed; and although, finally, the physiological
functions are never to be reduced to chemical or physical processes, yet,
in justification of this procedure, within certain limits, we may accept
the following observations as highly probable.

If several of the phenomena of will in the lower grades of its
objectification—that is, in unorganised nature—come into conflict because
each of them, under the guidance of causality, seeks to possess a given
portion of matter, there arises from the conflict the phenomenon of a
higher Idea which prevails over all the less developed phenomena
previously there, yet in such a way that it allows the essence of these to
continue to exist in a subordinate manner, in that it takes up into itself
from them something which is analogous to them. This process is only
intelligible from the identity of the will which manifests itself in all
the Ideas, and which is always striving after higher objectification. We
thus see, for example, in the hardening of the bones, an unmistakable
analogy to crystallisation, as the force which originally had possession
of the chalk, although ossification is never to be reduced to
crystallisation. The analogy shows itself in a weaker degree in the flesh
becoming firm. The combination of humours in the animal body and secretion
are also analogous to chemical combination and separation. Indeed, the
laws of chemistry are still strongly operative in this case, but
subordinated, very much modified, and mastered by a higher Idea; therefore
mere chemical forces outside the organism will never afford us such
humours; but


    “Encheiresin naturæ nennt es die Chemie,
    Spottet ihrer selbst und weiss nicht wie.”


The more developed Idea resulting from this victory over several lower
Ideas or objectifications of will, gains an entirely new character by
taking up into itself from every Idea over which it has prevailed a
strengthened analogy. The will objectifies itself in a new, more distinct
way. It originally appears in _generatio æquivoca_; afterwards in
assimilation to the given germ, organic moisture, plant, animal, man. Thus
from the strife of lower phenomena the higher arise, swallowing them all
up, but yet realising in the higher grade the tendency of all the lower.
Here, then, already the law applies—_Serpens nisi serpentem comederit non
fit draco._

I wish it had been possible for me to dispel by clearness of explanation
the obscurity which clings to the subject of these thoughts; but I see
very well that the reader’s own consideration of the matter must
materially aid me if I am not to remain uncomprehended or misunderstood.
According to the view I have expressed, the traces of chemical and
physical modes of operation will indeed be found in the organism, but it
can never be explained from them; because it is by no means a phenomenon
even accidentally brought about through the united actions of such forces,
but a higher Idea which has overcome these lower ideas by _subduing
assimilation_; for the _one_ will which objectifies itself in all Ideas
always seeks the highest possible objectification, and has therefore in
this case given up the lower grades of its manifestation after a conflict,
in order to appear in a higher grade, and one so much the more powerful.
No victory without conflict: since the higher Idea or objectification of
will can only appear through the conquest of the lower, it endures the
opposition of these lower Ideas, which, although brought into subjection,
still constantly strive to obtain an independent and complete expression
of their being. The magnet that has attracted a piece of iron carries on a
perpetual conflict with gravitation, which, as the lower objectification
of will, has a prior right to the matter of the iron; and in this constant
battle the magnet indeed grows stronger, for the opposition excites it, as
it were, to greater effort. In the same way every manifestation of the
will, including that which expresses itself in the human organism, wages a
constant war against the many physical and chemical forces which, as lower
Ideas, have a prior right to that matter. Thus the arm falls which for a
while, overcoming gravity, we have held stretched out; thus the pleasing
sensation of health, which proclaims the victory of the Idea of the
self-conscious organism over the physical and chemical laws, which
originally governed the humours of the body, is so often interrupted, and
is indeed always accompanied by greater or less discomfort, which arises
from the resistance of these forces, and on account of which the
vegetative part of our life is constantly attended by slight pain. Thus
also digestion weakens all the animal functions, because it requires the
whole vital force to overcome the chemical forces of nature by
assimilation. Hence also in general the burden of physical life, the
necessity of sleep, and, finally, of death; for at last these subdued
forces of nature, assisted by circumstances, win back from the organism,
wearied even by the constant victory, the matter it took from them, and
attain to an unimpeded expression of their being. We may therefore say
that every organism expresses the Idea of which it is the image, only
after we have subtracted the part of its force which is expended in
subduing the lower Ideas that strive with it for matter. This seems to
have been running in the mind of Jacob Böhm when he says somewhere that
all the bodies of men and animals, and even all plants, are really half
dead. According as the subjection in the organism of these forces of
nature, which express the lower grades of the objectification of will, is
more or less successful, the more or the less completely does it attain to
the expression of its Idea; that is to say, the nearer it is to the
_ideal_ or the further from it—the _ideal_ of beauty in its species.

Thus everywhere in nature we see strife, conflict, and alternation of
victory, and in it we shall come to recognise more distinctly that
variance with itself which is essential to the will. Every grade of the
objectification of will fights for the matter, the space, and the time of
the others. The permanent matter must constantly change its form; for
under the guidance of causality, mechanical, physical, chemical, and
organic phenomena, eagerly striving to appear, wrest the matter from each
other, for each desires to reveal its own Idea. This strife may be
followed through the whole of nature; indeed nature exists only through
it: ει γαρ μη ην το νεικος εν τοις πραγμασιν, ἑν αν ην ἁπαντα, ὡς φησιν
Εμπεδοκλης; (nam si non inesset in rebus contentio, unum omnia essent, ut
ait Empedocles. Aris. Metaph., B. 5). Yet this strife itself is only the
revelation of that variance with itself which is essential to the will.
This universal conflict becomes most distinctly visible in the animal
kingdom. For animals have the whole of the vegetable kingdom for their
food, and even within the animal kingdom every beast is the prey and the
food of another; that is, the matter in which its Idea expresses itself
must yield itself to the expression of another Idea, for each animal can
only maintain its existence by the constant destruction of some other.
Thus the will to live everywhere preys upon itself, and in different forms
is its own nourishment, till finally the human race, because it subdues
all the others, regards nature as a manufactory for its use. Yet even the
human race, as we shall see in the Fourth Book, reveals in itself with
most terrible distinctness this conflict, this variance with itself of the
will, and we find _homo homini lupus_. Meanwhile we can recognise this
strife, this subjugation, just as well in the lower grades of the
objectification of will. Many insects (especially ichneumon-flies) lay
their eggs on the skin, and even in the body of the larvæ of other
insects, whose slow destruction is the first work of the newly hatched
brood. The young hydra, which grows like a bud out of the old one, and
afterwards separates itself from it, fights while it is still joined to
the old one for the prey that offers itself, so that the one snatches it
out of the mouth of the other (Trembley, Polypod., ii. p. 110, and iii. p.
165). But the bulldog-ant of Australia affords us the most extraordinary
example of this kind; for if it is cut in two, a battle begins between the
head and the tail. The head seizes the tail with its teeth, and the tail
defends itself bravely by stinging the head: the battle may last for half
an hour, until they die or are dragged away by other ants. This contest
takes place every time the experiment is tried. (From a letter by Howitt
in the W. Journal, reprinted in Galignani’s Messenger, 17th November
1855.) On the banks of the Missouri one sometimes sees a mighty oak the
stem and branches of which are so encircled, fettered, and interlaced by a
gigantic wild vine, that it withers as if choked. The same thing shows
itself in the lowest grades; for example, when water and carbon are
changed into vegetable sap, or vegetables or bread into blood by organic
assimilation; and so also in every case in which animal secretion takes
place, along with the restriction of chemical forces to a subordinate mode
of activity. This also occurs in unorganised nature, when, for example,
crystals in process of formation meet, cross, and mutually disturb each
other to such an extent that they are unable to assume the pure
crystalline form, so that almost every cluster of crystals is an image of
such a conflict of will at this low grade of its objectification; or
again, when a magnet forces its magnetism upon iron, in order to express
its Idea in it; or when galvanism overcomes chemical affinity, decomposes
the closest combinations, and so entirely suspends the laws of chemistry
that the acid of a decomposed salt at the negative pole must pass to the
positive pole without combining with the alkalies through which it goes on
its way, or turning red the litmus paper that touches it. On a large scale
it shows itself in the relation between the central body and the planet,
for although the planet is in absolute dependence, yet it always resists,
just like the chemical forces in the organism; hence arises the constant
tension between centripetal and centrifugal force, which keeps the globe
in motion, and is itself an example of that universal essential conflict
of the manifestation of will which we are considering. For as every body
must be regarded as the manifestation of a will, and as will necessarily
expresses itself as a struggle, the original condition of every world that
is formed into a globe cannot be rest, but motion, a striving forward in
boundless space without rest and without end. Neither the law of inertia
nor that of causality is opposed to this: for as, according to the former,
matter as such is alike indifferent to rest and motion, its original
condition may just as well be the one as the other, therefore if we first
find it in motion, we have just as little right to assume that this was
preceded by a condition of rest, and to inquire into the cause of the
origin of the motion, as, conversely, if we found it at rest, we would
have to assume a previous motion and inquire into the cause of its
suspension. It is, therefore, not needful to seek for a first impulse for
centrifugal force, for, according to the hypothesis of Kant and Laplace,
it is, in the case of the planets, the residue of the original rotation of
the central body, from which the planets have separated themselves as it
contracted. But to this central body itself motion is essential; it always
continues its rotation, and at the same time rushes forward in endless
space, or perhaps circulates round a greater central body invisible to us.
This view entirely agrees with the conjecture of astronomers that there is
a central sun, and also with the observed advance of our whole solar
system, and perhaps of the whole stellar system to which our sun belongs.
From this we are finally led to assume a general advance of fixed stars,
together with the central sun, and this certainly loses all meaning in
boundless space (for motion in absolute space cannot be distinguished from
rest), and becomes, as is already the case from its striving and aimless
flight, an expression of that nothingness, that failure of all aim, which,
at the close of this book, we shall be obliged to recognise in the
striving of will in all its phenomena. Thus boundless space and endless
time must be the most universal and essential forms of the collective
phenomena of will, which exist for the expression of its whole being.
Lastly, we can recognise that conflict which we are considering of all
phenomena of will against each other in simple matter regarded as such;
for the real characteristic of matter is correctly expressed by Kant as
repulsive and attractive force; so that even crude matter has its
existence only in the strife of conflicting forces. If we abstract from
all chemical differences in matter, or go so far back in the chain of
causes and effects that as yet there is no chemical difference, there
remains mere matter,—the world rounded to a globe, whose life, _i.e._,
objectification of will, is now constituted by the conflict between
attractive and repulsive forces, the former as gravitation pressing from
all sides towards the centre, the latter as impenetrability always
opposing the former either as rigidity or elasticity; and this constant
pressure and resistance may be regarded as the objectivity of will in its
very lowest grade, and even there it expresses its character.

We should see the will express itself here in the lowest grade as blind
striving, an obscure, inarticulate impulse, far from susceptible of being
directly known. It is the simplest and the weakest mode of its
objectification. But it appears as this blind and unconscious striving in
the whole of unorganised nature, in all those original forces of which it
is the work of physics and chemistry to discover and to study the laws,
and each of which manifests itself to us in millions of phenomena which
are exactly similar and regular, and show no trace of individual
character, but are mere multiplicity through space and time, _i.e._,
through the _principium individuationis_, as a picture is multiplied
through the facets of a glass.

From grade to grade objectifying itself more distinctly, yet still
completely without consciousness as an obscure striving force, the will
acts in the vegetable kingdom also, in which the bond of its phenomena
consists no longer properly of causes, but of stimuli; and, finally, also
in the vegetative part of the animal phenomenon, in the production and
maturing of the animal, and in sustaining its inner economy, in which the
manifestation of will is still always necessarily determined by stimuli.
The ever-ascending grades of the objectification of will bring us at last
to the point at which the individual that expresses the Idea could no
longer receive food for its assimilation through mere movement following
upon stimuli. For such a stimulus must be waited for, but the food has now
come to be of a more special and definite kind, and with the
ever-increasing multiplicity of the individual phenomena, the crowd and
confusion has become so great that they interfere with each other, and the
chance of the individual that is moved merely by stimuli and must wait for
its food would be too unfavourable. From the point, therefore, at which
the animal has delivered itself from the egg or the womb in which it
vegetated without consciousness, its food must be sought out and selected.
For this purpose movement following upon motives, and therefore
consciousness, becomes necessary, and consequently it appears as an agent,
μηχανη, called in at this stage of the objectification of will for the
conservation of the individual and the propagation of the species. It
appears represented by the brain or a large ganglion, just as every other
effort or determination of the will which objectifies itself is
represented by an organ, that is to say, manifests itself for the idea as
an organ.(36) But with this means of assistance, this μηχανη, the _world
as idea_ comes into existence at a stroke, with all its forms, object and
subject, time, space, multiplicity, and causality. The world now shows its
second side. Till now _mere will_, it becomes also _idea_, object of the
knowing subject. The will, which up to this point followed its tendency in
the dark with unerring certainty, has at this grade kindled for itself a
light as a means which became necessary for getting rid of the
disadvantage which arose from the throng and the complicated nature of its
manifestations, and which would have accrued precisely to the most perfect
of them. The hitherto infallible certainty and regularity with which it
worked in unorganised and merely vegetative nature, rested upon the fact
that it alone was active in its original nature, as blind impulse, will,
without assistance, and also without interruption, from a second and
entirely different world, the world as idea, which is indeed only the
image of its own inner being, but is yet of quite another nature, and now
encroaches on the connected whole of its phenomena. Hence its infallible
certainty comes to an end. Animals are already exposed to illusion, to
deception. They have, however, merely ideas of perception, no conceptions,
no reflection, and they are therefore bound to the present; they cannot
have regard for the future. It seems as if this knowledge without reason
was not in all cases sufficient for its end, and at times required, as it
were, some assistance. For the very remarkable phenomenon presents itself,
that the blind working of the will and the activity enlightened by
knowledge encroach in a most astonishing manner upon each other’s spheres
in two kinds of phenomena. In the one case we find in the very midst of
those actions of animals which are guided by perceptive knowledge and its
motives one kind of action which is accomplished apart from these, and
thus through the necessity of the blindly acting will. I refer to those
mechanical instincts which are guided by no motive or knowledge, and which
yet have the appearance of performing their work from abstract rational
motives. The other case, which is opposed to this, is that in which, on
the contrary, the light of knowledge penetrates into the workshop of the
blindly active will, and illuminates the vegetative functions of the human
organism. I mean clairvoyance. Finally, when the will has attained to the
highest grade of its objectification, that knowledge of the understanding
given to brutes to which the senses supply the data, out of which there
arises mere perception confined to what is immediately present, does not
suffice. That complicated, many-sided, imaginative being, man, with his
many needs, and exposed as he is to innumerable dangers, must, in order to
exist, be lighted by a double knowledge; a higher power, as it were, of
perceptive knowledge must be given him, and also reason, as the faculty of
framing abstract conceptions. With this there has appeared reflection,
surveying the future and the past, and, as a consequence, deliberation,
care, the power of premeditated action independent of the present, and
finally, the full and distinct consciousness of one’s own deliberate
volition as such. Now if with mere knowledge of perception there arose the
possibility of illusion and deception, by which the previous infallibility
of the blind striving of will was done away with, so that mechanical and
other instincts, as expressions of unconscious will, had to lend their
help in the midst of those that were conscious, with the entrance of
reason that certainty and infallibility of the expressions of will (which
at the other extreme in unorganised nature appeared as strict conformity
to law) is almost entirely lost; instinct disappears altogether;
deliberation, which is supposed to take the place of everything else,
begets (as was shown in the First Book) irresolution and uncertainty; then
error becomes possible, and in many cases obstructs the adequate
objectification of the will in action. For although in the character the
will has already taken its definite and unchangeable bent or direction, in
accordance with which volition, when occasioned by the presence of a
motive, invariably takes place, yet error can falsify its expressions, for
it introduces illusive motives that take the place of the real ones which
they resemble;(37) as, for example, when superstition forces on a man
imaginary motives which impel him to a course of action directly opposed
to the way in which the will would otherwise express itself in the given
circumstances. Agamemnon slays his daughter; a miser dispenses alms, out
of pure egotism, in the hope that he will some day receive an
hundred-fold; and so on.

Thus knowledge generally, rational as well as merely sensuous, proceeds
originally from the will itself, belongs to the inner being of the higher
grades of its objectification as a mere μηχανη, a means of supporting the
individual and the species, just like any organ of the body. Originally
destined for the service of the will for the accomplishment of its aims,
it remains almost throughout entirely subjected to its service: it is so
in all brutes and in almost all men. Yet we shall see in the Third Book
how in certain individual men knowledge can deliver itself from this
bondage, throw off its yoke, and, free from all the aims of will, exist
purely for itself, simply as a clear mirror of the world, which is the
source of art. Finally, in the Fourth Book, we shall see how, if this kind
of knowledge reacts on the will, it can bring about self-surrender,
_i.e._, resignation, which is the final goal, and indeed the inmost nature
of all virtue and holiness, and is deliverance from the world.

§ 28. We have considered the great multiplicity and diversity of the
phenomena in which the will objectifies itself, and we have seen their
endless and implacable strife with each other. Yet, according to the whole
discussion up to this point, the will itself, as thing-in-itself, is by no
means included in that multiplicity and change. The diversity of the
(Platonic) Ideas, _i.e._, grades of objectification, the multitude of
individuals in which each of these expresses itself, the struggle of forms
for matter,—all this does not concern it, but is only the manner of its
objectification, and only through this has an indirect relation to it, by
virtue of which it belongs to the expression of the nature of will for the
idea. As the magic-lantern shows many different pictures, which are all
made visible by one and the same light, so in all the multifarious
phenomena which fill the world together or throng after each other as
events, only _one will_ manifests itself, of which everything is the
visibility, the objectivity, and which remains unmoved in the midst of
this change; it alone is thing-in-itself; all objects are manifestations,
or, to speak the language of Kant, phenomena. Although in man, as
(Platonic) Idea, the will finds its clearest and fullest objectification,
yet man alone could not express its being. In order to manifest the full
significance of the will, the Idea of man would need to appear, not alone
and sundered from everything else, but accompanied by the whole series of
grades, down through all the forms of animals, through the vegetable
kingdom to unorganised nature. All these supplement each other in the
complete objectification of will; they are as much presupposed by the Idea
of man as the blossoms of a tree presuppose leaves, branches, stem, and
root; they form a pyramid, of which man is the apex. If fond of similes,
one might also say that their manifestations accompany that of man as
necessarily as the full daylight is accompanied by all the gradations of
twilight, through which, little by little, it loses itself in darkness; or
one might call them the echo of man, and say: Animal and plant are the
descending fifth and third of man, the inorganic kingdom is the lower
octave. The full truth of this last comparison will only become clear to
us when, in the following book, we attempt to fathom the deep significance
of music, and see how a connected, progressive melody, made up of high,
quick notes, may be regarded as in some sense expressing the life and
efforts of man connected by reflection, while the unconnected complemental
notes and the slow bass, which make up the harmony necessary to perfect
the music, represent the rest of the animal kingdom and the whole of
nature that is without knowledge. But of this in its own place, where it
will not sound so paradoxical. We find, however, that the _inner
necessity_ of the gradation of its manifestations, which is inseparable
from the adequate objectification of the will, is expressed by an _outer
necessity_ in the whole of these manifestations themselves, by reason of
which man has need of the beasts for his support, the beasts in their
grades have need of each other as well as of plants, which in their turn
require the ground, water, chemical elements and their combinations, the
planet, the sun, rotation and motion round the sun, the curve of the
ellipse, &c., &c. At bottom this results from the fact that the will must
live on itself, for there exists nothing beside it, and it is a hungry
will. Hence arise eager pursuit, anxiety, and suffering.

It is only the knowledge of the unity of will as thing-in-itself, in the
endless diversity and multiplicity of the phenomena, that can afford us
the true explanation of that wonderful, unmistakable analogy of all the
productions of nature, that family likeness on account of which we may
regard them as variations on the same ungiven theme. So in like measure,
through the distinct and thoroughly comprehended knowledge of that
harmony, that essential connection of all the parts of the world, that
necessity of their gradation which we have just been considering, we shall
obtain a true and sufficient insight into the inner nature and meaning of
the undeniable _teleology_ of all organised productions of nature, which,
indeed, we presupposed _a priori_, when considering and investigating
them.

This _teleology_ is of a twofold description; sometimes an _inner
teleology_, that is, an agreement of all the parts of a particular
organism, so ordered that the sustenance of the individual and the species
results from it, and therefore presents itself as the end of that
disposition or arrangement. Sometimes, however, there is an _outward
teleology_, a relation of unorganised to organised nature in general, or
of particular parts of organised nature to each other, which makes the
maintenance of the whole of organised nature, or of the particular animal
species, possible, and therefore presents itself to our judgment as the
means to this end.

_Inner teleology_ is connected with the scheme of our work in the
following way. If, in accordance with what has been said, all variations
of form in nature, and all multiplicity of individuals, belong not to the
will itself, but merely to its objectivity and the form of this
objectivity, it necessarily follows that the will is indivisible and is
present as a whole in every manifestation, although the grades of its
objectification, the (Platonic) Ideas, are very different from each other.
We may, for the sake of simplicity, regard these different Ideas as in
themselves individual and simple acts of the will, in which it expresses
its nature more or less. Individuals, however, are again manifestations of
the Ideas, thus of these acts, in time, space, and multiplicity. Now, in
the lowest grades of objectivity, such an act (or an Idea) retains its
unity in the manifestation; while, in order to appear in higher grades, it
requires a whole series of conditions and developments in time, which only
collectively express its nature completely. Thus, for example the Idea
that reveals itself in any general force of nature has always one single
expression, although it presents itself differently according to the
external relations that are present: otherwise its identity could not be
proved, for this is done by abstracting the diversity that arises merely
from external relations. In the same way the crystal has only _one_
manifestation of life, crystallisation, which afterwards has its fully
adequate and exhaustive expression in the rigid form, the corpse of that
momentary life. The plant, however, does not express the Idea, whose
phenomenon it is, at once and through a single manifestation, but in a
succession of developments of its organs in time. The animal not only
develops its organism in the same manner, in a succession of forms which
are often very different (metamorphosis), but this form itself, although
it is already objectivity of will at this grade, does not attain to a full
expression of its Idea. This expression must be completed through the
actions of the animal, in which its empirical character, common to the
whole species, manifests itself, and only then does it become the full
revelation of the Idea, a revelation which presupposes the particular
organism as its first condition. In the case of man, the empirical
character is peculiar to every individual (indeed, as we shall see in the
Fourth Book, even to the extent of supplanting entirely the character of
the species, through the self-surrender of the whole will). That which is
known as the empirical character, through the necessary development in
time, and the division into particular actions that is conditioned by it,
is, when we abstract from this temporal form of the manifestation the
_intelligible character_, according to the expression of Kant, who shows
his undying merit especially in establishing this distinction and
explaining the relation between freedom and necessity, _i.e._, between the
will as thing-in-itself and its manifestations in time.(38) Thus the
intelligible character coincides with the Idea, or, more accurately, with
the original act of will which reveals itself in it. So far then, not only
the empirical character of every man, but also that of every species of
animal and plant, and even of every original force of unorganised nature,
is to be regarded as the manifestation of an intelligible character, that
is, of a timeless, indivisible act of will. I should like here to draw
attention in passing to the naïveté with which every plant expresses and
lays open its whole character in its mere form, reveals its whole being
and will. This is why the physiognomy of plants is so interesting; while
in order to know an animal in its Idea, it is necessary to observe the
course of its action. As for man, he must be fully investigated and
tested, for reason makes him capable of a high degree of dissimulation.
The beast is as much more naïve than the man as the plant is more naïve
than the beast. In the beast we see the will to live more naked, as it
were, than in the man, in whom it is clothed with so much knowledge, and
is, moreover, so veiled through the capacity for dissimulation, that it is
almost only by chance, and here and there, that its true nature becomes
apparent. In the plant it shows itself quite naked, but also much weaker,
as mere blind striving for existence without end or aim. For the plant
reveals its whole being at the first glance, and with complete innocence,
which does not suffer from the fact that it carries its organs of
generation exposed to view on its upper surface, though in all animals
they have been assigned to the most hidden part. This innocence of the
plant results from its complete want of knowledge. Guilt does not lie in
willing, but in willing with knowledge. Every plant speaks to us first of
all of its home, of the climate, and the nature of the ground in which it
has grown. Therefore, even those who have had little practice easily tell
whether an exotic plant belongs to the tropical or the temperate zone, and
whether it grows in water, in marshes, on mountain, or on moorland.
Besides this, however, every plant expresses the special will of its
species, and says something that cannot be uttered in any other tongue.
But we must now apply what has been said to the teleological consideration
of the organism, so far as it concerns its inner design. If in unorganised
nature the Idea, which is everywhere to be regarded as a single act of
will, reveals itself also in a single manifestation which is always the
same, and thus one may say that here the empirical character directly
partakes of the unity of the intelligible, coincides, as it were, with it,
so that no inner design can show itself here; if, on the contrary, all
organisms express their Ideas through a series of successive developments,
conditioned by a multiplicity of co-existing parts, and thus only the sum
of the manifestations of the empirical character collectively constitute
the expression of the intelligible character; this necessary co-existence
of the parts and succession of the stages of development does not destroy
the unity of the appearing Idea, the act of will which expresses itself;
nay, rather this unity finds its expression in the necessary relation and
connection of the parts and stages of development with each other, in
accordance with the law of causality. Since it is the will which is one,
indivisible, and therefore entirely in harmony with itself, that reveals
itself in the whole Idea as in act, its manifestation, although broken up
into a number of different parts and conditions, must yet show this unity
again in the thorough agreement of all of these. This is effected by a
necessary relation and dependence of all the parts upon each other, by
means of which the unity of the Idea is re-established in the
manifestation. In accordance with this, we now recognise these different
parts and functions of the organism as related to each other reciprocally
as means and end, but the organism itself as the final end of all.
Consequently, neither the breaking up of the Idea, which in itself is
simple, into the multiplicity of the parts and conditions of the organism,
on the one hand, nor, on the other hand, the re-establishment of its unity
through the necessary connection of the parts and functions which arises
from the fact that they are the cause and effect, the means and end, of
each other, is peculiar and essential to the appearing will as such, to
the thing-in-itself, but only to its manifestation in space, time, and
causality (mere modes of the principle of sufficient reason, the form of
the phenomenon). They belong to the world as idea, not to the world as
will; they belong to the way in which the will becomes object, _i.e._,
idea at this grade of its objectivity. Every one who has grasped the
meaning of this discussion—a discussion which is perhaps somewhat
difficult—will now fully understand the doctrine of Kant, which follows
from it, that both the design of organised and the conformity to law of
unorganised nature are only introduced by our understanding, and therefore
both belong only to the phenomenon, not to the thing-in-itself. The
surprise, which was referred to above, at the infallible constancy of the
conformity to law of unorganised nature, is essentially the same as the
surprise that is excited by design in organised nature; for in both cases
what we wonder at is only the sight of the original unity of the Idea,
which, for the phenomenon, has assumed the form of multiplicity and
diversity.(39)

As regards the second kind of teleology, according to the division made
above, the _outer_ design, which shows itself, not in the inner economy of
the organisms, but in the support and assistance they receive from
without, both from unorganised nature and from each other; its general
explanation is to be found in the exposition we have just given. For the
whole world, with all its phenomena, is the objectivity of the one
indivisible will, the Idea, which is related to all other Ideas as harmony
is related to the single voice. Therefore that unity of the will must show
itself also in the agreement of all its manifestations. But we can very
much increase the clearness of this insight if we go somewhat more closely
into the manifestations of that outer teleology and agreement of the
different parts of nature with each other, an inquiry which will also
throw some light on the foregoing exposition. We shall best attain this
end by considering the following analogy.

The character of each individual man, so far as it is thoroughly
individual, and not entirely included in that of the species, may be
regarded as a special Idea, corresponding to a special act of the
objectification of will. This act itself would then be his intelligible
character, and his empirical character would be the manifestation of it.
The empirical character is entirely determined through the intelligible,
which is without ground, _i.e._, as thing-in-itself is not subordinated to
the principle of sufficient reason (the form of the phenomenon). The
empirical character must in the course of life afford us the express image
of the intelligible, and can only become what the nature of the latter
demands. But this property extends only to the essential, not to the
unessential in the course of life to which it applies. To this unessential
belong the detailed events and actions which are the material in which the
empirical character shows itself. These are determined by outward
circumstances, which present the motives upon which the character reacts
according to its nature; and as they may be very different, the outward
form of the manifestation of the empirical character, that is, the
definite actual or historical form of the course of life, will have to
accommodate itself to their influence. Now this form may be very
different, although what is essential to the manifestation, its content,
remains the same. Thus, for example it is immaterial whether a man plays
for nuts or for crowns; but whether a man cheats or plays fairly, that is
the real matter; the latter is determined by the intelligible character,
the former by outward circumstances. As the same theme may be expressed in
a hundred different variations, so the same character may be expressed in
a hundred very different lives. But various as the outward influence may
be, the empirical character which expresses itself in the course of life
must yet, whatever form it takes, accurately objectify the intelligible
character, for the latter adapts its objectification to the given material
of actual circumstances. We have now to assume something analogous to the
influence of outward circumstances upon the life that is determined in
essential matters by the character, if we desire to understand how the
will, in the original act of its objectification, determines the various
Ideas in which it objectifies itself, that is, the different forms of
natural existence of every kind, among which it distributes its
objectification, and which must therefore necessarily have a relation to
each other in the manifestation. We must assume that between all these
manifestations of the _one_ will there existed a universal and reciprocal
adaptation and accommodation of themselves to each other, by which,
however, as we shall soon see more clearly, all time-determination is to
be excluded, for the Idea lies outside time. In accordance with this,
every manifestation must have adapted itself to the surroundings into
which it entered, and these again must have adapted themselves to it,
although it occupied a much later position in time; and we see this
_consensus naturæ_ everywhere. Every plant is therefore adapted to its
soil and climate, every animal to its element and the prey that will be
its food, and is also in some way protected, to a certain extent, against
its natural enemy: the eye is adapted to the light and its refrangibility,
the lungs and the blood to the air, the air-bladder of fish to water, the
eye of the seal to the change of the medium in which it must see, the
water-pouch in the stomach of the camel to the drought of the African
deserts, the sail of the nautilus to the wind that is to drive its little
bark, and so on down to the most special and astonishing outward
adaptations.(40) We must abstract however here from all temporal
relations, for these can only concern the manifestation of the Idea, not
the Idea itself. Accordingly this kind of explanation must also be used
retrospectively, and we must not merely admit that every species
accommodated itself to the given environment, but also that this
environment itself, which preceded it in time, had just as much regard for
the being that would some time come into it. For it is one and the same
will that objectifies itself in the whole world; it knows no time, for
this form of the principle of sufficient reason does not belong to it, nor
to its original objectivity, the Ideas, but only to the way in which these
are known by the individuals who themselves are transitory, _i.e._, to the
manifestation of the Ideas. Thus, time has no significance for our present
examination of the manner in which the objectification of the will
distributes itself among the Ideas, and the Ideas whose _manifestations_
entered into the course of time earlier, according to the law of
causality, to which as phenomena they are subject, have no advantage over
those whose manifestation entered later; nay rather, these last are the
completest objectifications of the will, to which the earlier
manifestations must adapt themselves just as much as they must adapt
themselves to the earlier. Thus the course of the planets, the tendency to
the ellipse, the rotation of the earth, the division of land and sea, the
atmosphere, light, warmth, and all such phenomena, which are in nature
what bass is in harmony, adapted themselves in anticipation of the coming
species of living creatures of which they were to become the supporter and
sustainer. In the same way the ground adapted itself to the nutrition of
plants, plants adapted themselves to the nutrition of animals, animals to
that of other animals, and conversely they all adapted themselves to the
nutrition of the ground. All the parts of nature correspond to each other,
for it is _one_ will that appears in them all, but the course of time is
quite foreign to its original and only _adequate objectification_ (this
expression will be explained in the following book), the Ideas. Even now,
when the species have only to sustain themselves, no longer to come into
existence, we see here and there some such forethought of nature extending
to the future, and abstracting as it were from the process of time, a
self-adaptation of what is to what is yet to come. The bird builds the
nest for the young which it does not yet know; the beaver constructs a dam
the object of which is unknown to it; ants, marmots, and bees lay in
provision for the winter they have never experienced; the spider and the
ant-lion make snares, as if with deliberate cunning, for future unknown
prey; insects deposit their eggs where the coming brood finds future
nourishment. In the spring-time the female flower of the diœcian
valisneria unwinds the spirals of its stalk, by which till now it was held
at the bottom of the water, and thus rises to the surface. Just then the
male flower, which grows on a short stalk from the bottom, breaks away,
and so, at the sacrifice of its life, reaches the surface, where it swims
about in search of the female. The latter is fructified, and then draws
itself down again to the bottom by contracting its spirals, and there the
fruit grows.(41) I must again refer here to the larva of the male
stag-beetle, which makes the hole in the wood for its metamorphosis as big
again as the female does, in order to have room for its future horns. The
instinct of animals in general gives us the best illustration of what
remains of teleology in nature. For as instinct is an action, like that
which is guided by the conception of an end, and yet is entirely without
this; so all construction of nature resembles that which is guided by the
conception of an end, and yet is entirely without it. For in the outer as
in the inner teleology of nature, what we are obliged to think as means
and end is, in every case, _the manifestation of the unity of the one will
so thoroughly agreeing with itself_, which has assumed multiplicity in
space and time for our manner of knowing.

The reciprocal adaptation and self-accommodation of phenomena that springs
from this unity cannot, however, annul the inner contradiction which
appears in the universal conflict of nature described above, and which is
essential to the will. That harmony goes only so far as to render possible
the duration of the world and the different kinds of existences in it,
which without it would long since have perished. Therefore it only extends
to the continuance of the species, and the general conditions of life, but
not to that of the individual. If, then, by reason of that harmony and
accommodation, the _species_ in organised nature and the _universal
forces_ in unorganised nature continue to exist beside each other, and
indeed support each other reciprocally, on the other hand, the inner
contradiction of the will which objectifies itself in all these ideas
shows itself in the ceaseless internecine war of the _individuals_ of
these species, and in the constant struggle of the _manifestations_ of
these natural forces with each other, as we pointed out above. The scene
and the object of this conflict is matter, which they try to wrest from
each other, and also space and time, the combination of which through the
form of causality is, in fact, matter, as was explained in the First
Book.(42)

§ 29. I here conclude the second principal division of my exposition, in
the hope that, so far as is possible in the case of an entirely new
thought, which cannot be quite free from traces of the individuality in
which it originated, I have succeeded in conveying to the reader the
complete certainty that this world in which we live and have our being is
in its whole nature through and through _will_, and at the same time
through and through _idea_: that this idea, as such, already presupposes a
form, object and subject, is therefore relative; and if we ask what
remains if we take away this form, and all those forms which are
subordinate to it, and which express the principle of sufficient reason,
the answer must be that as something _toto genere_ different from idea,
this can be nothing but _will_, which is thus properly the
_thing-in-itself_. Every one finds that he himself is this will, in which
the real nature of the world consists, and he also finds that he is the
knowing subject, whose idea the whole world is, the world which exists
only in relation to his consciousness, as its necessary supporter. Every
one is thus himself in a double aspect the whole world, the microcosm;
finds both sides whole and complete in himself. And what he thus
recognises as his own real being also exhausts the being of the whole
world—the macrocosm; thus the world, like man, is through and through
_will_, and through and through _idea_, and nothing more than this. So we
see the philosophy of Thales, which concerned the macrocosm, unite at this
point with that of Socrates, which dealt with the microcosm, for the
object of both is found to be the same. But all the knowledge that has
been communicated in the two first books will gain greater completeness,
and consequently greater certainty, from the two following books, in which
I hope that several questions that have more or less distinctly arisen in
the course of our work will also be sufficiently answered.

In the meantime _one_ such question may be more particularly considered,
for it can only properly arise so long as one has not fully penetrated the
meaning of the foregoing exposition, and may so far serve as an
illustration of it. It is this: Every will is a will towards something,
has an object, an end of its willing; what then is the final end, or
towards what is that will striving that is exhibited to us as the
being-in-itself of the world? This question rests, like so many others,
upon the confusion of the thing-in-itself with the manifestation. The
principle of sufficient reason, of which the law of motivation is also a
form, extends only to the latter, not to the former. It is only of
phenomena, of individual things, that a ground can be given, never of the
will itself, nor of the Idea in which it adequately objectifies itself. So
then of every particular movement or change of any kind in nature, a cause
is to be sought, that is, a condition that of necessity produced it, but
never of the natural force itself which is revealed in this and
innumerable similar phenomena; and it is therefore simple
misunderstanding, arising from want of consideration, to ask for a cause
of gravity, electricity, and so on. Only if one had somehow shown that
gravity and electricity were not original special forces of nature, but
only the manifestations of a more general force already known, would it be
allowable to ask for the cause which made this force produce the phenomena
of gravity or of electricity here. All this has been explained at length
above. In the same way every particular act of will of a knowing
individual (which is itself only a manifestation of will as the
thing-in-itself) has necessarily a motive without which that act would
never have occurred; but just as material causes contain merely the
determination that at this time, in this place, and in this matter, a
manifestation of this or that natural force must take place, so the motive
determines only the act of will of a knowing being, at this time, in this
place, and under these circumstances, as a particular act, but by no means
determines that that being wills in general or wills in this manner; this
is the expression of his intelligible character, which, as will itself,
the thing-in-itself, is without ground, for it lies outside the province
of the principle of sufficient reason. Therefore every man has permanent
aims and motives by which he guides his conduct, and he can always give an
account of his particular actions; but if he were asked why he wills at
all, or why in general he wills to exist, he would have no answer, and the
question would indeed seem to him meaningless; and this would be just the
expression of his consciousness that he himself is nothing but will, whose
willing stands by itself and requires more particular determination by
motives only in its individual acts at each point of time.

In fact, freedom from all aim, from all limits, belongs to the nature of
the will, which is an endless striving. This was already touched on above
in the reference to centrifugal force. It also discloses itself in its
simplest form in the lowest grade of the objectification of will, in
gravitation, which we see constantly exerting itself, though a final goal
is obviously impossible for it. For if, according to its will, all
existing matter were collected in one mass, yet within this mass gravity,
ever striving towards the centre, would still wage war with
impenetrability as rigidity or elasticity. The tendency of matter can
therefore only be confined, never completed or appeased. But this is
precisely the case with all tendencies of all phenomena of will. Every
attained end is also the beginning of a new course, and so on _ad
infinitum_. The plant raises its manifestation from the seed through the
stem and the leaf to the blossom and the fruit, which again is the
beginning of a new seed, a new individual, that runs through the old
course, and so on through endless time. Such also is the life of the
animal; procreation is its highest point, and after attaining to it, the
life of the first individual quickly or slowly sinks, while a new life
ensures to nature the endurance of the species and repeats the same
phenomena. Indeed, the constant renewal of the matter of every organism is
also to be regarded as merely the manifestation of this continual pressure
and change, and physiologists are now ceasing to hold that it is the
necessary reparation of the matter wasted in motion, for the possible
wearing out of the machine can by no means be equivalent to the support it
is constantly receiving through nourishment. Eternal becoming, endless
flux, characterises the revelation of the inner nature of will. Finally,
the same thing shows itself in human endeavours and desires, which always
delude us by presenting their satisfaction as the final end of will. As
soon as we attain to them they no longer appear the same, and therefore
they soon grow stale, are forgotten, and though not openly disowned, are
yet always thrown aside as vanished illusions. We are fortunate enough if
there still remains something to wish for and to strive after, that the
game may be kept up of constant transition from desire to satisfaction,
and from satisfaction to a new desire, the rapid course of which is called
happiness, and the slow course sorrow, and does not sink into that
stagnation that shows itself in fearful ennui that paralyses life, vain
yearning without a definite object, deadening languor. According to all
this, when the will is enlightened by knowledge, it always knows what it
wills now and here, never what it wills in general; every particular act
of will has its end, the whole will has none; just as every particular
phenomenon of nature is determined by a sufficient cause so far as
concerns its appearance in this place at this time, but the force which
manifests itself in it has no general cause, for it belongs to the
thing-in-itself, to the groundless will. The single example of
self-knowledge of the will as a whole is the idea as a whole, the whole
world of perception. It is the objectification, the revelation, the mirror
of the will. What the will expresses in it will be the subject of our
further consideration.(43)





THIRD BOOK. THE WORLD AS IDEA.




Second Aspect. The Idea Independent Of The Principle Of Sufficient Reason:
The Platonic Idea: The Object Of Art.


    Τί τὸ ὄν μὲν ἀεί, γένεσιν δὲ οὐκ ἔχον; καὶ τί τό γιγνόμενον μὲν
    καὶ ἀπολλύμενον, ὄντως δε οὐδέποτε ὄν.——ΠΛΑΤΩΝ.


§ 30. In the First Book the world was explained as mere _idea_, object for
a subject. In the Second Book we considered it from its other side, and
found that in this aspect it is _will_, which proved to be simply that
which this world is besides being idea. In accordance with this knowledge
we called the world as idea, both as a whole and in its parts, the
_objectification of will_, which therefore means the will become object,
_i.e._, idea. Further, we remember that this objectification of will was
found to have many definite grades, in which, with gradually increasing
distinctness and completeness, the nature of will appears in the idea,
that is to say, presents itself as object. In these grades we already
recognised the Platonic Ideas, for the grades are just the determined
species, or the original unchanging forms and qualities of all natural
bodies, both organised and unorganised, and also the general forces which
reveal themselves according to natural laws. These Ideas, then, as a whole
express themselves in innumerable individuals and particulars, and are
related to these as archetypes to their copies. The multiplicity of such
individuals is only conceivable through time and space, their appearing
and passing away through causality, and in all these forms we recognise
merely the different modes of the principle of sufficient reason, which is
the ultimate principle of all that is finite, of all individual existence,
and the universal form of the idea as it appears in the knowledge of the
individual as such. The Platonic Idea, on the other hand, does not come
under this principle, and has therefore neither multiplicity nor change.
While the individuals in which it expresses itself are innumerable, and
unceasingly come into being and pass away, it remains unchanged as one and
the same, and the principle of sufficient reason has for it no meaning.
As, however, this is the form under which all knowledge of the subject
comes, so far as the subject knows as an _individual_, the Ideas lie quite
outside the sphere of its knowledge. If, therefore, the Ideas are to
become objects of knowledge, this can only happen by transcending the
individuality of the knowing subject. The more exact and detailed
explanation of this is what will now occupy our attention.

§ 31. First, however, the following very essential remark. I hope that in
the preceding book I have succeeded in producing the conviction that what
is called in the Kantian philosophy the _thing-in-itself_, and appears
there as so significant, and yet so obscure and paradoxical a doctrine,
and especially on account of the manner in which Kant introduced it as an
inference from the caused to the cause, was considered a stumbling-stone,
and, in fact, the weak side of his philosophy,—that this, I say, if it is
reached by the entirely different way by which we have arrived at it, is
nothing but the _will_ when the sphere of that conception is extended and
defined in the way I have shown. I hope, further, that after what has been
said there will be no hesitation in recognising the definite grades of the
objectification of the will, which is the inner reality of the world, to
be what Plato called the _eternal Ideas_ or unchangeable forms (ειδῆ); a
doctrine which is regarded as the principal, but at the same time the most
obscure and paradoxical dogma of his system, and has been the subject of
reflection and controversy of ridicule and of reverence to so many and
such differently endowed minds in the course of many centuries.

If now the will is for us the _thing-in-itself_, and the Idea is the
immediate objectivity of that will at a definite grade, we find that
Kant’s thing-in-itself, and Plato’s Idea, which to him is the only οντως
ον, these two great obscure paradoxes of the two greatest philosophers of
the West are not indeed identical, but yet very closely related, and only
distinguished by a single circumstance. The purport of these two great
paradoxes, with all inner harmony and relationship, is yet so very
different on account of the remarkable diversity of the individuality of
their authors, that they are the best commentary on each other, for they
are like two entirely different roads that conduct us to the same goal.
This is easily made clear. What Kant says is in substance this:—“Time,
space, and causality are not determinations of the thing-in-itself, but
belong only to its phenomenal existence, for they are nothing but the
forms of our knowledge. Since, however, all multiplicity, and all coming
into being and passing away, are only possible through time, space, and
causality, it follows that they also belong only to the phenomenon, not to
the thing-in-itself. But as our knowledge is conditioned by these forms,
the whole of experience is only knowledge of the phenomenon, not of the
thing-in-itself; therefore its laws cannot be made valid for the
thing-in-itself. This extends even to our own _ego_, and we know it only
as phenomenon, and not according to what it may be in itself.” This is the
meaning and content of the doctrine of Kant in the important respect we
are considering. What Plato says is this:—“The things of this world which
our senses perceive have no true being; _they always become, they never
are:_ they have only a relative being; they all exist merely in and
through their relations to each other; their whole being may, therefore,
quite as well be called a non-being. They are consequently not objects of
a true knowledge (επιστημη), for such a knowledge can only be of what
exists for itself, and always in the same way; they, on the contrary, are
only the objects of an opinion based on sensation (δοξα μετ᾽ αισθησεως
αλογου). So long as we are confined to the perception of these, we are
like men who sit in a dark cave, bound so fast that they cannot turn their
heads, and who see nothing but the shadows of real things which pass
between them and a fire burning behind them, the light of which casts the
shadows on the wall opposite them; and even of themselves and of each
other they see only the shadows on the wall. Their wisdom would thus
consist in predicting the order of the shadows learned from experience.
The real archetypes, on the other hand, to which these shadows correspond,
the eternal Ideas, the original forms of all things, can alone be said to
have true being (οντως ον), because they _always are, but never become nor
pass away_. To them belongs _no multiplicity_; for each of them is
according to its nature only one, for it is the archetype itself, of which
all particular transitory things of the same kind which are named after it
are copies or shadows. They have also _no coming into being nor passing
away_, for they are truly being, never becoming nor vanishing, like their
fleeting shadows. (It is necessarily presupposed, however, in these two
negative definitions, that time, space, and causality have no significance
or validity for these Ideas, and that they do not exist in them.) Of these
only can there be true knowledge, for the object of such knowledge can
only be that which always and in every respect (thus in-itself) is; not
that which is and again is not, according as we look at it.” This is
Plato’s doctrine. It is clear, and requires no further proof that the
inner meaning of both doctrines is entirely the same; that both explain
the visible world as a manifestation, which in itself is nothing, and
which only has meaning and a borrowed reality through that which expresses
itself in it (in the one case the thing-in-itself, in the other the Idea).
To this last, which has true being, all the forms of that phenomenal
existence, even the most universal and essential, are, according to both
doctrines, entirely foreign. In order to disown these forms Kant has
directly expressed them even in abstract terms, and distinctly refused
time, space, and causality as mere forms of the phenomenon to the
thing-in-itself. Plato, on the other hand, did not attain to the fullest
expression, and has only distinctly refused these forms to his Ideas in
that he denies of the Ideas what is only possible through these forms,
multiplicity of similar things, coming into being and passing away. Though
it is perhaps superfluous, I should like to illustrate this remarkable and
important agreement by an example. There stands before us, let us suppose,
an animal in the full activity of life. Plato would say, “This animal has
no true existence, but merely an apparent existence, a constant becoming,
a relative existence which may just as well be called non-being as being.
Only the Idea which expresses itself in that animal is truly ‘being,’ or
the animal in-itself (αυτο το θηριον), which is dependent upon nothing,
but is in and for itself (καθ᾽ ἑαυτο, αει ὡς αυτως); it has not become, it
will not end, but always is in the same way (αει ον, και μηδεποτε ουτε
γυγνομενον ουτε απολλυμενον). If now we recognise its Idea in this animal,
it is all one and of no importance whether we have this animal now before
us or its progenitor of a thousand years ago, whether it is here or in a
distant land, whether it presents itself in this or that manner, position,
or action; whether, lastly, it is this or any other individual of the same
species; all this is nothing, and only concerns the phenomenon; the Idea
of the animal alone has true being, and is the object of real knowledge.”
So Plato; Kant would say something of this kind, “This animal is a
phenomenon in time, space, and causality, which are collectively the
conditions _a priori_ of the possibility of experience, lying in our
faculty of knowledge, not determinations of the thing-in-itself. Therefore
this animal as we perceive it at this definite point of time, in this
particular place, as an individual in the connection of experience
(_i.e._, in the chain of causes and effects), which has come into being,
and will just as necessarily pass away, is not a thing-in-itself, but a
phenomenon which only exists in relation to our knowledge. To know it as
what it may be in itself, that is to say, independent of all the
determinations which lie in time, space, and causality, would demand
another kind of knowledge than that which is possible for us through the
senses and the understanding.”

In order to bring Kant’s mode of expression nearer the Platonic, we might
say: Time, space, and causality are that arrangement of our intellect by
virtue of which the _one_ being of each kind which alone really is,
manifests itself to us as a multiplicity of similar beings, constantly
appearing and disappearing in endless succession. The apprehension of
things by means of and in accordance with this arrangement is _immanent_
knowledge; that, on the other hand, which is conscious of the true state
of the case, is _transcendental_ knowledge. The latter is obtained _in
abstracto_ through the criticism of pure reason, but in exceptional cases
it may also appear intuitively. This last is an addition of my own, which
I am endeavouring in this Third Book to explain.

If the doctrine of Kant had ever been properly understood and grasped, and
since Kant’s time that of Plato, if men had truly and earnestly reflected
on the inner meaning and content of the teaching of these two great
masters, instead of involving themselves in the technicalities of the one
and writing parodies of the style of the other, they could not have failed
to discern long ago to what an extent these two great philosophers agree,
and that the true meaning, the aim of both systems, is the same. Not only
would they have refrained from constantly comparing Plato to Leibnitz, on
whom his spirit certainly did not rest, or indeed to a well-known
gentleman who is still alive,(44) as if they wanted to mock the manes of
the great thinker of the past; but they would have advanced much farther
in general, or rather they would not have fallen so disgracefully far
behind as they have in the last forty years. They would not have let
themselves be led by the nose, to-day by one vain boaster and to-morrow by
another, nor would they have opened the nineteenth century, which promised
so much in Germany, with the philosophical farces that were performed over
the grave of Kant (as the ancients sometimes did at the funeral obsequies
of their dead), and which deservedly called forth the derision of other
nations, for such things least become the earnest and strait-laced German.
But so small is the chosen public of true philosophers, that even students
who understand are but scantily brought them by the centuries—Εισι δη
ναρθηκοφοροι μεν πολλοι, βακχοι δε γε παυροι (_Thyrsigeri quidem multi,
Baachi vero pauci_). Ἡ ατιμια φιλοσοφιᾳ δια ταυτα προσπεπτωκεν, ὁτι ου κατ
αξιαν αυτης ἁπτονται; ου γαρ νοθους εδει ἁπτεσθαι, αλλα γνησιους (_Eam ob
rem philosophia in infamiam incidit, quad non pro dignitate ipsam
attingunt: neque enim a spuriis, sad a legitimis erat
attrectanda_).—Plato.

Men followed the words,—such words as “_a priori_ ideas,” “forms of
perception and thought existing in consciousness independently of
experience,” “fundamental conceptions of the pure understanding,” &c.,
&c.,—and asked whether Plato’s Ideas, which were also original
conceptions, and besides this were supposed to be reminiscences of a
perception before life of the truly real things, were in some way the same
as Kant’s forms of perception and thought, which lie _a priori_ in our
consciousness. On account of some slight resemblance in the expression of
these two entirely different doctrines, the Kantian doctrine of the forms
which limit the knowledge of the individual to the phenomenon, and the
Platonic doctrine of Ideas, the knowledge of which these very forms
expressly deny, these so far diametrically opposed doctrines were
carefully compared, and men deliberated and disputed as to whether they
were identical, found at last that they were not the same, and concluded
that Plato’s doctrine of Ideas and Kant’s “Critique of Reason” had nothing
in common. But enough of this.(45)

§ 32. It follows from our consideration of the subject, that, for us, Idea
and thing-in-itself are not entirely one and the same, in spite of the
inner agreement between Kant and Plato, and the identity of the aim they
had before them, or the conception of the world which roused them and led
them to philosophise. The Idea is for us rather the direct, and therefore
adequate, objectivity of the thing-in-itself, which is, however, itself
the _will_—the will as not yet objectified, not yet become idea. For the
thing-in-itself must, even according to Kant, be free from all the forms
connected with knowing as such; and it is merely an error on his part (as
is shown in the Appendix) that he did not count among these forms, before
all others, that of being object for a subject, for it is the first and
most universal form of all phenomena, _i.e._, of all idea; he should
therefore have distinctly denied objective existence to his
thing-in-itself, which would have saved him from a great inconsistency
that was soon discovered. The Platonic Idea, on the other hand, is
necessarily object, something known, an idea, and in that respect is
different from the thing-in-itself, but in that respect only. It has
merely laid aside the subordinate forms of the phenomenon, all of which we
include in the principle of sufficient reason, or rather it has not yet
assumed them; but it has retained the first and most universal form, that
of the idea in general, the form of being object for a subject. It is the
forms which are subordinate to this (whose general expression is the
principle of sufficient reason) that multiply the Idea in particular
transitory individuals, whose number is a matter of complete indifference
to the Idea. The principle of sufficient reason is thus again the form
into which the Idea enters when it appears in the knowledge of the subject
as individual. The particular thing that manifests itself in accordance
with the principle of sufficient reason is thus only an indirect
objectification of the thing-in-itself (which is the will), for between it
and the thing-in-itself stands the Idea as the only direct objectivity of
the will, because it has assumed none of the special forms of knowledge as
such, except that of the idea in general, _i.e._, the form of being object
for a subject. Therefore it alone is the most _adequate objectivity_ of
the will or thing-in-itself which is possible; indeed it is the whole
thing-in-itself, only under the form of the idea; and here lies the ground
of the great agreement between Plato and Kant, although, in strict
accuracy, that of which they speak is not the same. But the particular
things are no really adequate objectivity of the will, for in them it is
obscured by those forms whose general expression is the principle of
sufficient reason, but which are conditions of the knowledge which belongs
to the individual as such. If it is allowable to draw conclusions from an
impossible presupposition, we would, in fact, no longer know particular
things, nor events, nor change, nor multiplicity, but would comprehend
only Ideas,—only the grades of the objectification of that one will, of
the thing-in-itself, in pure unclouded knowledge. Consequently our world
would be a _nunc stans_, if it were not that, as knowing subjects, we are
also individuals, _i.e._, our perceptions come to us through the medium of
a body, from the affections of which they proceed, and which is itself
only concrete willing, objectivity of the will, and thus is an object
among objects, and as such comes into the knowing consciousness in the
only way in which an object can, through the forms of the principle of
sufficient reason, and consequently already presupposes, and therefore
brings in, time, and all other forms which that principle expresses. Time
is only the broken and piecemeal view which the individual being has of
the Ideas, which are outside time, and consequently _eternal_. Therefore
Plato says time is the moving picture of eternity: αιωνος εικων κινητη ὁ
χρονος.(46)

§ 33. Since now, as individuals, we have no other knowledge than that
which is subject to the principle of sufficient reason, and this form of
knowledge excludes the Ideas, it is certain that if it is possible for us
to raise ourselves from the knowledge of particular things to that of the
Ideas, this can only happen by an alteration taking place in the subject
which is analogous and corresponds to the great change of the whole nature
of the object, and by virtue of which the subject, so far as it knows an
Idea, is no more individual.

It will be remembered from the preceding book that knowledge in general
belongs to the objectification of will at its higher grades, and
sensibility, nerves, and brain, just like the other parts of the organised
being, are the expression of the will at this stage of its objectivity,
and therefore the idea which appears through them is also in the same way
bound to the service of will as a means (μηχανη) for the attainment of its
now complicated (πολυτελεστερα) aims for sustaining a being of manifold
requirements. Thus originally and according to its nature, knowledge is
completely subject to the will, and, like the immediate object, which, by
means of the application of the law of causality, is its starting-point,
all knowledge which proceeds in accordance with the principle of
sufficient reason remains in a closer or more distant relation to the
will. For the individual finds his body as an object among objects, to all
of which it is related and connected according to the principle of
sufficient reason. Thus all investigations of these relations and
connections lead back to his body, and consequently to his will. Since it
is the principle of sufficient reason which places the objects in this
relation to the body, and, through it, to the will, the one endeavour of
the knowledge which is subject to this principle will be to find out the
relations in which objects are placed to each other through this
principle, and thus to trace their innumerable connections in space, time,
and causality. For only through these is the object _interesting_ to the
individual, _i.e._, related to the will. Therefore the knowledge which is
subject to the will knows nothing further of objects than their relations,
knows the objects only so far as they exist at this time, in this place,
under these circumstances, from these causes, and with these effects—in a
word, as particular things; and if all these relations were to be taken
away, the objects would also have disappeared for it, because it knew
nothing more about them. We must not disguise the fact that what the
sciences consider in things is also in reality nothing more than this;
their relations, the connections of time and space, the causes of natural
changes, the resemblance of forms, the motives of actions,—thus merely
relations. What distinguishes science from ordinary knowledge is merely
its systematic form, the facilitating of knowledge by the comprehension of
all particulars in the universal, by means of the subordination of
concepts, and the completeness of knowledge which is thereby attained. All
relation has itself only a relative existence; for example, all being in
time is also non-being; for time is only that by means of which opposite
determinations can belong to the same thing; therefore every phenomenon
which is in time again is not, for what separates its beginning from its
end is only time, which is essentially a fleeting, inconstant, and
relative thing, here called duration. But time is the most universal form
of all objects of the knowledge which is subject to the will, and the
prototype of its other forms.

Knowledge now, as a rule, remains always subordinate to the service of the
will, as indeed it originated for this service, and grew, so to speak, to
the will, as the head to the body. In the case of the brutes this
subjection of knowledge to the will can never be abolished. In the case of
men it can be abolished only in exceptional cases, which we shall
presently consider more closely. This distinction between man and brute is
outwardly expressed by the difference of the relation of the head to the
body. In the case of the lower brutes both are deformed: in all brutes the
head is directed towards the earth, where the objects of its will lie;
even in the higher species the head and the body are still far more one
than in the case of man, whose head seems freely set upon his body, as if
only carried by and not serving it. This human excellence is exhibited in
the highest degree by the Apollo of Belvedere; the head of the god of the
Muses, with eyes fixed on the far distance, stands so freely on his
shoulders that it seems wholly delivered from the body, and no more
subject to its cares.

§ 34. The transition which we have referred to as possible, but yet to be
regarded as only exceptional, from the common knowledge of particular
things to the knowledge of the Idea, takes place suddenly; for knowledge
breaks free from the service of the will, by the subject ceasing to be
merely individual, and thus becoming the pure will-less subject of
knowledge, which no longer traces relations in accordance with the
principle of sufficient reason, but rests in fixed contemplation of the
object presented to it, out of its connection with all others, and rises
into it.

A full explanation is necessary to make this clear, and the reader must
suspend his surprise for a while, till he has grasped the whole thought
expressed in this work, and then it will vanish of itself.

If, raised by the power of the mind, a man relinquishes the common way of
looking at things, gives up tracing, under the guidance of the forms of
the principle of sufficient reason, their relations to each other, the
final goal of which is always a relation to his own will; if he thus
ceases to consider the where, the when, the why, and the whither of
things, and looks simply and solely at the _what_; if, further, he does
not allow abstract thought, the concepts of the reason, to take possession
of his consciousness, but, instead of all this, gives the whole power of
his mind to perception, sinks himself entirely in this, and lets his whole
consciousness be filled with the quiet contemplation of the natural object
actually present, whether a landscape, a tree, a mountain, a building, or
whatever it may be; inasmuch as he _loses_ himself in this object (to use
a pregnant German idiom), _i.e._, forgets even his individuality, his
will, and only continues to exist as the pure subject, the clear mirror of
the object, so that it is as if the object alone were there, without any
one to perceive it, and he can no longer separate the perceiver from the
perception, but both have become one, because the whole consciousness is
filled and occupied with one single sensuous picture; if thus the object
has to such an extent passed out of all relation to something outside it,
and the subject out of all relation to the will, then that which is so
known is no longer the particular thing as such; but it is the _Idea_, the
eternal form, the immediate objectivity of the will at this grade; and,
therefore, he who is sunk in this perception is no longer individual, for
in such perception the individual has lost himself; but he is _pure_,
will-less, painless, timeless _subject of knowledge_. This, which in
itself is so remarkable (which I well know confirms the saying that
originated with Thomas Paine, _Du sublime au ridicule il n’y a qu’un
pas_), will by degrees become clearer and less surprising from what
follows. It was this that was running in Spinoza’s mind when he wrote:
_Meus æterna est, quatenus res sub æternitatis specie __ concipit_ (Eth.
V. pr. 31, Schol.)(47) In such contemplation the particular thing becomes
at once the _Idea_ of its species, and the perceiving individual becomes
_pure subject of knowledge_. The individual, as such, knows only
particular things; the pure subject of knowledge knows only Ideas. For the
individual is the subject of knowledge in its relation to a definite
particular manifestation of will, and in subjection to this. This
particular manifestation of will is, as such, subordinated to the
principle of sufficient reason in all its forms; therefore, all knowledge
which relates itself to it also follows the principle of sufficient
reason, and no other kind of knowledge is fitted to be of use to the will
but this, which always consists merely of relations to the object. The
knowing individual as such, and the particular things known by him, are
always in some place, at some time, and are links in the chain of causes
and effects. The pure subject of knowledge and his correlative, the Idea,
have passed out of all these forms of the principle of sufficient reason:
time, place, the individual that knows, and the individual that is known,
have for them no meaning. When an individual knower has raised himself in
the manner described to be pure subject of knowledge, and at the same time
has raised the observed object to the Platonic Idea, the _world as idea_
appears complete and pure, and the full objectification of the will takes
place, for the Platonic Idea alone is its _adequate objectivity_. The Idea
includes object and subject in like manner in itself, for they are its one
form; but in it they are absolutely of equal importance; for as the object
is here, as elsewhere, simply the idea of the subject, the subject, which
passes entirely into the perceived object has thus become this object
itself, for the whole consciousness is nothing but its perfectly distinct
picture. Now this consciousness constitutes the whole _world as idea_, for
one imagines the whole of the Platonic Ideas, or grades of the objectivity
of will, in their series passing through it. The particular things of all
time and space are nothing but Ideas multiplied through the principle of
sufficient reason (the form of the knowledge of the individual as such),
and thus obscured as regards their pure objectivity. When the Platonic
Idea appears, in it subject and object are no longer to be distinguished,
for the Platonic Idea, the adequate objectivity of will, the true world as
idea, arises only when the subject and object reciprocally fill and
penetrate each other completely; and in the same way the knowing and the
known individuals, as things in themselves, are not to be distinguished.
For if we look entirely away from the true _world as idea_, there remains
nothing but the _world as will_. The will is the “in-itself” of the
Platonic Idea, which fully objectifies it; it is also the “in-itself” of
the particular thing and of the individual that knows it, which objectify
it incompletely. As will, outside the idea and all its forms, it is one
and the same in the object contemplated and in the individual, who soars
aloft in this contemplation, and becomes conscious of himself as pure
subject. These two are, therefore, in themselves not different, for in
themselves they are will, which here knows itself; and multiplicity and
difference exist only as the way in which this knowledge comes to the
will, _i.e._, only in the phenomenon, on account of its form, the
principle of sufficient reason.

Now the known thing, without me as the subject of knowledge, is just as
little an object, and not mere will, blind effort, as without the object,
without the idea, I am a knowing subject and not mere blind will. This
will is in itself, _i.e._, outside the idea, one and the same with mine:
only in the world as idea, whose form is always at least that of subject
and object, we are separated as the known and the knowing individual. As
soon as knowledge, the world as idea, is abolished, there remains nothing
but mere will, blind effort. That it should receive objectivity, become
idea, supposes at once both subject and object; but that this should be
pure, complete, and adequate objectivity of the will, supposes the object
as Platonic Idea, free from the forms of the principle of sufficient
reason, and the subject as the pure subject of knowledge, free from
individuality and subjection to the will.

Whoever now, has, after the manner referred to, become so absorbed and
lost in the perception of nature that he only continues to exist as the
pure knowing subject, becomes in this way directly conscious that, as
such, he is the condition, that is, the supporter, of the world and all
objective existence; for this now shows itself as dependent upon his
existence. Thus he draws nature into himself, so that he sees it to be
merely an accident of his own being. In this sense Byron says—


    “Are not the mountains, waves, and skies, a part
      Of me and of my soul, as I of them?”


But how shall he who feels this, regard himself as absolutely transitory,
in contrast to imperishable nature? Such a man will rather be filled with
the consciousness, which the Upanishad of the Veda expresses: _Hæ omnes
creaturæ in totum ego sum, et præter me aliud ens non est_ (Oupnek’hat, i.
122).(48)

§ 35. In order to gain a deeper insight into the nature of the world, it
is absolutely necessary that we should learn to distinguish the will as
thing-in-itself from its adequate objectivity, and also the different
grades in which this appears more and more distinctly and fully, _i.e._,
the Ideas themselves, from the merely phenomenal existence of these Ideas
in the forms of the principle of sufficient reason, the restricted method
of knowledge of the individual. We shall then agree with Plato when he
attributes actual being only to the Ideas, and allows only an illusive,
dream-like existence to things in space and time, the real world for the
individual. Then we shall understand how one and the same Idea reveals
itself in so many phenomena, and presents its nature only bit by bit to
the individual, one side after another. Then we shall also distinguish the
Idea itself from the way in which its manifestation appears in the
observation of the individual, and recognise the former as essential and
the latter as unessential. Let us consider this with the help of examples
taken from the most insignificant things, and also from the greatest. When
the clouds move, the figures which they form are not essential, but
indifferent to them; but that as elastic vapour they are pressed together,
drifted along, spread out, or torn asunder by the force of the wind: this
is their nature, the essence of the forces which objectify themselves in
them, the Idea; their actual forms are only for the individual observer.
To the brook that flows over stones, the eddies, the waves, the
foam-flakes which it forms are indifferent and unessential; but that it
follows the attraction of gravity, and behaves as inelastic, perfectly
mobile, formless, transparent fluid: this is its nature; this, _if known
through perception_, is its Idea; these accidental forms are only for us
so long as we know as individuals. The ice on the window-pane forms itself
into crystals according to the laws of crystallisation, which reveal the
essence of the force of nature that appears here, exhibit the Idea; but
the trees and flowers which it traces on the pane are unessential, and are
only there for us. What appears in the clouds, the brook, and the crystal
is the weakest echo of that will which appears more fully in the plant,
more fully still in the beast, and most fully in man. But only the
essential in all these grades of its objectification constitutes the Idea;
on the other hand, its unfolding or development, because broken up in the
forms of the principle of sufficient reason into a multiplicity of
many-sided phenomena, is unessential to the Idea, lies merely in the kind
of knowledge that belongs to the individual and has reality only for this.
The same thing necessarily holds good of the unfolding of that Idea which
is the completest objectivity of will. Therefore, the history of the human
race, the throng of events, the change of times, the multifarious forms of
human life in different lands and countries, all this is only the
accidental form of the manifestation of the Idea, does not belong to the
Idea itself, in which alone lies the adequate objectivity of the will, but
only to the phenomenon which appears in the knowledge of the individual,
and is just as foreign, unessential, and indifferent to the Idea itself as
the figures which they assume are to the clouds, the form of its eddies
and foam-flakes to the brook, or its trees and flowers to the ice.

To him who has thoroughly grasped this, and can distinguish between the
will and the Idea, and between the Idea and its manifestation, the events
of the world will have significance only so far as they are the letters
out of which we may read the Idea of man, but not in and for themselves.
He will not believe with the vulgar that time may produce something
actually new and significant; that through it, or in it, something
absolutely real may attain to existence, or indeed that it itself as a
whole has beginning and end, plan and development, and in some way has for
its final aim the highest perfection (according to their conception) of
the last generation of man, whose life is a brief thirty years. Therefore
he will just as little, with Homer, people a whole Olympus with gods to
guide the events of time, as, with Ossian, he will take the forms of the
clouds for individual beings; for, as we have said, both have just as much
meaning as regards the Idea which appears in them. In the manifold forms
of human life and in the unceasing change of events, he will regard the
Idea only as the abiding and essential, in which the will to live has its
fullest objectivity, and which shows its different sides in the
capacities, the passions, the errors and the excellences of the human
race; in self-interest, hatred, love, fear, boldness, frivolity,
stupidity, slyness, wit, genius, and so forth, all of which crowding
together and combining in thousands of forms (individuals), continually
create the history of the great and the little world, in which it is all
the same whether they are set in motion by nuts or by crowns. Finally, he
will find that in the world it is the same as in the dramas of Gozzi, in
all of which the same persons appear, with like intention, and with a like
fate; the motives and incidents are certainly different in each piece, but
the spirit of the incidents is the same; the actors in one piece know
nothing of the incidents of another, although they performed in it
themselves; therefore, after all experience of former pieces, Pantaloon
has become no more agile or generous, Tartaglia no more conscientious,
Brighella no more courageous, and Columbine no more modest.

Suppose we were allowed for once a clearer glance into the kingdom of the
possible, and over the whole chain of causes and effects; if the
earth-spirit appeared and showed us in a picture all the greatest men,
enlighteners of the world, and heroes, that chance destroyed before they
were ripe for their work; then the great events that would have changed
the history of the world and brought in periods of the highest culture and
enlightenment, but which the blindest chance, the most insignificant
accident, hindered at the outset; lastly, the splendid powers of great
men, that would have enriched whole ages of the world, but which, either
misled by error or passion, or compelled by necessity, they squandered
uselessly on unworthy or unfruitful objects, or even wasted in play. If we
saw all this, we would shudder and lament at the thought of the lost
treasures of whole periods of the world. But the earth-spirit would smile
and say, “The source from which the individuals and their powers proceed
is inexhaustible and unending as time and space; for, like these forms of
all phenomena, they also are only phenomena, visibility of the will. No
finite measure can exhaust that infinite source; therefore an undiminished
eternity is always open for the return of any event or work that was
nipped in the bud. In this world of phenomena true loss is just as little
possible as true gain. The will alone is; it is the thing in-itself, and
the source of all these phenomena. Its self-knowledge and its assertion or
denial, which is then decided upon, is the only event in-itself.”(49)

§ 36. History follows the thread of events; it is pragmatic so far as it
deduces them in accordance with the law of motivation, a law that
determines the self-manifesting will wherever it is enlightened by
knowledge. At the lowest grades of its objectivity, where it still acts
without knowledge, natural science, in the form of etiology, treats of the
laws of the changes of its phenomena, and, in the form of morphology, of
what is permanent in them. This almost endless task is lightened by the
aid of concepts, which comprehend what is general in order that we may
deduce what is particular from it. Lastly, mathematics treats of the mere
forms, time and space, in which the Ideas, broken up into multiplicity,
appear for the knowledge of the subject as individual. All these, of which
the common name is science, proceed according to the principle of
sufficient reason in its different forms, and their theme is always the
phenomenon, its laws, connections, and the relations which result from
them. But what kind of knowledge is concerned with that which is outside
and independent of all relations, that which alone is really essential to
the world, the true content of its phenomena, that which is subject to no
change, and therefore is known with equal truth for all time, in a word,
the _Ideas_, which are the direct and adequate objectivity of the thing
in-itself, the will? We answer, _Art_, the work of genius. It repeats or
reproduces the eternal Ideas grasped through pure contemplation, the
essential and abiding in all the phenomena of the world; and according to
what the material is in which it reproduces, it is sculpture or painting,
poetry or music. Its one source is the knowledge of Ideas; its one aim the
communication of this knowledge. While science, following the unresting
and inconstant stream of the fourfold forms of reason and consequent, with
each end attained sees further, and can never reach a final goal nor
attain full satisfaction, any more than by running we can reach the place
where the clouds touch the horizon; art, on the contrary, is everywhere at
its goal. For it plucks the object of its contemplation out of the stream
of the world’s course, and has it isolated before it. And this particular
thing, which in that stream was a small perishing part, becomes to art the
representative of the whole, an equivalent of the endless multitude in
space and time. It therefore pauses at this particular thing; the course
of time stops; the relations vanish for it; only the essential, the Idea,
is its object. We may, therefore, accurately define it as the _way of
viewing things independent of the principle of sufficient reason_, in
opposition to the way of viewing them which proceeds in accordance with
that principle, and which is the method of experience and of science. This
last method of considering things may be compared to a line infinitely
extended in a horizontal direction, and the former to a vertical line
which cuts it at any point. The method of viewing things which proceeds in
accordance with the principle of sufficient reason is the rational method,
and it alone is valid and of use in practical life and in science. The
method which looks away from the content of this principle is the method
of genius, which is only valid and of use in art. The first is the method
of Aristotle; the second is, on the whole, that of Plato. The first is
like the mighty storm, that rushes along without beginning and without
aim, bending, agitating, and carrying away everything before it; the
second is like the silent sunbeam, that pierces through the storm quite
unaffected by it. The first is like the innumerable showering drops of the
waterfall, which, constantly changing, never rest for an instant; the
second is like the rainbow, quietly resting on this raging torrent. Only
through the pure contemplation described above, which ends entirely in the
object, can Ideas be comprehended; and the nature of _genius_ consists in
pre-eminent capacity for such contemplation. Now, as this requires that a
man should entirely forget himself and the relations in which he stands,
_genius_ is simply the completest _objectivity_, _i.e._, the objective
tendency of the mind, as opposed to the subjective, which is directed to
one’s own self—in other words, to the will. Thus genius is the faculty of
continuing in the state of pure perception, of losing oneself in
perception, and of enlisting in this service the knowledge which
originally existed only for the service of the will; that is to say,
genius is the power of leaving one’s own interests, wishes, and aims
entirely out of sight, thus of entirely renouncing one’s own personality
for a time, so as to remain _pure knowing subject_, clear vision of the
world; and this not merely at moments, but for a sufficient length of
time, and with sufficient consciousness, to enable one to reproduce by
deliberate art what has thus been apprehended, and “to fix in lasting
thoughts the wavering images that float before the mind.” It is as if,
when genius appears in an individual, a far larger measure of the power of
knowledge falls to his lot than is necessary for the service of an
individual will; and this superfluity of knowledge, being free, now
becomes subject purified from will, a clear mirror of the inner nature of
the world. This explains the activity, amounting even to disquietude, of
men of genius, for the present can seldom satisfy them, because it does
not fill their consciousness. This gives them that restless aspiration,
that unceasing desire for new things, and for the contemplation of lofty
things, and also that longing that is hardly ever satisfied, for men of
similar nature and of like stature, to whom they might communicate
themselves; whilst the common mortal, entirely filled and satisfied by the
common present, ends in it, and finding everywhere his like, enjoys that
peculiar satisfaction in daily life that is denied to genius.

Imagination has rightly been recognised as an essential element of genius;
it has sometimes even been regarded as identical with it; but this is a
mistake. As the objects of genius are the eternal Ideas, the permanent,
essential forms of the world and all its phenomena, and as the knowledge
of the Idea is necessarily knowledge through perception, is not abstract,
the knowledge of the genius would be limited to the Ideas of the objects
actually present to his person, and dependent upon the chain of
circumstances that brought these objects to him, if his imagination did
not extend his horizon far beyond the limits of his actual personal
existence, and thus enable him to construct the whole out of the little
that comes into his own actual apperception, and so to let almost all
possible scenes of life pass before him in his own consciousness. Further,
the actual objects are almost always very imperfect copies of the Ideas
expressed in them; therefore the man of genius requires imagination in
order to see in things, not that which Nature has actually made, but that
which she endeavoured to make, yet could not because of that conflict of
her forms among themselves which we referred to in the last book. We shall
return to this farther on in treating of sculpture. The imagination then
extends the intellectual horizon of the man of genius beyond the objects
which actually present themselves to him, both as regards quality and
quantity. Therefore extraordinary strength of imagination accompanies, and
is indeed a necessary condition of genius. But the converse does not hold,
for strength of imagination does not indicate genius; on the contrary, men
who have no touch of genius may have much imagination. For as it is
possible to consider a real object in two opposite ways, purely
objectively, the way of genius grasping its Idea, or in the common way,
merely in the relations in which it stands to other objects and to one’s
own will, in accordance with the principle of sufficient reason, it is
also possible to perceive an imaginary object in both of these ways.
Regarded in the first way, it is a means to the knowledge of the Idea, the
communication of which is the work of art; in the second case, the
imaginary object is used to build castles in the air congenial to egotism
and the individual humour, and which for the moment delude and gratify;
thus only the relations of the phantasies so linked together are known.
The man who indulges in such an amusement is a dreamer; he will easily
mingle those fancies that delight his solitude with reality, and so unfit
himself for real life: perhaps he will write them down, and then we shall
have the ordinary novel of every description, which entertains those who
are like him and the public at large, for the readers imagine themselves
in the place of the hero, and then find the story very agreeable.

The common mortal, that manufacture of Nature which she produces by the
thousand every day, is, as we have said, not capable, at least not
continuously so, of observation that in every sense is wholly
disinterested, as sensuous contemplation, strictly so called, is. He can
turn his attention to things only so far as they have some relation to his
will, however indirect it may be. Since in this respect, which never
demands anything but the knowledge of relations, the abstract conception
of the thing is sufficient, and for the most part even better adapted for
use; the ordinary man does not linger long over the mere perception, does
not fix his attention long on one object, but in all that is presented to
him hastily seeks merely the concept under which it is to be brought, as
the lazy man seeks a chair, and then it interests him no further. This is
why he is so soon done with everything, with works of art, objects of
natural beauty, and indeed everywhere with the truly significant
contemplation of all the scenes of life. He does not linger; only seeks to
know his own way in life, together with all that might at any time become
his way. Thus he makes topographical notes in the widest sense; over the
consideration of life itself as such he wastes no time. The man of genius,
on the other hand, whose excessive power of knowledge frees it at times
from the service of will, dwells on the consideration of life itself,
strives to comprehend the Idea of each thing, not its relations to other
things; and in doing this he often forgets to consider his own path in
life, and therefore for the most part pursues it awkwardly enough. While
to the ordinary man his faculty of knowledge is a lamp to lighten his
path, to the man of genius it is the sun which reveals the world. This
great diversity in their way of looking at life soon becomes visible in
the outward appearance both of the man of genius and of the ordinary
mortal. The man in whom genius lives and works is easily distinguished by
his glance, which is both keen and steady, and bears the stamp of
perception, of contemplation. This is easily seen from the likenesses of
the few men of genius whom Nature has produced here and there among
countless millions. On the other hand, in the case of an ordinary man, the
true object of his contemplation, what he is prying into, can be easily
seen from his glance, if indeed it is not quite stupid and vacant, as is
generally the case. Therefore the expression of genius in a face consists
in this, that in it a decided predominance of knowledge over will is
visible, and consequently there also shows itself in it a knowledge that
is entirely devoid of relation to will, _i.e._, _pure knowing_. On the
contrary, in ordinary countenances there is a predominant expression of
will; and we see that knowledge only comes into activity under the impulse
of will, and thus is directed merely by motives.

Since the knowledge that pertains to genius, or the knowledge of Ideas, is
that knowledge which does not follow the principle of sufficient reason,
so, on the other hand, the knowledge which does follow that principle is
that which gives us prudence and rationality in life, and which creates
the sciences. Thus men of genius are affected with the deficiencies
entailed in the neglect of this latter kind of knowledge. Yet what I say
in this regard is subject to the limitation that it only concerns them in
so far as and while they are actually engaged in that kind of knowledge
which is peculiar to genius; and this is by no means at every moment of
their lives, for the great though spontaneous exertion which is demanded
for the comprehension of Ideas free from will must necessarily relax, and
there are long intervals during which men of genius are placed in very
much the same position as ordinary mortals, both as regards advantages and
deficiencies. On this account the action of genius has always been
regarded as an inspiration, as indeed the name indicates, as the action of
a superhuman being distinct from the individual himself, and which takes
possession of him only periodically. The disinclination of men of genius
to direct their attention to the content of the principle of sufficient
reason will first show itself, with regard to the ground of being, as
dislike of mathematics; for its procedure is based upon the most universal
forms of the phenomenon space and time, which are themselves merely modes
of the principle of sufficient reason, and is consequently precisely the
opposite of that method of thought which seeks merely the content of the
phenomenon, the Idea which expresses itself in it apart from all
relations. The logical method of mathematics is also antagonistic to
genius, for it does not satisfy but obstructs true insight, and presents
merely a chain of conclusions in accordance with the principle of the
ground of knowing. The mental faculty upon which it makes the greatest
claim is memory, for it is necessary to recollect all the earlier
propositions which are referred to. Experience has also proved that men of
great artistic genius have no faculty for mathematics; no man was ever
very distinguished for both. Alfieri relates that he was never able to
understand the fourth proposition of Euclid. Goethe was constantly
reproached with his want of mathematical knowledge by the ignorant
opponents of his theory of colours. Here certainly, where it was not a
question of calculation and measurement upon hypothetical data, but of
direct knowledge by the understanding of causes and effects, this reproach
was so utterly absurd and inappropriate, that by making it they have
exposed their entire want of judgment, just as much as by the rest of
their ridiculous arguments. The fact that up to the present day, nearly
half a century after the appearance of Goethe’s theory of colours, even in
Germany the Newtonian fallacies still have undisturbed possession of the
professorial chair, and men continue to speak quite seriously of the seven
homogeneous rays of light and their different refrangibility, will some
day be numbered among the great intellectual peculiarities of men
generally, and especially of Germans. From the same cause as we have
referred to above, may be explained the equally well-known fact that,
conversely, admirable mathematicians have very little susceptibility for
works of fine art. This is very naïvely expressed in the well-known
anecdote of the French mathematician, who, after having read Racine’s
“Iphigenia,” shrugged his shoulders and asked, “_Qu’est ce que cela
prouve?_” Further, as quick comprehension of relations in accordance with
the laws of causality and motivation is what specially constitutes
prudence or sagacity, a prudent man, so far as and while he is so, will
not be a genius, and a man of genius, so far as and while he is so, will
not be a prudent man. Lastly, perceptive knowledge generally, in the
province of which the Idea always lies, is directly opposed to rational or
abstract knowledge, which is guided by the principle of the ground of
knowing. It is also well known that we seldom find great genius united
with pre-eminent reasonableness; on the contrary, persons of genius are
often subject to violent emotions and irrational passions. But the ground
of this is not weakness of reason, but partly unwonted energy of that
whole phenomenon of will—the man of genius—which expresses itself through
the violence of all his acts of will, and partly preponderance of the
knowledge of perception through the senses and understanding over abstract
knowledge, producing a decided tendency to the perceptible, the
exceedingly lively impressions of which so far outshine colourless
concepts, that they take their place in the guidance of action, which
consequently becomes irrational. Accordingly the impression of the present
moment is very strong with such persons, and carries them away into
unconsidered action, violent emotions and passions. Moreover, since, in
general, the knowledge of persons of genius has to some extent freed
itself from the service of will, they will not in conversation think so
much of the person they are addressing as of the thing they are speaking
about, which is vividly present to them; and therefore they are likely to
judge or narrate things too objectively for their own interests; they will
not pass over in silence what would more prudently be concealed, and so
forth. Finally, they are given to soliloquising, and in general may
exhibit certain weaknesses which are actually akin to madness. It has
often been remarked that there is a side at which genius and madness
touch, and even pass over into each other, and indeed poetical inspiration
has been called a kind of madness: _amabilis insania_, Horace calls it
(Od. iii. 4), and Wieland in the introduction to “Oberon” speaks of it as
“amiable madness.” Even Aristotle, as quoted by Seneca (De Tranq. Animi,
15, 16), is reported to have said: _Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura
dementiæ fuit_. Plato expresses it in the figure of the dark cave,
referred to above (De Rep. 7), when he says: “Those who, outside the cave,
have seen the true sunlight and the things that have true being (Ideas),
cannot afterwards see properly down in the cave, because their eyes are
not accustomed to the darkness; they cannot distinguish the shadows, and
are jeered at for their mistakes by those who have never left the cave and
its shadows.” In the “Phædrus” also (p. 317), he distinctly says that
there can be no true poet without a certain madness; in fact, (p. 327),
that every one appears mad who recognises the eternal Ideas in fleeting
things. Cicero also quotes: _Negat enim sine furore, Democritus, quemquam
poetam magnum esse posse; quod idem dicit Plato_ (De Divin., i. 37). And,
lastly, Pope says—


    “Great wits to madness sure are near allied,
    And thin partitions do their bounds divide.”


Especially instructive in this respect is Goethe’s “Torquato Tasso,” in
which he shows us not only the suffering, the martyrdom of genius as such,
but also how it constantly passes into madness. Finally, the fact of the
direct connection of genius and madness is established by the biographies
of great men of genius, such as Rousseau, Byron, and Alfieri, and by
anecdotes from the lives of others. On the other hand, I must mention
that, by a diligent search in lunatic asylums, I have found individual
cases of patients who were unquestionably endowed with great talents, and
whose genius distinctly appeared through their madness, which, however,
had completely gained the upper hand. Now this cannot be ascribed to
chance, for on the one hand the number of mad persons is relatively very
small, and on the other hand a person of genius is a phenomenon which is
rare beyond all ordinary estimation, and only appears in nature as the
greatest exception. It will be sufficient to convince us of this if we
compare the number of really great men of genius that the whole of
civilised Europe has produced, both in ancient and modern times, with the
two hundred and fifty millions who are always living in Europe, and who
change entirely every thirty years. In estimating the number of men of
outstanding genius, we must of course only count those who have produced
works which have retained through all time an enduring value for mankind.
I shall not refrain from mentioning, that I have known some persons of
decided, though not remarkable, mental superiority, who also showed a
slight trace of insanity. It might seem from this that every advance of
intellect beyond the ordinary measure, as an abnormal development,
disposes to madness. In the meantime, however, I will explain as briefly
as possible my view of the purely intellectual ground of the relation
between genius and madness, for this will certainly assist the explanation
of the real nature of genius, that is to say, of that mental endowment
which alone can produce genuine works of art. But this necessitates a
brief explanation of madness itself.(50)

A clear and complete insight into the nature of madness, a correct and
distinct conception of what constitutes the difference between the sane
and the insane, has, as far as I know, not as yet been found. Neither
reason nor understanding can be denied to madmen, for they talk and
understand, and often draw very accurate conclusions; they also, as a
rule, perceive what is present quite correctly, and apprehend the
connection between cause and effect. Visions, like the phantasies of
delirium, are no ordinary symptom of madness: delirium falsifies
perception, madness the thoughts. For the most part, madmen do not err in
the knowledge of what is immediately _present_; their raving always
relates to what is _absent_ and _past_, and only through these to their
connection with what is present. Therefore it seems to me that their
malady specially concerns the memory; not indeed that memory fails them
entirely, for many of them know a great deal by heart, and sometimes
recognise persons whom they have not seen for a long time; but rather that
the thread of memory is broken, the continuity of its connection
destroyed, and no uniformly connected recollection of the past is
possible. Particular scenes of the past are known correctly, just like the
particular present; but there are gaps in their recollection which they
fill up with fictions, and these are either always the same, in which case
they become fixed ideas, and the madness that results is called monomania
or melancholy; or they are always different, momentary fancies, and then
it is called folly, _fatuitas_. This is why it is so difficult to find out
their former life from lunatics when they enter an asylum. The true and
the false are always mixed up in their memory. Although the immediate
present is correctly known, it becomes falsified through its fictitious
connection with an imaginary past; they therefore regard themselves and
others as identical with persons who exist only in their imaginary past;
they do not recognise some of their acquaintances at all, and thus while
they perceive correctly what is actually present, they have only false
conceptions of its relations to what is absent. If the madness reaches a
high degree, there is complete absence of memory, so that the madman is
quite incapable of any reference to what is absent or past, and is only
determined by the caprice of the moment in connection with the fictions
which, in his mind, fill the past. In such a case, we are never for a
moment safe from violence or murder, unless we constantly make the madman
aware of the presence of superior force. The knowledge of the madman has
this in common with that of the brute, both are confined to the present.
What distinguishes them is that the brute has really no idea of the past
as such, though the past acts upon it through the medium of custom, so
that, for example, the dog recognises its former master even after years,
that is to say, it receives the wonted impression at the sight of him; but
of the time that has passed since it saw him it has no recollection. The
madman, on the other hand, always carries about in his reason an abstract
past, but it is a false past, which exists only for him, and that either
constantly, or only for the moment. The influence of this false past
prevents the use of the true knowledge of the present which the brute is
able to make. The fact that violent mental suffering or unexpected and
terrible calamities should often produce madness, I explain in the
following manner. All such suffering is as an actual event confined to the
present. It is thus merely transitory, and is consequently never
excessively heavy; it only becomes unendurably great when it is lasting
pain; but as such it exists only in thought, and therefore lies in the
_memory_. If now such a sorrow, such painful knowledge or reflection, is
so bitter that it becomes altogether unbearable, and the individual is
prostrated under it, then, terrified Nature seizes upon _madness_ as the
last resource of life; the mind so fearfully tortured at once destroys the
thread of its memory, fills up the gaps with fictions, and thus seeks
refuge in madness from the mental suffering that exceeds its strength,
just as we cut off a mortified limb and replace it with a wooden one. The
distracted Ajax, King Lear, and Ophelia may be taken as examples; for the
creations of true genius, to which alone we can refer here, as universally
known, are equal in truth to real persons; besides, in this case, frequent
actual experience shows the same thing. A faint analogy of this kind of
transition from pain to madness is to be found in the way in which all of
us often seek, as it were mechanically, to drive away a painful thought
that suddenly occurs to us by some loud exclamation or quick movement—to
turn ourselves from it, to distract our minds by force.

We see, from what has been said, that the madman has a true knowledge of
what is actually present, and also of certain particulars of the past, but
that he mistakes the connection, the relations, and therefore falls into
error and talks nonsense. Now this is exactly the point at which he comes
into contact with the man of genius; for he also leaves out of sight the
knowledge of the connection of things, since he neglects that knowledge of
relations which conforms to the principle of sufficient reason, in order
to see in things only their Ideas, and to seek to comprehend their true
nature, which manifests itself to perception, and in regard to which _one
thing_ represents its whole species, in which way, as Goethe says, one
case is valid for a thousand. The particular object of his contemplation,
or the present which is perceived by him with extraordinary vividness,
appear in so strong a light that the other links of the chain to which
they belong are at once thrown into the shade, and this gives rise to
phenomena which have long been recognised as resembling those of madness.
That which in particular given things exists only incompletely and
weakened by modifications, is raised by the man of genius, through his way
of contemplating it, to the Idea of the thing, to completeness: he
therefore sees everywhere extremes, and therefore his own action tends to
extremes; he cannot hit the mean, he lacks soberness, and the result is
what we have said. He knows the Ideas completely but not the individuals.
Therefore it has been said that a poet may know mankind deeply and
thoroughly, and may yet have a very imperfect knowledge of men. He is
easily deceived, and is a tool in the hands of the crafty.

§ 37. Genius, then, consists, according to our explanation, in the
capacity for knowing, independently of the principle of sufficient reason,
not individual things, which have their existence only in their relations,
but the Ideas of such things, and of being oneself the correlative of the
Idea, and thus no longer an individual, but the pure subject of knowledge.
Yet this faculty must exist in all men in a smaller and different degree;
for if not, they would be just as incapable of enjoying works of art as of
producing them; they would have no susceptibility for the beautiful or the
sublime; indeed, these words could have no meaning for them. We must
therefore assume that there exists in all men this power of knowing the
Ideas in things, and consequently of transcending their personality for
the moment, unless indeed there are some men who are capable of no
æsthetic pleasure at all. The man of genius excels ordinary men only by
possessing this kind of knowledge in a far higher degree and more
continuously. Thus, while under its influence he retains the presence of
mind which is necessary to enable him to repeat in a voluntary and
intentional work what he has learned in this manner; and this repetition
is the work of art. Through this he communicates to others the Idea he has
grasped. This Idea remains unchanged and the same, so that æsthetic
pleasure is one and the same whether it is called forth by a work of art
or directly by the contemplation of nature and life. The work of art is
only a means of facilitating the knowledge in which this pleasure
consists. That the Idea comes to us more easily from the work of art than
directly from nature and the real world, arises from the fact that the
artist, who knew only the Idea, no longer the actual, has reproduced in
his work the pure Idea, has abstracted it from the actual, omitting all
disturbing accidents. The artist lets us see the world through his eyes.
That he has these eyes, that he knows the inner nature of things apart
from all their relations, is the gift of genius, is inborn; but that he is
able to lend us this gift, to let us see with his eyes, is acquired, and
is the technical side of art. Therefore, after the account which I have
given in the preceding pages of the inner nature of æsthetical knowledge
in its most general outlines, the following more exact philosophical
treatment of the beautiful and the sublime will explain them both, in
nature and in art, without separating them further. First of all we shall
consider what takes place in a man when he is affected by the beautiful
and the sublime; whether he derives this emotion directly from nature,
from life, or partakes of it only through the medium of art, does not make
any essential, but merely an external, difference.

§ 38. In the æsthetical mode of contemplation we have found _two
inseparable constituent parts_—the knowledge of the object, not as
individual thing but as Platonic Idea, that is, as the enduring form of
this whole species of things; and the self-consciousness of the knowing
person, not as individual, but as _pure will-less subject of knowledge_.
The condition under which both these constituent parts appear always
united was found to be the abandonment of the method of knowing which is
bound to the principle of sufficient reason, and which, on the other hand,
is the only kind of knowledge that is of value for the service of the will
and also for science. Moreover, we shall see that the pleasure which is
produced by the contemplation of the beautiful arises from these two
constituent parts, sometimes more from the one, sometimes more from the
other, according to what the object of the æsthetical contemplation may
be.

All _willing_ arises from want, therefore from deficiency, and therefore
from suffering. The satisfaction of a wish ends it; yet for one wish that
is satisfied there remain at least ten which are denied. Further, the
desire lasts long, the demands are infinite; the satisfaction is short and
scantily measured out. But even the final satisfaction is itself only
apparent; every satisfied wish at once makes room for a new one; both are
illusions; the one is known to be so, the other not yet. No attained
object of desire can give lasting satisfaction, but merely a fleeting
gratification; it is like the alms thrown to the beggar, that keeps him
alive to-day that his misery may be prolonged till the morrow. Therefore,
so long as our consciousness is filled by our will, so long as we are
given up to the throng of desires with their constant hopes and fears, so
long as we are the subject of willing, we can never have lasting happiness
nor peace. It is essentially all the same whether we pursue or flee, fear
injury or seek enjoyment; the care for the constant demands of the will,
in whatever form it may be, continually occupies and sways the
consciousness; but without peace no true well-being is possible. The
subject of willing is thus constantly stretched on the revolving wheel of
Ixion, pours water into the sieve of the Danaids, is the ever-longing
Tantalus.

But when some external cause or inward disposition lifts us suddenly out
of the endless stream of willing, delivers knowledge from the slavery of
the will, the attention is no longer directed to the motives of willing,
but comprehends things free from their relation to the will, and thus
observes them without personal interest, without subjectivity, purely
objectively, gives itself entirely up to them so far as they are ideas,
but not in so far as they are motives. Then all at once the peace which we
were always seeking, but which always fled from us on the former path of
the desires, comes to us of its own accord, and it is well with us. It is
the painless state which Epicurus prized as the highest good and as the
state of the gods; for we are for the moment set free from the miserable
striving of the will; we keep the Sabbath of the penal servitude of
willing; the wheel of Ixion stands still.

But this is just the state which I described above as necessary for the
knowledge of the Idea, as pure contemplation, as sinking oneself in
perception, losing oneself in the object, forgetting all individuality,
surrendering that kind of knowledge which follows the principle of
sufficient reason, and comprehends only relations; the state by means of
which at once and inseparably the perceived particular thing is raised to
the Idea of its whole species, and the knowing individual to the pure
subject of will-less knowledge, and as such they are both taken out of the
stream of time and all other relations. It is then all one whether we see
the sun set from the prison or from the palace.

Inward disposition, the predominance of knowing over willing, can produce
this state under any circumstances. This is shown by those admirable Dutch
artists who directed this purely objective perception to the most
insignificant objects, and established a lasting monument of their
objectivity and spiritual peace in their pictures of _still life_, which
the æsthetic beholder does not look on without emotion; for they present
to him the peaceful, still, frame of mind of the artist, free from will,
which was needed to contemplate such insignificant things so objectively,
to observe them so attentively, and to repeat this perception so
intelligently; and as the picture enables the onlooker to participate in
this state, his emotion is often increased by the contrast between it and
the unquiet frame of mind, disturbed by vehement willing, in which he
finds himself. In the same spirit, landscape-painters, and particularly
Ruisdael, have often painted very insignificant country scenes, which
produce the same effect even more agreeably.

All this is accomplished by the inner power of an artistic nature alone;
but that purely objective disposition is facilitated and assisted from
without by suitable objects, by the abundance of natural beauty which
invites contemplation, and even presses itself upon us. Whenever it
discloses itself suddenly to our view, it almost always succeeds in
delivering us, though it may be only for a moment, from subjectivity, from
the slavery of the will, and in raising us to the state of pure knowing.
This is why the man who is tormented by passion, or want, or care, is so
suddenly revived, cheered, and restored by a single free glance into
nature: the storm of passion, the pressure of desire and fear, and all the
miseries of willing are then at once, and in a marvellous manner, calmed
and appeased. For at the moment at which, freed from the will, we give
ourselves up to pure will-less knowing, we pass into a world from which
everything is absent that influenced our will and moved us so violently
through it. This freeing of knowledge lifts us as wholly and entirely away
from all that, as do sleep and dreams; happiness and unhappiness have
disappeared; we are no longer individual; the individual is forgotten; we
are only pure subject of knowledge; we are only that _one_ eye of the
world which looks out from all knowing creatures, but which can become
perfectly free from the service of will in man alone. Thus all difference
of individuality so entirely disappears, that it is all the same whether
the perceiving eye belongs to a mighty king or to a wretched beggar; for
neither joy nor complaining can pass that boundary with us. So near us
always lies a sphere in which we escape from all our misery; but who has
the strength to continue long in it? As soon as any single relation to our
will, to our person, even of these objects of our pure contemplation,
comes again into consciousness, the magic is at an end; we fall back into
the knowledge which is governed by the principle of sufficient reason; we
know no longer the Idea, but the particular thing, the link of a chain to
which we also belong, and we are again abandoned to all our woe. Most men
remain almost always at this standpoint because they entirely lack
objectivity, _i.e._, genius. Therefore they have no pleasure in being
alone with nature; they need company, or at least a book. For their
knowledge remains subject to their will; they seek, therefore, in objects,
only some relation to their will, and whenever they see anything that has
no such relation, there sounds within them, like a ground bass in music,
the constant inconsolable cry, “It is of no use to me;” thus in solitude
the most beautiful surroundings have for them a desolate, dark, strange,
and hostile appearance.

Lastly, it is this blessedness of will-less perception which casts an
enchanting glamour over the past and distant, and presents them to us in
so fair a light by means of self-deception. For as we think of days long
gone by, days in which we lived in a distant place, it is only the objects
which our fancy recalls, not the subject of will, which bore about with it
then its incurable sorrows just as it bears them now; but they are
forgotten, because since then they have often given place to others. Now,
objective perception acts with regard to what is remembered just as it
would in what is present, if we let it have influence over us, if we
surrendered ourselves to it free from will. Hence it arises that,
especially when we are more than ordinarily disturbed by some want, the
remembrance of past and distant scenes suddenly flits across our minds
like a lost paradise. The fancy recalls only what was objective, not what
was individually subjective, and we imagine that that objective stood
before us then just as pure and undisturbed by any relation to the will as
its image stands in our fancy now; while in reality the relation of the
objects to our will gave us pain then just as it does now. We can deliver
ourselves from all suffering just as well through present objects as
through distant ones whenever we raise ourselves to a purely objective
contemplation of them, and so are able to bring about the illusion that
only the objects are present and not we ourselves. Then, as the pure
subject of knowledge, freed from the miserable self, we become entirely
one with these objects, and, for the moment, our wants are as foreign to
us as they are to them. The world as idea alone remains, and the world as
will has disappeared.

In all these reflections it has been my object to bring out clearly the
nature and the scope of the subjective element in æsthetic pleasure; the
deliverance of knowledge from the service of the will, the forgetting of
self as an individual, and the raising of the consciousness to the pure
will-less, timeless, subject of knowledge, independent of all relations.
With this subjective side of æsthetic contemplation, there must always
appear as its necessary correlative the objective side, the intuitive
comprehension of the Platonic Idea. But before we turn to the closer
consideration of this, and to the achievements of art in relation to it,
it is better that we should pause for a little at the subjective side of
æsthetic pleasure, in order to complete our treatment of this by
explaining the impression of the _sublime_ which depends altogether upon
it, and arises from a modification of it. After that we shall complete our
investigation of æsthetic pleasure by considering its objective side.

But we must first add the following remarks to what has been said. Light
is the pleasantest and most gladdening of things; it has become the symbol
of all that is good and salutary. In all religions it symbolises
salvation, while darkness symbolises damnation. Ormuzd dwells in the
purest light, Ahrimines in eternal night. Dante’s Paradise would look very
much like Vauxhall in London, for all the blessed spirits appear as points
of light and arrange themselves in regular figures. The very absence of
light makes us sad; its return cheers us. Colours excite directly a keen
delight, which reaches its highest degree when they are transparent. All
this depends entirely upon the fact that light is the correlative and
condition of the most perfect kind of knowledge of perception, the only
knowledge which does not in any way affect the will. For sight, unlike the
affections of the other senses, cannot, in itself, directly and through
its sensuous effect, make the _sensation_ of the special organ agreeable
or disagreeable; that is, it has no immediate connection with the will.
Such a quality can only belong to the perception which arises in the
understanding, and then it lies in the relation of the object to the will.
In the case of hearing this is to some extent otherwise; sounds can give
pain directly, and they may also be sensuously agreeable, directly and
without regard to harmony or melody. Touch, as one with the feeling of the
whole body, is still more subordinated to this direct influence upon the
will; and yet there is such a thing as a sensation of touch which is
neither painful nor pleasant. But smells are always either agreeable or
disagreeable, and tastes still more so. Thus the last two senses are most
closely related to the will, and therefore they are always the most
ignoble, and have been called by Kant the subjective senses. The pleasure
which we experience from light is in fact only the pleasure which arises
from the objective possibility of the purest and fullest perceptive
knowledge, and as such it may be traced to the fact that pure knowledge,
freed and delivered from all will, is in the highest degree pleasant, and
of itself constitutes a large part of æsthetic enjoyment. Again, we must
refer to this view of light the incredible beauty which we associate with
the reflection of objects in water. That lightest, quickest, finest
species of the action of bodies upon each other, that to which we owe by
far the completest and purest of our perceptions, the action of reflected
rays of light, is here brought clearly before our eyes, distinct and
perfect, in cause and in effect, and indeed in its entirety, hence the
æsthetic delight it gives us, which, in the most important aspect, is
entirely based on the subjective ground of æsthetic pleasure, and is
delight in pure knowing and its method.

§ 39. All these reflections are intended to bring out the subjective part
of æsthetic pleasure; that is to say, that pleasure so far as it consists
simply of delight in perceptive knowledge as such, in opposition to will.
And as directly connected with this, there naturally follows the
explanation of that disposition or frame of mind which has been called the
sense of the _sublime_.

We have already remarked above that the transition to the state of pure
perception takes place most easily when the objects bend themselves to it,
that is, when by their manifold and yet definite and distinct form they
easily become representatives of their Ideas, in which beauty, in the
objective sense, consists. This quality belongs pre-eminently to natural
beauty, which thus affords even to the most insensible at least a fleeting
æsthetic satisfaction: indeed it is so remarkable how especially the
vegetable world invites æsthetic observation, and, as it were, presses
itself upon it, that one might say, that these advances are connected with
the fact that these organisms, unlike the bodies of animals, are not
themselves immediate objects of knowledge, and therefore require the
assistance of a foreign intelligent individual in order to rise out of the
world of blind will and enter the world of idea, and that thus they long,
as it were, for this entrance, that they may attain at least indirectly
what is denied them directly. But I leave this suggestion which I have
hazarded, and which borders perhaps upon extravagance, entirely undecided,
for only a very intimate and devoted consideration of nature can raise or
justify it.(51) As long as that which raises us from the knowledge of mere
relations subject to the will, to æsthetic contemplation, and thereby
exalts us to the position of the subject of knowledge free from will, is
this fittingness of nature, this significance and distinctness of its
forms, on account of which the Ideas individualised in them readily
present themselves to us; so long is it merely _beauty_ that affects us
and the sense of the _beautiful_ that is excited. But if these very
objects whose significant forms invite us to pure contemplation, have a
hostile relation to the human will in general, as it exhibits itself in
its objectivity, the human body, if they are opposed to it, so that it is
menaced by the irresistible predominance of their power, or sinks into
insignificance before their immeasurable greatness; if, nevertheless, the
beholder does not direct his attention to this eminently hostile relation
to his will, but, although perceiving and recognising it, turns
consciously away from it, forcibly detaches himself from his will and its
relations, and, giving himself up entirely to knowledge, quietly
contemplates those very objects that are so terrible to the will,
comprehends only their Idea, which is foreign to all relation, so that he
lingers gladly over its contemplation, and is thereby raised above
himself, his person, his will, and all will:—in that case he is filled
with the sense of the _sublime_, he is in the state of spiritual
exaltation, and therefore the object producing such a state is called
_sublime_. Thus what distinguishes the sense of the sublime from that of
the beautiful is this: in the case of the beautiful, pure knowledge has
gained the upper hand without a struggle, for the beauty of the object,
_i.e._, that property which facilitates the knowledge of its Idea, has
removed from consciousness without resistance, and therefore
imperceptibly, the will and the knowledge of relations which is subject to
it, so that what is left is the pure subject of knowledge without even a
remembrance of will. On the other hand, in the case of the sublime that
state of pure knowledge is only attained by a conscious and forcible
breaking away from the relations of the same object to the will, which are
recognised as unfavourable, by a free and conscious transcending of the
will and the knowledge related to it.

This exaltation must not only be consciously won, but also consciously
retained, and it is therefore accompanied by a constant remembrance of
will; yet not of a single particular volition, such as fear or desire, but
of human volition in general, so far as it is universally expressed in its
objectivity the human body. If a single real act of will were to come into
consciousness, through actual personal pressure and danger from the
object, then the individual will thus actually influenced would at once
gain the upper hand, the peace of contemplation would become impossible,
the impression of the sublime would be lost, because it yields to the
anxiety, in which the effort of the individual to right itself has sunk
every other thought. A few examples will help very much to elucidate this
theory of the æsthetic sublime and remove all doubt with regard to it; at
the same time they will bring out the different degrees of this sense of
the sublime. It is in the main identical with that of the beautiful, with
pure will-less knowing, and the knowledge, that necessarily accompanies it
of Ideas out of all relation determined by the principle of sufficient
reason, and it is distinguished from the sense of the beautiful only by
the additional quality that it rises above the known hostile relation of
the object contemplated to the will in general. Thus there come to be
various degrees of the sublime, and transitions from the beautiful to the
sublime, according as this additional quality is strong, bold, urgent,
near, or weak, distant, and merely indicated. I think it is more in
keeping with the plan of my treatise, first to give examples of these
transitions, and of the weaker degrees of the impression of the sublime,
although persons whose æsthetical susceptibility in general is not very
great, and whose imagination is not very lively, will only understand the
examples given later of the higher and more distinct grades of that
impression; and they should therefore confine themselves to these, and
pass over the examples of the very weak degrees of the sublime that are to
be given first.

As man is at once impetuous and blind striving of will (whose pole or
focus lies in the genital organs), and eternal, free, serene subject of
pure knowing (whose pole is the brain); so, corresponding to this
antithesis, the sun is both the source of _light_, the condition of the
most perfect kind of knowledge, and therefore of the most delightful of
things—and the source of _warmth_, the first condition of life, _i.e._, of
all phenomena of will in its higher grades. Therefore, what warmth is for
the will, light is for knowledge. Light is the largest gem in the crown of
beauty, and has the most marked influence on the knowledge of every
beautiful object. Its presence is an indispensable condition of beauty;
its favourable disposition increases the beauty of the most beautiful.
Architectural beauty more than any other object is enhanced by favourable
light, though even the most insignificant things become through its
influence most beautiful. If, in the dead of winter, when all nature is
frozen and stiff, we see the rays of the setting sun reflected by masses
of stone, illuminating without warming, and thus favourable only to the
purest kind of knowledge, not to the will; the contemplation of the
beautiful effect of the light upon these masses lifts us, as does all
beauty, into a state of pure knowing. But, in this case, a certain
transcending of the interests of the will is needed to enable us to rise
into the state of pure knowing, because there is a faint recollection of
the lack of warmth from these rays, that is, an absence of the principle
of life; there is a slight challenge to persist in pure knowing, and to
refrain from all willing, and therefore it is an example of a transition
from the sense of the beautiful to that of the sublime. It is the faintest
trace of the sublime in the beautiful; and beauty itself is indeed present
only in a slight degree. The following is almost as weak an example.

Let us imagine ourselves transported to a very lonely place, with unbroken
horizon, under a cloudless sky, trees and plants in the perfectly
motionless air, no animals, no men, no running water, the deepest silence.
Such surroundings are, as it were, a call to seriousness and
contemplation, apart from all will and its cravings; but this is just what
imparts to such a scene of desolate stillness a touch of the sublime. For,
because it affords no object, either favourable or unfavourable, for the
will which is constantly in need of striving and attaining, there only
remains the state of pure contemplation, and whoever is incapable of this,
is ignominiously abandoned to the vacancy of unoccupied will, and the
misery of ennui. So far it is a test of our intellectual worth, of which,
generally speaking, the degree of our power of enduring solitude, or our
love of it, is a good criterion. The scene we have sketched affords us,
then, an example of the sublime in a low degree, for in it, with the state
of pure knowing in its peace and all-sufficiency, there is mingled, by way
of contrast, the recollection of the dependence and poverty of the will
which stands in need of constant action. This is the species of the
sublime for which the sight of the boundless prairies of the interior of
North America is celebrated.

But let us suppose such a scene, stripped also of vegetation, and showing
only naked rocks; then from the entire absence of that organic life which
is necessary for existence, the will at once becomes uneasy, the desert
assumes a terrible aspect, our mood becomes more tragic; the elevation to
the sphere of pure knowing takes place with a more decided tearing of
ourselves away from the interests of the will; and because we persist in
continuing in the state of pure knowing, the sense of the sublime
distinctly appears.

The following situation may occasion this feeling in a still higher
degree: Nature convulsed by a storm; the sky darkened by black threatening
thunder-clouds; stupendous, naked, overhanging cliffs, completely shutting
out the view; rushing, foaming torrents; absolute desert; the wail of the
wind sweeping through the clefts of the rocks. Our dependence, our strife
with hostile nature, our will broken in the conflict, now appears visibly
before our eyes. Yet, so long as the personal pressure does not gain the
upper hand, but we continue in æsthetic contemplation, the pure subject of
knowing gazes unshaken and unconcerned through that strife of nature,
through that picture of the broken will, and quietly comprehends the Ideas
even of those objects which are threatening and terrible to the will. In
this contrast lies the sense of the sublime.

But the impression becomes still stronger, if, when we have before our
eyes, on a large scale, the battle of the raging elements, in such a scene
we are prevented from hearing the sound of our own voice by the noise of a
falling stream; or, if we are abroad in the storm of tempestuous seas,
where the mountainous waves rise and fall, dash themselves furiously
against steep cliffs, and toss their spray high into the air; the storm
howls, the sea boils, the lightning flashes from black clouds, and the
peals of thunder drown the voice of storm and sea. Then, in the undismayed
beholder, the two-fold nature of his consciousness reaches the highest
degree of distinctness. He perceives himself, on the one hand, as an
individual, as the frail phenomenon of will, which the slightest touch of
these forces can utterly destroy, helpless against powerful nature,
dependent, the victim of chance, a vanishing nothing in the presence of
stupendous might; and, on the other hand, as the eternal, peaceful,
knowing subject, the condition of the object, and, therefore, the
supporter of this whole world; the terrific strife of nature only his
idea; the subject itself free and apart from all desires and necessities,
in the quiet comprehension of the Ideas. This is the complete impression
of the sublime. Here he obtains a glimpse of a power beyond all comparison
superior to the individual, threatening it with annihilation.

The impression of the sublime may be produced in quite another way, by
presenting a mere immensity in space and time; its immeasurable greatness
dwindles the individual to nothing. Adhering to Kant’s nomenclature and
his accurate division, we may call the first kind the dynamical, and the
second the mathematical sublime, although we entirely dissent from his
explanation of the inner nature of the impression, and can allow no share
in it either to moral reflections, or to hypostases from scholastic
philosophy.

If we lose ourselves in the contemplation of the infinite greatness of the
universe in space and time, meditate on the thousands of years that are
past or to come, or if the heavens at night actually bring before our eyes
innumerable worlds and so force upon our consciousness the immensity of
the universe, we feel ourselves dwindle to nothing; as individuals, as
living bodies, as transient phenomena of will, we feel ourselves pass away
and vanish into nothing like drops in the ocean. But at once there rises
against this ghost of our own nothingness, against such lying
impossibility, the immediate consciousness that all these worlds exist
only as our idea, only as modifications of the eternal subject of pure
knowing, which we find ourselves to be as soon as we forget our
individuality, and which is the necessary supporter of all worlds and all
times the condition of their possibility. The vastness of the world which
disquieted us before, rests now in us; our dependence upon it is annulled
by its dependence upon us. All this, however, does not come at once into
reflection, but shows itself merely as the felt consciousness that in some
sense or other (which philosophy alone can explain) we are one with the
world, and therefore not oppressed, but exalted by its immensity. It is
the felt consciousness of this that the Upanishads of the Vedas repeatedly
express in such a multitude of different ways; very admirably in the
saying already quoted: _Hæ omnes creaturæ in totum ego sum, et præter me
aliud ens non est_ (Oupnek’hat, vol. i. p. 122.) It is the transcending of
our own individuality, the sense of the sublime.

We receive this impression of the mathematical-sublime, quite directly, by
means of a space which is small indeed as compared with the world, but
which has become directly perceptible to us, and affects us with its whole
extent in all its three dimensions, so as to make our own body seem almost
infinitely small. An empty space can never be thus perceived, and
therefore never an open space, but only space that is directly perceptible
in all its dimensions by means of the limits which enclose it; thus for
example a very high, vast dome, like that of St. Peter’s at Rome, or St.
Paul’s in London. The sense of the sublime here arises through the
consciousness of the vanishing nothingness of our own body in the presence
of a vastness which, from another point of view, itself exists only in our
idea, and of which we are as knowing subject, the supporter. Thus here as
everywhere it arises from the contrast between the insignificance and
dependence of ourselves as individuals, as phenomena of will, and the
consciousness of ourselves as pure subject of knowing. Even the vault of
the starry heaven produces this if it is contemplated without reflection;
but just in the same way as the vault of stone, and only by its apparent,
not its real extent. Some objects of our perception excite in us the
feeling of the sublime because, not only on account of their spatial
vastness, but also of their great age, that is, their temporal duration,
we feel ourselves dwarfed to insignificance in their presence, and yet
revel in the pleasure of contemplating them: of this kind are very high
mountains, the Egyptian pyramids, and colossal ruins of great antiquity.

Our explanation of the sublime applies also to the ethical, to what is
called the sublime character. Such a character arises from this, that the
will is not excited by objects which are well calculated to excite it, but
that knowledge retains the upper hand in their presence. A man of sublime
character will accordingly consider men in a purely objective way, and not
with reference to the relations which they might have to his will; he
will, for example, observe their faults, even their hatred and injustice
to himself, without being himself excited to hatred; he will behold their
happiness without envy; he will recognise their good qualities without
desiring any closer relations with them; he will perceive the beauty of
women, but he will not desire them. His personal happiness or unhappiness
will not greatly affect him, he will rather be as Hamlet describes
Horatio:—


            “... for thou hast been,
    As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing;
    A man that fortune’s buffets and rewards
    Hast ta’en with equal thanks,” &c. (A. 3. Sc. 2.)


For in the course of his own life and its misfortunes, he will consider
less his individual lot than that of humanity in general, and will
therefore conduct himself in its regard, rather as knowing than as
suffering.

§ 40. Opposites throw light upon each other, and therefore the remark may
be in place here, that the proper opposite of the sublime is something
which would not at the first glance be recognised, as such: _the charming_
or _attractive_. By this, however, I understand, that which excites the
will by presenting to it directly its fulfilment, its satisfaction. We saw
that the feeling of the sublime arises from the fact, that something
entirely unfavourable to the will, becomes the object of pure
contemplation, so that such contemplation can only be maintained by
persistently turning away from the will, and transcending its interests;
this constitutes the sublimity of the character. The charming or
attractive, on the contrary, draws the beholder away from the pure
contemplation which is demanded by all apprehension of the beautiful,
because it necessarily excites this will, by objects which directly appeal
to it, and thus he no longer remains pure subject of knowing, but becomes
the needy and dependent subject of will. That every beautiful thing which
is bright or cheering should be called charming, is the result of a too
general concept, which arises from a want of accurate discrimination, and
which I must entirely set aside, and indeed condemn. But in the sense of
the word which has been given and explained, I find only two species of
the charming or attractive in the province of art, and both of them are
unworthy of it. The one species, a very low one, is found in Dutch
paintings of still life, when they err by representing articles of food,
which by their deceptive likeness necessarily excite the appetite for the
things they represent, and this is just an excitement of the will, which
puts an end to all æsthetic contemplation of the object. Painted fruit is
yet admissible, because we may regard it as the further development of the
flower, and as a beautiful product of nature in form and colour, without
being obliged to think of it as eatable; but unfortunately we often find,
represented with deceptive naturalness, prepared and served dishes,
oysters, herrings, crabs, bread and butter, beer, wine, and so forth,
which is altogether to be condemned. In historical painting and in
sculpture the charming consists in naked figures, whose position, drapery,
and general treatment are calculated to excite the passions of the
beholder, and thus pure æsthetical contemplation is at once annihilated,
and the aim of art is defeated. This mistake corresponds exactly to that
which we have just censured in the Dutch paintings. The ancients are
almost always free from this fault in their representations of beauty and
complete nakedness of form, because the artist himself created them in a
purely objective spirit, filled with ideal beauty, not in the spirit of
subjective, and base sensuality. The charming is thus everywhere to be
avoided in art.

There is also a negative species of the charming or exciting which is even
more reprehensible than the positive form which has been discussed; this
is the disgusting or the loathsome. It arouses the will of the beholder,
just as what is properly speaking charming, and therefore disturbs pure
æsthetic contemplation. But it is an active aversion and opposition which
is excited by it; it arouses the will by presenting to it objects which it
abhors. Therefore it has always been recognised that it is altogether
inadmissible in art, where even what is ugly, when it is not disgusting,
is allowable in its proper place, as we shall see later.

§ 41. The course of the discussion has made it necessary to insert at this
point the treatment of the sublime, though we have only half done with the
beautiful, as we have considered its subjective side only. For it was
merely a special modification of this subjective side that distinguished
the beautiful from the sublime. This difference was found to depend upon
whether the state of pure will-less knowing, which is presupposed and
demanded by all æsthetic contemplation, was reached without opposition, by
the mere disappearance of the will from consciousness, because the object
invited and drew us towards it; or whether it was only attained through
the free, conscious transcending of the will, to which the object
contemplated had an unfavourable and even hostile relation, which would
destroy contemplation altogether, if we were to give ourselves up to it.
This is the distinction between the beautiful and the sublime. In the
object they are not essentially different, for in every case the object of
æsthetical contemplation is not the individual thing, but the Idea in it
which is striving to reveal itself; that is to say, adequate objectivity
of will at a particular grade. Its necessary correlative, independent,
like itself of the principle of sufficient reason, is the pure subject of
knowing; just as the correlative of the particular thing is the knowing
individual, both of which lie within the province of the principle of
sufficient reason.

When we say that a thing is _beautiful_, we thereby assert that it is an
object of our æsthetic contemplation, and this has a double meaning; on
the one hand it means that the sight of the thing makes us _objective_,
that is to say, that in contemplating it we are no longer conscious of
ourselves as individuals, but as pure will-less subjects of knowledge; and
on the other hand it means that we recognise in the object, not the
particular thing, but an Idea; and this can only happen, so far as our
contemplation of it is not subordinated to the principle of sufficient
reason, does not follow the relation of the object to anything outside it
(which is always ultimately connected with relations to our own will), but
rests in the object itself. For the Idea and the pure subject of knowledge
always appear at once in consciousness as necessary correlatives, and on
their appearance all distinction of time vanishes, for they are both
entirely foreign to the principle of sufficient reason in all its forms,
and lie outside the relations which are imposed by it; they may be
compared to the rainbow and the sun, which have no part in the constant
movement and succession of the falling drops. Therefore, if, for example,
I contemplate a tree æsthetically, _i.e._, with artistic eyes, and thus
recognise, not it, but its Idea, it becomes at once of no consequence
whether it is this tree or its predecessor which flourished a thousand
years ago, and whether the observer is this individual or any other that
lived anywhere and at any time; the particular thing and the knowing
individual are abolished with the principle of sufficient reason, and
there remains nothing but the Idea and the pure subject of knowing, which
together constitute the adequate objectivity of will at this grade. And
the Idea dispenses not only with time, but also with space, for the Idea
proper is not this special form which appears before me but its
expression, its pure significance, its inner being, which discloses itself
to me and appeals to me, and which may be quite the same though the
spatial relations of its form be very different.

Since, on the one hand, every given thing may be observed in a. purely
objective manner and apart from all relations; and since, on the other
hand, the will manifests itself in everything at some grade of its
objectivity, so that everything is the expression of an Idea; it follows
that everything is also _beautiful_. That even the most insignificant
things admit of pure objective and will-less contemplation, and thus prove
that they are beautiful, is shown by what was said above in this reference
about the Dutch pictures of still-life (§ 38). But one thing is more
beautiful than another, because it makes this pure objective contemplation
easier, it lends itself to it, and, so to speak, even compels it, and then
we call it very beautiful. This is the case sometimes because, as an
individual thing, it expresses in its purity the Idea of its species by
the very distinct, clearly defined, and significant relation of its parts,
and also fully reveals that Idea through the completeness of all the
possible expressions of its species united in it, so that it makes the
transition from the individual thing to the Idea, and therefore also the
condition of pure contemplation, very easy for the beholder. Sometimes
this possession of special beauty in an object lies in the fact that the
Idea itself which appeals to us in it is a high grade of the objectivity
of will, and therefore very significant and expressive. Therefore it is
that man is more beautiful than all other objects, and the revelation of
his nature is the highest aim of art. Human form and expression are the
most important objects of plastic art, and human action the most important
object of poetry. Yet each thing has its own peculiar beauty, not only
every organism which expresses itself in the unity of an individual being,
but also everything unorganised and formless, and even every manufactured
article. For all these reveal the Ideas through which the will objectifies
itself at its lowest grades, they give, as it were, the deepest resounding
bass-notes of nature. Gravity, rigidity, fluidity, light, and so forth,
are the Ideas which express themselves in rocks, in buildings, in waters.
Landscape-gardening or architecture can do no more than assist them to
unfold their qualities distinctly, fully, and variously; they can only
give them the opportunity of expressing themselves purely, so that they
lend themselves to æsthetic contemplation and make it easier. Inferior
buildings or ill-favoured localities, on the contrary, which nature has
neglected or art has spoiled, perform this task in a very slight degree or
not at all; yet even from them these universal, fundamental Ideas of
nature cannot altogether disappear. To the careful observer they present
themselves here also, and even bad buildings and the like are capable of
being æsthetically considered; the Ideas of the most universal properties
of their materials are still recognisable in them, only the artificial
form which has been given them does not assist but hinders æsthetic
contemplation. Manufactured articles also serve to express Ideas, only it
is not the Idea of the manufactured article which speaks in them, but the
Idea of the material to which this artificial form has been given. This
may be very conveniently expressed in two words, in the language of the
schoolmen, thus,—the manufactured article expresses the Idea of its _forma
substantialis_, but not that of its _forma accidentalis_; the latter leads
to no Idea, but only to a human conception of which it is the result. It
is needless to say that by manufactured article no work of plastic art is
meant. The schoolmen understand, in fact, by _forma substantialis_ that
which I call the grade of the objectification of will in a thing. We shall
return immediately, when we treat of architecture, to the Idea of the
material. Our view, then, cannot be reconciled with that of Plato if he is
of opinion that a table or a chair express the Idea of a table or a chair
(De Rep., x., pp. 284, 285, et Parmen., p. 79, ed. Bip.), but we say that
they express the Ideas which are already expressed in their mere material
as such. According to Aristotle (Metap. xi., chap. 3), however, Plato
himself only maintained Ideas of natural objects: ὁ Πλατων εφη, ὁτι ειδη
εστιν ὁποσα φυσει (_Plato dixit, quod ideæ eorum sunt, quæ natura sunt_),
and in chap. 5 he says that, according to the Platonists, there are no
Ideas of house and ring. In any case, Plato’s earliest disciples, as
Alcinous informs us (_Introductio __ in Platonicam Philosophiam_, chap.
9), denied that there were any ideas of manufactured articles. He says:
Ὁριζονται δε την ιδεαν, παραδειγμα των κατα φυσιν αιωνιον. Ουτε γαρ τοις
πλειστοις των απο Πλατωνος αρεσκει, των τεχνικων ειναι ιδεας, οἱον ασπιδος
η λυρας, ουτε μην των παρα φυσιν, οἱον πυρετου και χολερας, ουτε των κατα
μερος, οἱον Σωκρατους και Πλατωνος, αλλ᾽ ουτε των ευτελων τινος, οἱον
ρυπου και καρφους, ουτε των προς τι, οἱον μειζονος και ὑπερεχοντος; ειναι
γαρ τας ιδεας νοησεις θεου αιωνιους τε και αυτοτελεις (_Definiunt autem_
IDEAM _exemplar æternum eorum, quæ secundum naturam existunt. Nam plurimis
ex iis, qui Platonem secuti sunt, minime placuit, arte factorum ideas
esse, ut clypei atque lyræ; neque rursus eorum, quæ prætor naturam, ut
febris et choleræ, neque particularium, ceu Socratis et Platonis; neque
etiam rerum vilium, veluti sordium et festucæ; neque relationum, ut
majoris et excedentis: esse namque ideas intellectiones dei æternas, ac
seipsis perfectas_). We may take this opportunity of mentioning another
point in which our doctrine of Ideas differs very much from that of Plato.
He teaches (De Rep., x., p. 288) that the object which art tries to
express, the ideal of painting and poetry, is not the Idea but the
particular thing. Our whole exposition hitherto has maintained exactly the
opposite, and Plato’s opinion is the less likely to lead us astray,
inasmuch as it is the source of one of the greatest and best known errors
of this great man, his depreciation and rejection of art, and especially
poetry; he directly connects his false judgment in reference to this with
the passage quoted.

§ 42. I return to the exposition of the æsthetic impression. The knowledge
of the beautiful always supposes at once and inseparably the pure knowing
subject and the known Idea as object. Yet the source of æsthetic
satisfaction will sometimes lie more in the comprehension of the known
Idea, sometimes more in the blessedness and spiritual peace of the pure
knowing subject freed from all willing, and therefore from all
individuality, and the pain that proceeds from it. And, indeed, this
predominance of one or the other constituent part of æsthetic feeling will
depend upon whether the intuitively grasped Idea is a higher or a lower
grade of the objectivity of will. Thus in æsthetic contemplation (in the
real, or through the medium of art) of the beauty of nature in the
inorganic and vegetable worlds, or in works of architecture, the pleasure
of pure will-less knowing will predominate, because the Ideas which are
here apprehended are only low grades of the objectivity of will, and are
therefore not manifestations of deep significance and rich content. On the
other hand, if animals and man are the objects of æsthetic contemplation
or representation, the pleasure will consist rather in the comprehension
of these Ideas, which are the most distinct revelation of will; for they
exhibit the greatest multiplicity of forms, the greatest richness and deep
significance of phenomena, and reveal to us most completely the nature of
will, whether in its violence, its terribleness, its satisfaction or its
aberration (the latter in tragic situations), or finally in its change and
self-surrender, which is the peculiar theme of christian painting; as the
Idea of the will enlightened by full knowledge is the object of historical
painting in general, and of the drama. We shall now go through the fine
arts one by one, and this will give completeness and distinctness to the
theory of the beautiful which we have advanced.

§ 43. Matter as such cannot be the expression of an Idea. For, as we found
in the first book, it is throughout nothing but causality: its being
consists in its casual action. But causality is a form of the principle of
sufficient reason; knowledge of the Idea, on the other hand, absolutely
excludes the content of that principle. We also found, in the second book,
that matter is the common substratum of all particular phenomena of the
Ideas, and consequently is the connecting link between the Idea and the
phenomenon, or the particular thing. Accordingly for both of these reasons
it is impossible that matter can for itself express any Idea. This is
confirmed _a posteriori_ by the fact that it is impossible to have a
perceptible idea of matter as such, but only an abstract conception; in
the former, _i.e._, in perceptible ideas are exhibited only the forms and
qualities of which matter is the supporter, and in all of which Ideas
reveal themselves. This corresponds also with the fact, that causality
(the whole essence of matter) cannot for itself be presented perceptibly,
but is merely a definite casual connection. On the other hand, _every
phenomenon_ of an Idea, because as such it has entered the form of the
principle of sufficient reason, or the _principium individuationis_, must
exhibit itself in matter, as one of its qualities. So far then matter is,
as we have said, the connecting link between the Idea and the _principium
individuationis_, which is the form of knowledge of the individual, or the
principle of sufficient reason. Plato is therefore perfectly right in his
enumeration, for after the Idea and the phenomenon, which include all
other things in the world, he gives matter only, as a third thing which is
different from both (Timaus, p. 345). The individual, as a phenomenon of
the Idea, is always matter. Every quality of matter is also the phenomenon
of an Idea, and as such it may always be an object of æsthetic
contemplation, _i.e._, the Idea expressed in it may always be recognised.
This holds good of even the most universal qualities of matter, without
which it never appears, and which are the weakest objectivity of will.
Such are gravity, cohesion, rigidity, fluidity, sensitiveness to light,
and so forth.

If now we consider _architecture_ simply as a fine art and apart from its
application to useful ends, in which it serves the will and not pure
knowledge, and therefore ceases to be art in our sense; we can assign to
it no other aim than that of bringing to greater distinctness some of
those ideas, which are the lowest grades of the objectivity of will; such
as gravity, cohesion, rigidity, hardness, those universal qualities of
stone, those first, simplest, most inarticulate manifestations of will;
the bass notes of nature; and after these light, which in many respects is
their opposite. Even at these low grades of the objectivity of will we see
its nature revealing itself in discord; for properly speaking the conflict
between gravity and rigidity is the sole æsthetic material of
architecture; its problem is to make this conflict appear with perfect
distinctness in a multitude of different ways. It solves it by depriving
these indestructible forces of the shortest way to their satisfaction, and
conducting them to it by a circuitous route, so that the conflict is
lengthened and the inexhaustible efforts of both forces become visible in
many different ways. The whole mass of the building, if left to its
original tendency, would exhibit a mere heap or clump, bound as closely as
possible to the earth, to which gravity, the form in which the will
appears here, continually presses, while rigidity, also objectivity of
will, resists. But this very tendency, this effort, is hindered by
architecture from obtaining direct satisfaction, and only allowed to reach
it indirectly and by roundabout ways. The roof, for example, can only
press the earth through columns, the arch must support itself, and can
only satisfy its tendency towards the earth through the medium of the
pillars, and so forth. But just by these enforced digressions, just by
these restrictions, the forces which reside in the crude mass of stone
unfold themselves in the most distinct and multifarious ways; and the
purely æsthetic aim of architecture can go no further than this. Therefore
the beauty, at any rate, of a building lies in the obvious adaptation of
every part, not to the outward arbitrary end of man (so far the work
belongs to practical architecture), but directly to the stability of the
whole, to which the position, dimensions, and form of every part must have
so necessary a relation that, where it is possible, if any one part were
taken away, the whole would fall to pieces. For just because each part
bears just as much as it conveniently can, and each is supported just
where it requires to be and just to the necessary extent, this opposition
unfolds itself, this conflict between rigidity and gravity, which
constitutes the life, the manifestation of will, in the stone, becomes
completely visible, and these lowest grades of the objectivity of will
reveal themselves distinctly. In the same way the form of each part must
not be determined arbitrarily, but by its end, and its relation to the
whole. The column is the simplest form of support, determined simply by
its end: the twisted column is tasteless; the four-cornered pillar is in
fact not so simple as the round column, though it happens that it is
easier to make it. The forms also of frieze, rafter, roof, and dome are
entirely determined by their immediate end, and explain themselves from
it. The decoration of capitals, &c., belongs to sculpture, not to
architecture, which admits it merely as extraneous ornament, and could
dispense with it. According to what has been said, it is absolutely
necessary, in order to understand the æsthetic satisfaction afforded by a
work of architecture, to have immediate knowledge through perception of
its matter as regards its weight, rigidity, and cohesion, and our pleasure
in such a work would suddenly be very much diminished by the discovery
that the material used was pumice-stone; for then it would appear to us as
a kind of sham building. We would be affected in almost the same way if we
were told that it was made of wood, when we had supposed it to be of
stone, just because this alters and destroys the relation between rigidity
and gravity, and consequently the significance and necessity of all the
parts, for these natural forces reveal themselves in a far weaker degree
in a wooden building. Therefore no real work of architecture as a fine art
can be made of wood, although it assumes all forms so easily; this can
only be explained by our theory. If we were distinctly told that a
building, the sight of which gave us pleasure, was made of different kinds
of material of very unequal weight and consistency, but not
distinguishable to the eye, the whole building would become as utterly
incapable of affording us pleasure as a poem in an unknown language. All
this proves that architecture does not affect us mathematically, but also
dynamically, and that what speaks to us through it, is not mere form and
symmetry, but rather those fundamental forces of nature, those first
Ideas, those lowest grades of the objectivity of will. The regularity of
the building and its parts is partly produced by the direct adaptation of
each member to the stability of the whole, partly it serves to facilitate
the survey and comprehension of the whole, and finally, regular figures to
some extent enhance the beauty because they reveal the constitution of
space as such. But all this is of subordinate value and necessity, and by
no means the chief concern; indeed, symmetry is not invariably demanded,
as ruins are still beautiful.

Works of architecture have further quite a special relation to light; they
gain a double beauty in the full sunshine, with the blue sky as a
background, and again they have quite a different effect by moonlight.
Therefore, when a beautiful work of architecture is to be erected, special
attention is always paid to the effects of the light and to the climate.
The reason of all this is, indeed, principally that all the parts and
their relations are only made clearly visible by a bright, strong light;
but besides this I am of opinion that it is the function of architecture
to reveal the nature of light just as it reveals that of things so
opposite to it as gravity and rigidity. For the light is intercepted,
confined, and reflected by the great opaque, sharply outlined, and
variously formed masses of stone, and thus it unfolds its nature and
qualities in the purest and clearest way, to the great pleasure of the
beholders, for light is the most joy-giving of things, as the condition
and the objective correlative of the most perfect kind of knowledge of
perception.

Now, because the Ideas which architecture brings to clear perception, are
the lowest grades of the objectivity of will, and consequently their
objective significance, which architecture reveals to us, is comparatively
small; the æsthetic pleasure of looking at a beautiful building in a good
light will lie, not so much in the comprehension of the Idea, as in the
subjective correlative which accompanies this comprehension; it will
consist pre-eminently in the fact that the beholder, set free from the
kind of knowledge that belongs to the individual, and which serves the
will and follows the principle of sufficient reason, is raised to that of
the pure subject of knowing free from will. It will consist then
principally in pure contemplation itself, free from all the suffering of
will and of individuality. In this respect the opposite of architecture,
and the other extreme of the series of the fine arts, is the drama, which
brings to knowledge the most significant Ideas. Therefore in the æsthetic
pleasure afforded by the drama the objective side is throughout
predominant.

Architecture has this distinction from plastic art and poetry: it does not
give us a copy but the thing itself. It does not repeat, as they do, the
known Idea, so that the artist lends his eyes to the beholder, but in it
the artist merely presents the object to the beholder, and facilitates for
him the comprehension of the Idea by bringing the actual, individual
object to a distinct and complete expression of its nature.

Unlike the works of the other arts, those of architecture are very seldom
executed for purely æsthetic ends. These are generally subordinated to
other useful ends which are foreign to art itself. Thus the great merit of
the architect consists in achieving and attaining the pure æsthetic ends,
in spite of their subordination to other ends which are foreign to them.
This he does by cleverly adapting them in a variety of ways to the
arbitrary ends in view, and by rightly judging which form of æsthetical
architectonic beauty is compatible and may be associated with a temple,
which with a palace, which with a prison, and so forth. The more a harsh
climate increases these demands of necessity and utility, determines them
definitely, and prescribes them more inevitably, the less free play has
beauty in architecture. In the mild climate of India, Egypt, Greece, and
Rome, where the demands of necessity were fewer and less definite,
architecture could follow its æsthetic ends with the greatest freedom. But
under a northern sky this was sorely hindered. Here, when caissons,
pointed roofs and towers were what was demanded, architecture could only
unfold its own beauty within very narrow limits, and therefore it was
obliged to make amends by resorting all the more to the borrowed ornaments
of sculpture, as is seen in Gothic architecture.

We thus see that architecture is greatly restricted by the demands of
necessity and utility; but on the other hand it has in them a very
powerful support, for, on account of the magnitude and costliness of its
works, and the narrow sphere of its æsthetic effect, it could not continue
to exist merely as a fine art, if it had not also, as a useful and
necessary profession, a firm and honourable place among the occupations of
men. It is the want of this that prevents another art from taking its
place beside architecture as a sister art, although in an æsthetical point
of view it is quite properly to be classed along with it as its
counterpart; I mean artistic arrangements of water. For what architecture
accomplishes for the Idea of gravity when it appears in connection with
that of rigidity, hydraulics accomplishes for the same Idea, when it is
connected with fluidity, _i.e._, formlessness, the greatest mobility and
transparency. Leaping waterfalls foaming and tumbling over rocks,
cataracts dispersed into floating spray, springs gushing up as high
columns of water, and clear reflecting lakes, reveal the Ideas of fluid
and heavy matter, in precisely the same way as the works of architecture
unfold the Ideas of rigid matter. Artistic hydraulics, however, obtains no
support from practical hydraulics, for, as a rule, their ends cannot be
combined; yet, in exceptional cases, this happens; for example, in the
Cascata di Trevi at Rome.(52)

§ 44. What the two arts we have spoken of accomplish for these lowest
grades of the objectivity of will, is performed for the higher grades of
vegetable nature by artistic horticulture. The landscape beauty of a scene
consists, for the most part, in the multiplicity of natural objects which
are present in it, and then in the fact that they are clearly separated,
appear distinctly, and yet exhibit a fitting connection and alternation.
These two conditions are assisted and promoted by landscape-gardening, but
it has by no means such a mastery over its material as architecture, and
therefore its effect is limited. The beauty with which it is concerned
belongs almost exclusively to nature; it has done little for it; and, on
the other hand, it can do little against unfavourable nature, and when
nature works, not for it, but against it, its achievements are small.

The vegetable world offers itself everywhere for æsthetic enjoyment
without the medium of art; but so far as it is an object of art, it
belongs principally to landscape-painting; to the province of which all
the rest of unconscious nature also belongs. In paintings of still life,
and of mere architecture, ruins, interiors of churches, &c., the
subjective side of æsthetic pleasure is predominant, _i.e._, our
satisfaction does not lie principally in the direct comprehension of the
represented Ideas, but rather in the subjective correlative of this
comprehension, pure, will-less knowing. For, because the painter lets us
see these things through his eyes, we at once receive a sympathetic and
reflected sense of the deep spiritual peace and absolute silence of the
will, which were necessary in order to enter with knowledge so entirely
into these lifeless objects, and comprehend them with such love, _i.e._,
in this case with such a degree of objectivity. The effect of
landscape-painting proper is indeed, as a whole, of this kind; but because
the Ideas expressed are more distinct and significant, as higher grades of
the objectivity of will, the objective side of æsthetic pleasure already
comes more to the front and assumes as much importance as the subjective
side. Pure knowing as such is no longer the paramount consideration, for
we are equally affected by the known Platonic Idea, the world as idea at
an important grade of the objectification of will.

But a far higher grade is revealed by animal painting and sculpture. Of
the latter we have some important antique remains; for example, horses at
Venice, on Monte Cavallo, and on the Elgin Marbles, also at Florence in
bronze and marble; the ancient boar, howling wolves, the lions in the
arsenal at Venice, also in the Vatican a whole room almost filled with
ancient animals, &c. In these representations the objective side of
æsthetic pleasure obtains a marked predominance over the subjective. The
peace of the subject which knows these Ideas, which has silenced its own
will, is indeed present, as it is in all æsthetic contemplation; but its
effect is not felt, for we are occupied with the restlessness and
impetuosity of the will represented. It is that very will, which
constitutes our own nature, that here appears to us in forms, in which its
manifestation is not, as in us, controlled and tempered by intellect, but
exhibits itself in stronger traits, and with a distinctness that borders
on the grotesque and monstrous. For this very reason there is no
concealment; it is free, naïve, open as the day, and this is the cause of
our interest in animals. The characteristics of species appeared already
in the representation of plants, but showed itself only in the forms; here
it becomes much more distinct, and expresses itself not only in the form,
but in the action, position, and mien, yet always merely as the character
of the species, not of the individual. This knowledge of the Ideas of
higher grades, which in painting we receive through extraneous means, we
may gain directly by the pure contemplative perception of plants, and
observation of beasts, and indeed of the latter in their free, natural,
and unrestrained state. The objective contemplation of their manifold and
marvellous forms, and of their actions and behaviour, is an instructive
lesson from the great book of nature, it is a deciphering of the true
_signatura rerum_.(53) We see in them the manifold grades and modes of the
manifestation of will, which in all beings of one and the same grade,
wills always in the same way, which objectifies itself as life, as
existence in such endless variety, and such different forms, which are all
adaptations to the different external circumstances, and may be compared
to many variations on the same theme. But if we had to communicate to the
observer, for reflection, and in a word, the explanation of their inner
nature, it would be best to make use of that Sanscrit formula which occurs
so often in the sacred books of the Hindoos, and is called Mahavakya,
i.e., the great word: “_Tat twam asi_,” which means, “this living thing
art thou.”

§ 45. The great problem of historical painting and sculpture is to express
directly and for perception the Idea in which the will reaches the highest
grade of its objectification. The objective side of the pleasure afforded
by the beautiful is here always predominant, and the subjective side has
retired into the background. It is further to be observed that at the next
grade below this, animal painting, the characteristic is entirely one with
the beautiful; the most characteristic lion, wolf, horse, sheep, or ox,
was always the most beautiful also. The reason of this is that animals
have only the character of their species, no individual character. In the
representation of men the character of the species is separated from that
of the individual; the former is now called beauty (entirely in the
objective sense), but the latter retains the name, character, or
expression, and the new difficulty arises of representing both, at once
and completely, in the same individual.

_Human beauty_ is an objective expression, which means the fullest
objectification of will at the highest grade at which it is knowable, the
Idea of man in general, completely expressed in the sensible form. But
however much the objective side of the beautiful appears here, the
subjective side still always accompanies it. And just because no object
transports us so quickly into pure æsthetic contemplation, as the most
beautiful human countenance and form, at the sight of which we are
instantly filled with unspeakable satisfaction, and raised above ourselves
and all that troubles us; this is only possible because this most distinct
and purest knowledge of will raises us most easily and quickly to the
state of pure knowing, in which our personality, our will with its
constant pain, disappears, so long as the pure æsthetic pleasure lasts.
Therefore it is that Goethe says: “No evil can touch him who looks on
human beauty; he feels himself at one with himself and with the world.”
That a beautiful human form is produced by nature must be explained in
this way. At this its highest grade the will objectifies itself in an
individual; and therefore through circumstances and its own power it
completely overcomes all the hindrances and opposition which the phenomena
of the lower grades present to it. Such are the forces of nature, from
which the will must always first extort and win back the matter that
belongs to all its manifestations. Further, the phenomenon of will at its
higher grades always has multiplicity in its form. Even the tree is only a
systematic aggregate of innumerably repeated sprouting fibres. This
combination assumes greater complexity in higher forms, and the human body
is an exceedingly complex system of different parts, each of which has a
peculiar life of its own, _vita propria_, subordinate to the whole. Now
that all these parts are in the proper fashion subordinate to the whole,
and co-ordinate to each other, that they all work together harmoniously
for the expression of the whole, nothing superfluous, nothing restricted;
all these are the rare conditions, whose result is beauty, the completely
expressed character of the species. So is it in nature. But how in art?
One would suppose that art achieved the beautiful by imitating nature. But
how is the artist to recognise the perfect work which is to be imitated,
and distinguish it from the failures, if he does not anticipate the
beautiful _before experience_? And besides this, has nature ever produced
a human being perfectly beautiful in all his parts? It has accordingly
been thought that the artist must seek out the beautiful parts,
distributed among a number of different human beings, and out of them
construct a beautiful whole; a perverse and foolish opinion. For it will
be asked, how is he to know that just these forms and not others are
beautiful? We also see what kind of success attended the efforts of the
old German painters to achieve the beautiful by imitating nature. Observe
their naked figures. No knowledge of the beautiful is possible purely _a
posteriori_, and from mere experience; it is always, at least in part, _a
priori_, although quite different in kind, from the forms of the principle
of sufficient reason, of which we are conscious _a priori_. These concern
the universal form of phenomena as such, as it constitutes the possibility
of knowledge in general, the universal _how_ of all phenomena, and from
this knowledge proceed mathematics and pure natural science. But this
other kind of knowledge _a priori_, which makes it possible to express the
beautiful, concerns, not the form but the content of phenomena, not the
_how_ but the _what_ of the phenomenon. That we all recognise human beauty
when we see it, but that in the true artist this takes place with such
clearness that he shows it as he has never seen it, and surpasses nature
in his representation; this is only possible because _we ourselves are_
the will whose adequate objectification at its highest grade is here to be
judged and discovered. Thus alone have we in fact an anticipation of that
which nature (which is just the will that constitutes our own being)
strives to express. And in the true genius this anticipation is
accompanied by so great a degree of intelligence that he recognises the
Idea in the particular thing, and thus, as it were, _understands the
half-uttered speech of nature_, and articulates clearly what she only
stammered forth. He expresses in the hard marble that beauty of form which
in a thousand attempts she failed to produce, he presents it to nature,
saying, as it were, to her, “That is what you wanted to say!” And whoever
is able to judge replies, “Yes, that is it.” Only in this way was it
possible for the genius of the Greeks to find the type of human beauty and
establish it as a canon for the school of sculpture; and only by virtue of
such an anticipation is it possible for all of us to recognise beauty,
when it has actually been achieved by nature in the particular case. This
anticipation is the _Ideal_. It is the _Idea_ so far as it is known _a
priori_, at least half, and it becomes practical for art, because it
corresponds to and completes what is given _a posteriori_ through nature.
The possibility of such an anticipation of the beautiful _a priori_ in the
artist, and of its recognition _a posteriori_ by the critic, lies in the
fact that the artist and the critic are themselves the “in-itself” of
nature, the will which objectifies itself. For, as Empedocles said, like
can only be known by like: only nature can understand itself: only nature
can fathom itself: but only spirit also can understand spirit.(54)

The opinion, which is absurd, although expressed by the Socrates of
Xenophon (Stobæi Floril, vol. ii. p. 384) that the Greeks discovered the
established ideal of human beauty empirically, by collecting particular
beautiful parts, uncovering and noting here a knee, there an arm, has an
exact parallel in the art of poetry. The view is entertained, that
Shakespeare, for example, observed, and then gave forth from his own
experience of life, the innumerable variety of the characters in his
dramas, so true, so sustained, so profoundly worked out. The impossibility
and absurdity of such an assumption need not be dwelt upon. It is obvious
that the man of genius produces the works of poetic art by means of an
anticipation of what is characteristic, just as he produces the works of
plastic and pictorial art by means of a prophetic anticipation of the
beautiful; yet both require experience as a pattern or model, for thus
alone can that which is dimly known _a priori_ be called into clear
consciousness, and an intelligent representation of it becomes possible.

Human beauty was explained above as the fullest objectification of will at
the highest grade at which it is knowable. It expresses itself through the
form; and this lies in space alone, and has no necessary connection with
time, as, for example, motion has. Thus far then we may say: the adequate
objectification of will through a merely spatial phenomenon is beauty, in
the objective sense. A plant is nothing but such a merely spatial
phenomenon of will; for no motion, and consequently no relation to time
(regarded apart from its development), belongs to the expression of its
nature; its mere form expresses its whole being and displays it openly.
But brutes and men require, further, for the full revelation of the will
which is manifested in them, a series of actions, and thus the
manifestation in them takes on a direct relation to time. All this has
already been explained in the preceding book; it is related to what we are
considering at present in the following way. As the merely spatial
manifestation of will can objectify it fully or defectively at each
definite grade,—and it is this which constitutes beauty or ugliness,—so
the temporal objectification of will, _i.e._, the action, and indeed the
direct action, the movement, may correspond to the will, which objectifies
itself in it, purely and fully without foreign admixture, without
superfluity, without defect, only expressing exactly the act of will
determined in each case;—or the converse of all this may occur. In the
first case the movement is made with _grace_, in the second case without
it. Thus as beauty is the adequate representation of will generally,
through its merely spatial manifestation; _grace_ is the adequate
representation of will through its temporal manifestation, that is to say,
the perfectly accurate and fitting expression of each act of will, through
the movement and position which objectify it. Since movement and position
presuppose the body, Winckelmann’s expression is very true and suitable,
when he says, “Grace is the proper relation of the acting person to the
action” (Works, vol. i. p. 258). It is thus evident that beauty may be
attributed to a plant, but no grace, unless in a figurative sense; but to
brutes and men, both beauty and grace. Grace consists, according to what
has been said, in every movement being performed, and every position
assumed, in the easiest, most appropriate and convenient way, and
therefore being the pure, adequate expression of its intention, or of the
act of will, without any superfluity, which exhibits itself as aimless,
meaningless bustle, or as wooden stiffness. Grace presupposes as its
condition a true proportion of all the limbs, and a symmetrical,
harmonious figure; for complete ease and evident appropriateness of all
positions and movements are only possible by means of these. Grace is
therefore never without a certain degree of beauty of person. The two,
complete and united, are the most distinct manifestation of will at the
highest grade of its objectification.

It was mentioned above that in order rightly to portray man, it is
necessary to separate the character of the species from that of the
individual, so that to a certain extent every man expresses an Idea
peculiar to himself, as was said in the last book. Therefore the arts
whose aim is the representation of the Idea of man, have as their problem,
not only beauty, the character of the species, but also the character of
the individual, which is called, _par excellence_, _character_. But this
is only the case in so far as this character is to be regarded, not as
something accidental and quite peculiar to the man as a single individual,
but as a side of the Idea of humanity which is specially apparent in this
individual, and the representation of which is therefore of assistance in
revealing this Idea. Thus the character, although as such it is
individual, must yet be Ideal, that is, its significance in relation to
the Idea of humanity generally (the objectifying of which it assists in
its own way) must be comprehended and expressed with special prominence.
Apart from this the representation is a portrait, a copy of the individual
as such, with all his accidental qualities. And even the portrait ought to
be, as Winckelmann says, the ideal of the individual.

That _character_ which is to be ideally comprehended, as the prominence of
a special side of the Idea of humanity, expresses itself visibly, partly
through permanent physiognomy and bodily form, partly through passing
emotion and passion, the reciprocal modification of knowing and willing by
each other, which is all exhibited in the mien and movements. Since the
individual always belongs to humanity, and, on the other hand, humanity
always reveals itself in the individual with what is indeed peculiar ideal
significance, beauty must not be destroyed by character nor character by
beauty. For if the character of the species is annulled by that of the
individual, the result is caricature; and if the character of the
individual is annulled by that of the species, the result is an absence of
meaning. Therefore the representation which aims at beauty, as sculpture
principally does, will yet always modify this (the character of the
species), in some respect, by the individual character, and will always
express the Idea of man in a definite individual manner, giving prominence
to a special side of it. For the human individual as such has to a certain
extent the dignity of a special Idea, and it is essential to the Idea of
man that it should express itself in individuals of special significance.
Therefore we find in the works of the ancients, that the beauty distinctly
comprehended by them, is not expressed in one form, but in many forms of
different character. It is always apprehended, as it were, from a
different side, and expressed in one way in Apollo, in another way in
Bacchus, in another in Hercules, in another in Antinous; indeed the
characteristic may limit the beautiful, and finally extend even to
hideousness, in the drunken Silenus, in the Faun, &c. If the
characteristic goes so far as actually to annul the character of the
species, if it extends to the unnatural, it becomes caricature. But we can
far less afford to allow grace to be interfered with by what is
characteristic than even beauty, for graceful position and movement are
demanded for the expression of the character also; but yet it must be
achieved in the way which is most fitting, appropriate, and easy for the
person. This will be observed, not only by the sculptor and the painter,
but also by every good actor; otherwise caricature will appear here also
as grimace or distortion.

In sculpture, beauty and grace are the principal concern. The special
character of the mind, appearing in emotion, passion, alternations of
knowing and willing, which can only be represented by the expression of
the countenance and the gestures, is the peculiar sphere of _painting_.
For although eyes and colour, which lie outside the province of sculpture,
contribute much to beauty, they are yet far more essential to character.
Further, beauty unfolds itself more completely when it is contemplated
from various points of view; but the expression, the character, can only
be completely comprehended from _one_ point of view.

Because beauty is obviously the chief aim of sculpture, Lessing tried to
explain the fact that the _Laocoon does not cry out_, by saying that
crying out is incompatible with beauty. The Laocoon formed for Lessing the
theme, or at least the text of a work of his own, and both before and
after him a great deal has been written on the subject. I may therefore be
allowed to express my views about it in passing, although so special a
discussion does not properly belong to the scheme of this work, which is
throughout concerned with what is general.

§ 46. That Laocoon, in the celebrated group, does not cry out is obvious,
and the universal and ever-renewed surprise at this must be occasioned by
the fact that any of us would cry out if we were in his place. And nature
demands that it should be so; for in the case of the acutest physical
pain, and the sudden seizure by the greatest bodily fear, all reflection,
that might have inculcated silent endurance, is entirely expelled from
consciousness, and nature relieves itself by crying out, thus expressing
both the pain and the fear, summoning the deliverer and terrifying the
assailer. Thus Winckelmann missed the expression of crying out; but as he
wished to justify the artist he turned Laocoon into a Stoic, who
considered it beneath his dignity to cry out _secundum naturam_, but added
to his pain the useless constraint of suppressing all utterance of it.
Winckelmann therefore sees in him “the tried spirit of a great man, who
writhes in agony, and yet seeks to suppress the utterance of his feeling,
and to lock it up in himself. He does not break forth into loud cries, as
in Virgil, but only anxious sighs escape him,” &c. (Works, vol. vii. p.
98, and at greater length in vol. vi. p. 104). Now Lessing criticised this
opinion of Winckelmann’s in his Laocoon, and improved it in the way
mentioned above. In place of the psychological he gave the purely æsthetic
reason that beauty, the principle of ancient art, does not admit of the
expression of crying out. Another argument which he added to this, that a
merely passing state incapable of duration ought not to be represented in
motionless works of art, has a hundred examples of most excellent figures
against it, which are fixed in merely transitory movements, dancing,
wrestling, catching, &c. Indeed Goethe, in the essay on the Laocoon, which
opens the Propylaen (p. 8), holds that the choice of such a merely
fleeting movement is absolutely necessary. In our own day Hirt (Horen,
1797, tenth St.) finally decided the point, deducing everything from the
highest truth of expression, that Laocoon does not cry out, because he can
no longer do so, as he is at the point of death from choking. Lastly,
Fernow (“Römische Studien,” vol. i. p. 246) expounded and weighed all
these opinions; he added, however, no new one of his own, but combined
these three eclectically.

I cannot but wonder that such thoughtful and acute men should laboriously
bring far-fetched and insufficient reasons, should resort to psychological
and physiological arguments, to explain a matter the reason of which lies
so near at hand, and is obvious at once to the unprejudiced; and
especially I wonder that Lessing, who came so near the true explanation,
should yet have entirely missed the real point.

Before all psychological and physiological inquiries as to whether Laocoon
would cry out in his position or not (and I certainly affirm that he
would), it must be decided as regards the group in question, that crying
out ought not to be expressed in it, for the simple reason that its
expression lies quite outside the province of sculpture. A shrieking
Laocoon could not be produced in marble, but only a figure with the mouth
open vainly endeavouring to shriek; a Laocoon whose voice has stuck in his
throat, _vox faucibus haesit_. The essence of shrieking, and consequently
its effect upon the onlooker, lies entirely in sound; not in the
distortion of the mouth. This phenomenon, which necessarily accompanies
shrieking, derives motive and justification only from the sound produced
by means of it; then it is permissible and indeed necessary, as
characteristic of the action, even though it interferes with beauty. But
in plastic art, to which the representation of shrieking is quite foreign
and impossible, it would be actual folly to represent the medium of
violent shrieking, the distorted mouth, which would disturb all the
features and the remainder of the expression; for thus at the sacrifice of
many other things the means would be represented, while its end, the
shrieking itself, and its effect upon our feelings, would be left out. Nay
more, there would be produced the spectacle of a continuous effort without
effect, which is always ridiculous, and may really be compared to what
happened when some one for a joke stopped the horn of a night watchman
with wax while he was asleep, and then awoke him with the cry of fire, and
amused himself by watching his vain endeavours to blow the horn. When, on
the other hand, the expression of shrieking lies in the province of poetic
or histrionic art, it is quite admissible, because it helps to express the
truth, _i.e._, the complete expression of the Idea. Thus it is with
poetry, which claims the assistance of the imagination of the reader, in
order to enable it to represent things perceptibly. Therefore Virgil makes
Laocoon cry out like the bellowing of an ox that has broken loose after
being struck by the axe; and Homer (Il. xx. 48-53) makes Mars and Minerva
shriek horribly, without derogating from their divine dignity or beauty.
The same with acting; Laocoon on the stage would certainly have to shriek.
Sophocles makes Philoctetus cry out, and, on the ancient stage at any
rate, he must actually have done so. As a case in point, I remember having
seen in London the great actor Kemble play in a piece called Pizarro,
translated from the German. He took the part of the American, a
half-savage, but of very noble character. When he was wounded he cried out
loudly and wildly, which had a great and admirable effect, for it was
exceedingly characteristic and therefore assisted the truth of the
representation very much. On the other hand, a painted or sculptured model
of a man shrieking, would be much more absurd than the painted music which
is censured in Goethe’s Propylaen. For shrieking does far more injury to
the expression and beauty of the whole than music, which at the most only
occupies the hands and arms, and is to be looked upon as an occupation
characteristic of the person; indeed thus far it may quite rightly be
painted, as long as it demands no violent movement of the body, or
distortion of the mouth: for example, St. Cecilia at the organ, Raphael’s
violin-player in the Sciarra Gallery at Rome, and others. Since then, on
account of the limits of the art, the pain of Laocoon must not be
expressed by shrieking, the artist was obliged to employ every other
expression of pain; this he has done in the most perfect manner, as is
ably described by Winckelmann (Works, vol. vi. p. 104), whose admirable
account thus retains its full value and truth, as soon as we abstract from
the stoical view which underlies it.(55)

§ 47. Because beauty accompanied with grace is the principal object of
sculpture, it loves nakedness, and allows clothing only so far as it does
not conceal the form. It makes use of drapery, not as a covering, but as a
means of exhibiting the form, a method of exposition that gives much
exercise to the understanding, for it can only arrive at a perception of
the cause, the form of the body, through the only directly given effect,
the drapery. Thus to a certain extent drapery is in sculpture what
fore-shortening is in painting. Both are suggestions, yet not symbolical,
but such that, if they are successful, they force the understanding
directly to perceive what is suggested, just as if it were actually given.

I may be allowed, in passing, to insert here a comparison that is very
pertinent to the arts we are discussing. It is this: as the beautiful
bodily form is seen to the greatest advantage when clothed in the lightest
way, or indeed without any clothing at all, and therefore a very handsome
man, if he had also taste and the courage to follow it, would go about
almost naked, clothed only after the manner of the ancients; so every one
who possesses a beautiful and rich mind will always express himself in the
most natural, direct, and simple way, concerned, if it be possible, to
communicate his thoughts to others, and thus relieve the loneliness that
he must feel in such a world as this. And conversely, poverty of mind,
confusion, and perversity of thought, will clothe itself in the most
far-fetched expressions and the obscurest forms of speech, in order to
wrap up in difficult and pompous phraseology small, trifling, insipid, or
commonplace thoughts; like a man who has lost the majesty of beauty, and
trying to make up for the deficiency by means of clothing, seeks to hide
the insignificance or ugliness of his person under barbaric finery,
tinsel, feathers, ruffles, cuffs, and mantles. Many an author, if
compelled to translate his pompous and obscure book into its little clear
content, would be as utterly spoilt as this man if he had to go naked.

§ 48. _Historical painting_ has for its principal object, besides beauty
and grace, character. By character we mean generally, the representation
of will at the highest grade of its objectification, when the individual,
as giving prominence to a particular side of the Idea of humanity, has
special significance, and shows this not merely by his form, but makes it
visible in his bearing and occupation, by action of every kind, and the
modifications of knowing and willing that occasion and accompany it. The
Idea of man must be exhibited in these circumstances, and therefore the
unfolding of its many-sidedness must be brought before our eyes by means
of representative individuals, and these individuals can only be made
visible in their significance through various scenes, events, and actions.
This is the endless problem of the historical painter, and he solves it by
placing before us scenes of life of every kind, of greater or less
significance. No individual and no action can be without significance; in
all and through all the Idea of man unfolds itself more and more.
Therefore no event of human life is excluded from the sphere of painting.
It is thus a great injustice to the excellent painters of the Dutch
school, to prize merely their technical skill, and to look down upon them
in other respects, because, for the most part, they represent objects of
common life, whereas it is assumed that only the events of the history of
the world, or the incidents of biblical story, have significance. We ought
first to bethink ourselves that the inward significance of an action is
quite different from its outward significance, and that these are often
separated from each other. The outward significance is the importance of
an action in relation to its result for and in the actual world; thus
according to the principle of sufficient reason. The inward significance
is the depth of the insight into the Idea of man which it reveals, in that
it brings to light sides of that Idea which rarely appear, by making
individuals who assert themselves distinctly and decidedly, disclose their
peculiar characteristics by means of appropriately arranged circumstances.
Only the inward significance concerns art; the outward belongs to history.
They are both completely independent of each other; they may appear
together, but may each appear alone. An action which is of the highest
significance for history may in inward significance be a very ordinary and
common one; and conversely, a scene of ordinary daily life may be of great
inward significance, if human individuals, and the inmost recesses of
human action and will, appear in it in a clear and distinct light.
Further, the outward and the inward significance of a scene may be equal
and yet very different. Thus, for example, it is all the same, as far as
inward significance is concerned, whether ministers discuss the fate of
countries and nations over a map, or boors wrangle in a beer-house over
cards and dice, just as it is all the same whether we play chess with
golden or wooden pieces. But apart from this, the scenes and events that
make up the life of so many millions of men, their actions, their sorrows,
their joys, are on that account important enough to be the object of art,
and by their rich variety they must afford material enough for unfolding
the many-sided Idea of man. Indeed the very transitoriness of the moment
which art has fixed in such a picture (now called _genre_-painting)
excites a slight and peculiar sensation; for to fix the fleeting,
ever-changing world in the enduring picture of a single event, which yet
represents the whole, is an achievement of the art of painting by which it
seems to bring time itself to a standstill, for it raises the individual
to the Idea of its species. Finally, the historical and outwardly
significant subjects of painting have often the disadvantage that just
what is significant in them cannot be presented to perception, but must be
arrived at by thought. In this respect the nominal significance of the
picture must be distinguished from its real significance. The former is
the outward significance, which, however, can only be reached as a
conception; the latter is that side of the Idea of man which is made
visible to the onlooker in the picture. For example, Moses found by the
Egyptian princess is the nominal significance of a painting; it represents
a moment of the greatest importance in history; the real significance, on
the other hand, that which is really given to the onlooker, is a foundling
child rescued from its floating cradle by a great lady, an incident which
may have happened more than once. The costume alone can here indicate the
particular historical case to the learned; but the costume is only of
importance to the nominal significance, and is a matter of indifference to
the real significance; for the latter knows only the human being as such,
not the arbitrary forms. Subjects taken from history have no advantage
over those which are taken from mere possibility, and which are therefore
to be called, not individual, but merely general. For what is peculiarly
significant in the former is not the individual, not the particular event
as such, but the universal in it, the side of the Idea of humanity which
expresses itself through it. But, on the other hand, definite historical
subjects are not on this account to be rejected, only the really artistic
view of such subjects, both in the painter and in the beholder, is never
directed to the individual particulars in them, which properly constitute
the historical, but to the universal which expresses itself in them, to
the Idea. And only those historical subjects are to be chosen the chief
point of which can actually be represented, and not merely arrived at by
thought, otherwise the nominal significance is too remote from the real;
what is merely thought in connection with the picture becomes of most
importance, and interferes with what is perceived. If even on the stage it
is not right that the chief incident of the plot should take place behind
the scenes (as in French tragedies), it is clearly a far greater fault in
a picture. Historical subjects are distinctly disadvantageous only when
they confine the painter to a field which has not been chosen for artistic
but for other reasons, and especially when this field is poor in
picturesque and significant objects—if, for example, it is the history of
a small, isolated, capricious, hierarchical (_i.e._, ruled by error),
obscure people, like the Jews, despised by the great contemporary nations
of the East and the West. Since the wandering of the tribes lies between
us and all ancient nations, as the change of the bed of the ocean lies
between the earth’s surface as it is to-day and as it was when those
organisations existed which we only know from fossil remains, it is to be
regarded generally as a great misfortune that the people whose culture was
to be the principal basis of our own were not the Indians or the Greeks,
or even the Romans, but these very Jews. But it was especially a great
misfortune for the Italian painters of genius in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries that, in the narrow sphere to which they were
arbitrarily driven for the choice of subjects, they were obliged to have
recourse to miserable beings of every kind. For the New Testament, as
regards its historical part, is almost more unsuitable for painting than
the Old, and the subsequent history of martyrs and doctors of the church
is a very unfortunate subject. Yet of the pictures, whose subject is the
history or mythology of Judaism and Christianity, we must carefully
distinguish those in which the peculiar, _i.e._, the ethical spirit of
Christianity is revealed for perception, by the representation of men who
are full of this spirit. These representations are in fact the highest and
most admirable achievements of the art of painting; and only the greatest
masters of this art succeeded in this, particularly Raphael and Correggio,
and especially in their earlier pictures. Pictures of this kind are not
properly to be classed as historical: for, as a rule, they represent no
event, no action; but are merely groups of saints, with the Saviour
himself, often still a child, with His mother, angels, &c. In their
countenances, and especially in the eyes, we see the expression, the
reflection, of the completest knowledge, that which is not directed to
particular things, but has fully grasped the Ideas, and thus the whole
nature of the world and life. And this knowledge in them, reacting upon
the will, does not, like other knowledge, convey _motives_ to it, but on
the contrary has become a _quieter_ of all will, from which proceeded the
complete resignation, which is the innermost spirit of Christianity, as of
the Indian philosophy; the surrender of all volition, conversion, the
suppression of will, and with it of the whole inner being of this world,
that is to say, salvation. Thus these masters of art, worthy of eternal
praise, expressed perceptibly in their works the highest wisdom. And this
is the summit of all art. It has followed the will in its adequate
objectivity, the Ideas, through all its grades, in which it is affected
and its nature unfolded in so many ways, first by causes, then by stimuli,
and finally by motives. And now art ends with the representation of the
free self-suppression of will, by means of the great peace which it gains
from the perfect knowledge of its own nature.(56)

§ 49. The truth which lies at the foundation of all that we have hitherto
said about art, is that the object of art, the representation of which is
the aim of the artist, and the knowledge of which must therefore precede
his work as its germ and source, is an Idea in Plato’s sense, and never
anything else; not the particular thing, the object of common
apprehension, and not the concept, the object of rational thought and of
science. Although the Idea and the concept have something in common,
because both represent as unity a multiplicity of real things; yet the
great difference between them has no doubt been made clear and evident
enough by what we have said about concepts in the first book, and about
Ideas in this book. I by no means wish to assert, however, that Plato
really distinctly comprehended this difference; indeed many of his
examples of Ideas, and his discussions of them, are applicable only to
concepts. Meanwhile we leave this question alone and go on our own way,
glad when we come upon traces of any great and noble mind, yet not
following his footsteps but our own aim. The _concept_ is abstract,
discursive, undetermined within its own sphere, only determined by its
limits, attainable and comprehensible by him who has only reason,
communicable by words without any other assistance, entirely exhausted by
its definition. The _Idea_ on the contrary, although defined as the
adequate representative of the concept, is always object of perception,
and although representing an infinite number of particular things, is yet
thoroughly determined. It is never known by the individual as such, but
only by him who has raised himself above all willing and all individuality
to the pure subject of knowing. Thus it is only attainable by the man of
genius, and by him who, for the most part through the assistance of the
works of genius, has reached an exalted frame of mind, by increasing his
power of pure knowing. It is therefore not absolutely but only
conditionally communicable, because the Idea, comprehended and repeated in
the work of art, appeals to every one only according to the measure of his
own intellectual worth. So that just the most excellent works of every
art, the noblest productions of genius, must always remain sealed books to
the dull majority of men, inaccessible to them, separated from them by a
wide gulf, just as the society of princes is inaccessible to the common
people. It is true that even the dullest of them accept on authority
recognisedly great works, lest otherwise they should argue their own
incompetence; but they wait in silence, always ready to express their
condemnation, as soon as they are allowed to hope that they may do so
without being left to stand alone; and then their long-restrained hatred
against all that is great and beautiful, and against the authors of it,
gladly relieves itself; for such things never appealed to them, and for
that very reason were humiliating to them. For as a rule a man must have
worth in himself in order to recognise it and believe in it willingly and
freely in others. On this rests the necessity of modesty in all merit, and
the disproportionately loud praise of this virtue, which alone of all its
sisters is always included in the eulogy of every one who ventures to
praise any distinguished man, in order to appease and quiet the wrath of
the unworthy. What then is modesty but hypocritical humility, by means of
which, in a world swelling with base envy, a man seeks to obtain pardon
for excellences and merits from those who have none? For whoever
attributes to himself no merits, because he actually has none, is not
modest but merely honest.

The _Idea_ is the unity that falls into multiplicity on account of the
temporal and spatial form of our intuitive apprehension; the _concept_, on
the contrary, is the unity reconstructed out of multiplicity by the
abstraction of our reason; the latter may be defined as _unitas post rem_,
the former as _unitas ante rem_. Finally, we may express the distinction
between the Idea and the concept, by a comparison, thus: the _concept_ is
like a dead receptacle, in which, whatever has been put, actually lies
side by side, but out of which no more can be taken (by analytical
judgment) than was put in (by synthetical reflection); the (Platonic)
_Idea_, on the other hand, develops, in him who has comprehended it, ideas
which are new as regards the concept of the same name; it resembles a
living organism, developing itself and possessed of the power of
reproduction, which brings forth what was not put into it.

It follows from all that has been said, that the concept, useful as it is
in life, and serviceable, necessary and productive as it is in science, is
yet always barren and unfruitful in art. The comprehended Idea, on the
contrary, is the true and only source of every work of art. In its
powerful originality it is only derived from life itself, from nature,
from the world, and that only by the true genius, or by him whose
momentary inspiration reaches the point of genius. Genuine and immortal
works of art spring only from such direct apprehension. Just because the
Idea is and remains object of perception, the artist is not conscious in
the abstract of the intention and aim of his work; not a concept, but an
Idea floats before his mind; therefore he can give no justification of
what he does. He works, as people say, from pure feeling, and
unconsciously, indeed instinctively. On the contrary, imitators,
mannerists, _imitatores, servum pecus_, start, in art, from the concept;
they observe what pleases and affects us in true works of art; understand
it clearly, fix it in a concept, and thus abstractly, and then imitate it,
openly or disguisedly, with dexterity and intentionally. They suck their
nourishment, like parasite plants, from the works of others, and like
polypi, they become the colour of their food. We might carry comparison
further, and say that they are like machines which mince fine and mingle
together whatever is put into them, but can never digest it, so that the
different constituent parts may always be found again if they are sought
out and separated from the mixture; the man of genius alone resembles the
organised, assimilating, transforming and reproducing body. For he is
indeed educated and cultured by his predecessors and their works; but he
is really fructified only by life and the world directly, through the
impression of what he perceives; therefore the highest culture never
interferes with his originality. All imitators, all mannerists, apprehend
in concepts the nature of representative works of art; but concepts can
never impart inner life to a work. The age, _i.e._, the dull multitude of
every time, knows only concepts, and sticks to them, and therefore
receives mannered works of art with ready and loud applause: but after a
few years these works become insipid, because the spirit of the age,
_i.e._, the prevailing concepts, in which alone they could take root, have
changed. Only true works of art, which are drawn directly from nature and
life, have eternal youth and enduring power, like nature and life
themselves. For they belong to no age, but to humanity, and as on that
account they are coldly received by their own age, to which they disdain
to link themselves closely, and because indirectly and negatively they
expose the existing errors, they are slowly and unwillingly recognised; on
the other hand, they cannot grow old, but appear to us ever fresh and new
down to the latest ages. Then they are no longer exposed to neglect and
ignorance, for they are crowned and sanctioned by the praise of the few
men capable of judging, who appear singly and rarely in the course of
ages,(57) and give in their votes, whose slowly growing number constitutes
the authority, which alone is the judgment-seat we mean when we appeal to
posterity. It is these successively appearing individuals, for the mass of
posterity will always be and remain just as perverse and dull as the mass
of contemporaries always was and always is. We read the complaints of
great men in every century about the customs of their age. They always
sound as if they referred to our own age, for the race is always the same.
At every time and in every art, mannerisms have taken the place of the
spirit, which was always the possession of a few individuals, but
mannerisms are just the old cast-off garments of the last manifestation of
the spirit that existed and was recognised. From all this it appears that,
as a rule, the praise of posterity can only be gained at the cost of the
praise of one’s contemporaries, and _vice versa_.(58)

§ 50. If the aim of all art is the communication of the comprehended Idea,
which through the mind of the artist appears in such a form that it is
purged and isolated from all that is foreign to it, and may now be grasped
by the man of weaker comprehension and no productive faculty; if further,
it is forbidden in art to start from the concept, we shall not be able to
consent to the intentional and avowed employment of a work of art for the
expression of a concept; this is the case in the _Allegory_. An allegory
is a work of art which means something different from what it represents.
But the object of perception, and consequently also the Idea, expresses
itself directly and completely, and does not require the medium of
something else which implies or indicates it. Thus, that which in this way
is indicated and represented by something entirely different, because it
cannot itself be made object of perception, is always a concept. Therefore
through the allegory a conception has always to be signified, and
consequently the mind of the beholder has to be drawn away from the
expressed perceptible idea to one which is entirely different, abstract
and not perceptible, and which lies quite outside the work of art. The
picture or statue is intended to accomplish here what is accomplished far
more fully by a book. Now, what we hold is the end of art, representation
of a perceivable, comprehensible Idea, is not here the end. No great
completeness in the work of art is demanded for what is aimed at here. It
is only necessary that we should see what the thing is meant to be, for,
as soon as this has been discovered, the end is reached, and the mind is
now led away to quite a different kind of idea to an abstract conception,
which is the end that was in view. Allegories in plastic and pictorial art
are, therefore, nothing but hieroglyphics; the artistic value which they
may have as perceptible representations, belongs to them not as
allegories, but otherwise. That the “Night” of Correggio, the “Genius of
Fame” of Hannibal Caracci, and the “Hours” of Poussin, are very beautiful
pictures, is to be separated altogether from the fact that they are
allegories. As allegories they do not accomplish more than a legend,
indeed rather less. We are here again reminded of the distinction drawn
above between the real and the nominal significance of a picture. The
nominal is here the allegorical as such, for example, the “Genius of
Fame.” The real is what is actually represented, in this case a beautiful
winged youth, surrounded by beautiful boys; this expresses an Idea. But
this real significance affects us only so long as we forget the nominal,
allegorical significance; if we think of the latter, we forsake the
perception, and the mind is occupied with an abstract conception; but the
transition from the Idea to the conception is always a fall. Indeed, that
nominal significance, that allegorical intention, often injures the real
significance, the perceptible truth. For example, the unnatural light in
the “Night” of Correggio, which, though beautifully executed, has yet a
merely allegorical motive, and is really impossible. If then an
allegorical picture has artistic value, it is quite separate from and
independent of what it accomplishes as allegory. Such a work of art serves
two ends at once, the expression of a conception and the expression of an
Idea. Only the latter can be an end of art; the other is a foreign end,
the trifling amusement of making a picture also do service as a legend, as
a hieroglyphic, invented for the pleasure of those to whom the true nature
of art can never appeal. It is the same thing as when a work of art is
also a useful implement of some kind, in which case it also serves two
ends; for example, a statue which is at the same time a candelabrum or a
caryatide; or a bas-relief, which is also the shield of Achilles. True
lovers of art will allow neither the one nor the other. It is true that an
allegorical picture may, because of this quality, produce a vivid
impression upon the feelings; but when this is the case, a legend would
under the same circumstances produce the same effect. For example, if the
desire of fame were firmly and lastingly rooted in the heart of a man,
because he regarded it as his rightful possession, which is only withheld
from him so long as he has not produced the charter of his ownership; and
if the Genius of Fame, with his laurel crown, were to appear to such a
man, his whole mind would be excited, and his powers called into activity;
but the same effect would be produced if he were suddenly to see the word
“fame,” in large distinct letters on the wall. Or if a man has made known
a truth, which is of importance either as a maxim for practical life, or
as insight for science, but it has not been believed; an allegorical
picture representing time as it lifts the veil, and discloses the naked
figure of Truth, will affect him powerfully; but the same effect would be
produced by the legend: “_Le temps découvre la vérité._” For what really
produces the effect here is the abstract thought, not the object of
perception.

If then, in accordance with what has been said, allegory in plastic and
pictorial art is a mistaken effort, serving an end which is entirely
foreign to art, it becomes quite unbearable when it leads so far astray
that the representation of forced and violently introduced subtilties
degenerates into absurdity. Such, for example, is a tortoise, to represent
feminine seclusion; the downward glance of Nemesis into the drapery of her
bosom, signifying that she can see into what is hidden; the explanation of
Bellori that Hannibal Carracci represents voluptuousness clothed in a
yellow robe, because he wishes to indicate that her lovers soon fade and
become yellow as straw. If there is absolutely no connection between the
representation and the conception signified by it, founded on subsumption
under the concept, or association of Ideas; but the signs and the things
signified are combined in a purely conventional manner, by positive,
accidentally introduced laws; then I call this degenerate kind of allegory
_Symbolism_. Thus the rose is the symbol of secrecy, the laurel is the
symbol of fame, the palm is the symbol of peace, the scallop-shell is the
symbol of pilgrimage, the cross is the symbol of the Christian religion.
To this class also belongs all significance of mere colour, as yellow is
the colour of falseness, and blue is the colour of fidelity. Such symbols
may often be of use in life, but their value is foreign to art. They are
simply to be regarded as hieroglyphics, or like Chinese word-writing, and
really belong to the same class as armorial bearings, the bush that
indicates a public-house, the key of the chamberlain, or the leather of
the mountaineer. If, finally, certain historical or mythical persons, or
personified conceptions, are represented by certain fixed symbols, these
are properly called _emblems_. Such are the beasts of the Evangelist, the
owl of Minerva, the apple of Paris, the Anchor of Hope, &c. For the most
part, however, we understand by emblems those simple allegorical
representations explained by a motto, which are meant to express a moral
truth, and of which large collections have been made by J. Camerarius,
Alciatus, and others. They form the transition to poetical allegory, of
which we shall have more to say later. Greek sculpture devotes itself to
the perception, and therefore it is _æsthetical_; Indian sculpture devotes
itself to the conception, and therefore it is merely _symbolical_.

This conclusion in regard to allegory, which is founded on our
consideration of the nature of art and quite consistent with it, is
directly opposed to the opinion of Winckelmann, who, far from explaining
allegory, as we do, as something quite foreign to the end of art, and
often interfering with it, always speaks in favour of it, and indeed
(Works, vol. i. p. 55) places the highest aim of art in the
“representation of universal conceptions, and non-sensuous things.” We
leave it to every one to adhere to whichever view he pleases. Only the
truth became very clear to me from these and similar views of Winckelmann
connected with his peculiar metaphysic of the beautiful, that one may have
the greatest susceptibility for artistic beauty, and the soundest judgment
in regard to it, without being able to give an abstract and strictly
philosophical justification of the nature of the beautiful; just as one
may be very noble and virtuous, and may have a tender conscience, which
decides with perfect accuracy in particular cases, without on that account
being in a position to investigate and explain in the abstract the ethical
significance of action.

Allegory has an entirely different relation to poetry from that which it
has to plastic and pictorial art, and although it is to be rejected in the
latter, it is not only permissible, but very serviceable to the former.
For in plastic and pictorial art it leads away from what is perceptibly
given, the proper object of all art, to abstract thoughts; but in poetry
the relation is reversed; for here what is directly given in words is the
concept, and the first aim is to lead from this to the object of
perception, the representation of which must be undertaken by the
imagination of the hearer. If in plastic and pictorial art we are led from
what is immediately given to something else, this must always be a
conception, because here only the abstract cannot be given directly; but a
conception must never be the source, and its communication must never be
the end of a work of art. In poetry, on the contrary, the conception is
the material, the immediately given, and therefore we may very well leave
it, in order to call up perceptions which are quite different, and in
which the end is reached. Many a conception or abstract thought may be
quite indispensable to the connection of a poem, which is yet, in itself
and directly, quite incapable of being perceived; and then it is often
made perceptible by means of some example which is subsumed under it. This
takes place in every trope, every metaphor, simile, parable, and allegory,
all of which differ only in the length and completeness of their
expression. Therefore, in the arts which employ language as their medium,
similes and allegories are of striking effect. How beautifully Cervantes
says of sleep in order to express the fact that it frees us from all
spiritual and bodily suffering, “It is a mantle that covers all mankind.”
How beautifully Kleist expresses allegorically the thought that
philosophers and men of science enlighten mankind, in the line, “Those
whose midnight lamp lights the world.” How strongly and sensuously Homer
describes the harmful Ate when he says: “She has tender feet, for she
walks not on the hard earth, but treads on the heads of men” (Il. xix.
91.) How forcibly we are struck by Menenius Agrippa’s fable of the belly
and the limbs, addressed to the people of Rome when they seceded. How
beautifully Plato’s figure of the Cave, at the beginning of the seventh
book of the “Republic” to which we have already referred, expresses a very
abstract philosophical dogma. The fable of Persephone is also to be
regarded as a deeply significant allegory of philosophical tendency, for
she became subject to the nether world by tasting a pomegranate. This
becomes peculiarly enlightening from Goethe’s treatment of the fable, as
an episode in the _Triumph der Empfindsamkeit_, which is beyond all
praise. Three detailed allegorical works are known to me, one, open and
avowed, is the incomparable “Criticon” of Balthasar Gracian. It consists
of a great rich web of connected and highly ingenious allegories, that
serve here as the fair clothing of moral truths, to which he thus imparts
the most perceptible form, and astonishes us by the richness of his
invention. The two others are concealed allegories, “Don Quixote” and
“Gulliver’s Travels.” The first is an allegory of the life of every man,
who will not, like others, be careful, merely for his own welfare, but
follows some objective, ideal end, which has taken possession of his
thoughts and will; and certainly, in this world, he has then a strange
appearance. In the case of Gulliver we have only to take everything
physical as spiritual or intellectual, in order to see what the “satirical
rogue,” as Hamlet would call him, meant by it. Such, then, in the poetical
allegory, the conception is always the given, which it tries to make
perceptible by means of a picture; it may sometimes be expressed or
assisted by a painted picture. Such a picture will not be regarded as a
work of art, but only as a significant symbol, and it makes no claim to
pictorial, but only to poetical worth. Such is that beautiful allegorical
vignette of Lavater’s, which must be so heartening to every defender of
truth: a hand holding a light is stung by a wasp, while gnats are burning
themselves in the flame above; underneath is the motto:


    “And although it singes the wings of the gnats,
    Destroys their heads and all their little brains,
                  Light is still light;
    And although I am stung by the angriest wasp,
                  I will not let it go.”


To this class also belongs the gravestone with the burnt-out, smoking
candle, and the inscription—


    “When it is out, it becomes clear
    Whether the candle was tallow or wax.”


Finally, of this kind is an old German genealogical tree, in which the
last representative of a very ancient family thus expresses his
determination to live his life to the end in abstinence and perfect
chastity, and therefore to let his race die out; he represents himself at
the root of the high-branching tree cutting it over himself with shears.
In general all those symbols referred to above, commonly called emblems,
which might also be defined as short painted fables with obvious morals,
belong to this class. Allegories of this kind are always to be regarded as
belonging to poetry, not to painting, and as justified thereby; moreover,
the pictorial execution is here always a matter of secondary importance,
and no more is demanded of it than that it shall represent the thing so
that we can recognise it. But in poetry, as in plastic art, the allegory
passes into the symbol if there is merely an arbitrary connection between
what it presented to perception and the abstract significance of it. For
as all symbolism rests, at bottom, on an agreement, the symbol has this
among other disadvantages, that in time its meaning is forgotten, and then
it is dumb. Who would guess why the fish is a symbol of Christianity if he
did not know? Only a Champollion; for it is entirely a phonetic
hieroglyphic. Therefore, as a poetical allegory, the Revelation of John
stands much in the same position as the reliefs with _Magnus Deus sol
Mithra_, which are still constantly being explained.

§ 51. If now, with the exposition which has been given of art in general,
we turn from plastic and pictorial art to poetry, we shall have no doubt
that its aim also is the revelation of the Ideas, the grades of the
objectification of will, and the communication of them to the hearer with
the distinctness and vividness with which the poetical sense comprehends
them. Ideas are essentially perceptible; if, therefore, in poetry only
abstract conceptions are directly communicated through words, it is yet
clearly the intention to make the hearer perceive the Ideas of life in the
representatives of these conceptions, and this can only take place through
the assistance of his own imagination. But in order to set the imagination
to work for the accomplishment of this end, the abstract conceptions,
which are the immediate material of poetry as of dry prose, must be so
arranged that their spheres intersect each other in such a way that none
of them can remain in its abstract universality; but, instead of it, a
perceptible representative appears to the imagination; and this is always
further modified by the words of the poet according to what his intention
may be. As the chemist obtains solid precipitates by combining perfectly
clear and transparent fluids; the poet understands how to precipitate, as
it were, the concrete, the individual, the perceptible idea, out of the
abstract and transparent universality of the concepts by the manner in
which he combines them. For the Idea can only be known by perception; and
knowledge of the Idea is the end of art. The skill of a master, in poetry
as in chemistry, enables us always to obtain the precise precipitate we
intended. This end is assisted by the numerous epithets in poetry, by
means of which the universality of every concept is narrowed more and more
till we reach the perceptible. Homer attaches to almost every substantive
an adjective, whose concept intersects and considerably diminishes the
sphere of the concept of the substantive, which is thus brought so much
the nearer to perception: for example—


    “Εν δ᾽ επεσ᾽ Ωκεανῳ λαμπρον φαος ἡελιοιο,
    Ἑλκον νυκτα μελαιναν επι ζειδωρον αρουραν.”

    (“Occidit vero in Oceanum splendidum lumen solis,
    Trahens noctem nigram super almam terram.”)


And—


    “Where gentle winds from the blue heavens sigh,
    There stand the myrtles still, the laurel high,”—


calls up before the imagination by means of a few concepts the whole
delight of a southern clime.

Rhythm and rhyme are quite peculiar aids to poetry. I can give no other
explanation of their incredibly powerful effect than that our faculties of
perception have received from time, to which they are essentially bound,
some quality on account of which we inwardly follow, and, as it were,
consent to each regularly recurring sound. In this way rhythm and rhyme
are partly a means of holding our attention, because we willingly follow
the poem read, and partly they produce in us a blind consent to what is
read prior to any judgment, and this gives the poem a certain emphatic
power of convincing independent of all reasons.

From the general nature of the material, that is, the concepts, which
poetry uses to communicate the Ideas, the extent of its province is very
great. The whole of nature, the Ideas of all grades, can be represented by
means of it, for it proceeds according to the Idea it has to impart, so
that its representations are sometimes descriptive, sometimes narrative,
and sometimes directly dramatic. If, in the representation of the lower
grades of the objectivity of will, plastic and pictorial art generally
surpass it, because lifeless nature, and even brute nature, reveals almost
its whole being in a single well-chosen moment; man, on the contrary, so
far as he does not express himself by the mere form and expression of his
person, but through a series of actions and the accompanying thoughts and
emotions, is the principal object of poetry, in which no other art can
compete with it, for here the progress or movement which cannot be
represented in plastic or pictorial art just suits its purpose.

The revelation of the Idea, which is the highest grade of the objectivity
of will, the representation of man in the connected series of his efforts
and actions, is thus the great problem of poetry. It is true that both
experience and history teach us to know man; yet oftener men than man,
_i.e._, they give us empirical notes of the behaviour of men to each
other, from which we may frame rules for our own conduct, oftener than
they afford us deep glimpses of the inner nature of man. The latter
function, however, is by no means entirely denied them; but as often as it
is the nature of mankind itself that discloses itself to us in history or
in our own experience, we have comprehended our experience, and the
historian has comprehended history, with artistic eyes, poetically,
_i.e._, according to the Idea, not the phenomenon, in its inner nature,
not in its relations. Our own experience is the indispensable condition of
understanding poetry as of understanding history; for it is, so to speak,
the dictionary of the language that both speak. But history is related to
poetry as portrait-painting is related to historical painting; the one
gives us the true in the individual, the other the true in the universal;
the one has the truth of the phenomenon, and can therefore verify it from
the phenomenal, the other has the truth of the Idea, which can be found in
no particular phenomenon, but yet speaks to us from them all. The poet
from deliberate choice represents significant characters in significant
situations; the historian takes both as they come. Indeed, he must regard
and select the circumstances and the persons, not with reference to their
inward and true significance, which expresses the Idea, but according to
the outward, apparent, and relatively important significance with regard
to the connection and the consequences. He must consider nothing in and
for itself in its essential character and expression, but must look at
everything in its relations, in its connection, in its influence upon what
follows, and especially upon its own age. Therefore he will not overlook
an action of a king, though of little significance, and in itself quite
common, because it has results and influence. And, on the other hand,
actions of the highest significance of particular and very eminent
individuals are not to be recorded by him if they have no consequences.
For his treatment follows the principle of sufficient reason, and
apprehends the phenomenon, of which this principle is the form. But the
poet comprehends the Idea, the inner nature of man apart from all
relations, outside all time, the adequate objectivity of the
thing-in-itself, at its highest grade. Even in that method of treatment
which is necessary for the historian, the inner nature and significance of
the phenomena, the kernel of all these shells, can never be entirely lost.
He who seeks for it, at any rate, may find it and recognise it. Yet that
which is significant in itself, not in its relations, the real unfolding
of the Idea, will be found far more accurately and distinctly in poetry
than in history, and, therefore, however paradoxical it may sound, far
more really genuine inner truth is to be attributed to poetry than to
history. For the historian must accurately follow the particular event
according to life, as it develops itself in time in the manifold tangled
chains of causes and effects. It is, however, impossible that he can have
all the data for this; he cannot have seen all and discovered all. He is
forsaken at every moment by the original of his picture, or a false one
substitutes itself for it, and this so constantly that I think I may
assume that in all history the false outweighs the true. The poet, on the
contrary, has comprehended the Idea of man from some definite side which
is to be represented; thus it is the nature of his own self that
objectifies itself in it for him. His knowledge, as we explained above
when speaking of sculpture, is half _a priori_; his ideal stands before
his mind firm, distinct, brightly illuminated, and cannot forsake him;
therefore he shows us, in the mirror of his mind, the Idea pure and
distinct, and his delineation of it down to the minutest particular is
true as life itself.(59) The great ancient historians are, therefore, in
those particulars in which their data fail them, for example, in the
speeches of their heroes—poets; indeed their whole manner of handling
their material approaches to the epic. But this gives their
representations unity, and enables them to retain inner truth, even when
outward truth was not accessible, or indeed was falsified. And as we
compared history to portrait-painting, in contradistinction to poetry,
which corresponds to historical painting, we find that Winckelmann’s
maxim, that the portrait ought to be the ideal of the individual, was
followed by the ancient historians, for they represent the individual in
such a way as to bring out that side of the Idea of man which is expressed
in it. Modern historians, on the contrary, with few exceptions, give us in
general only “a dust-bin and a lumber-room, and at the most a chronicle of
the principal political events.” Therefore, whoever desires to know man in
his inner nature, identical in all its phenomena and developments, to know
him according to the Idea, will find that the works of the great, immortal
poet present a far truer, more distinct picture, than the historians can
ever give. For even the best of the historians are, as poets, far from the
first; and moreover their hands are tied. In this aspect the relation
between the historian and the poet may be illustrated by the following
comparison. The mere, pure historian, who works only according to data, is
like a man, who without any knowledge of mathematics, has investigated the
relations of certain figures, which he has accidentally found, by
measuring them; and the problem thus empirically solved is affected of
course by all the errors of the drawn figure. The poet, on the other hand,
is like the mathematician, who constructs these relations _a priori_ in
pure perception, and expresses them not as they actually are in the drawn
figure, but as they are in the Idea, which the drawing is intended to
render for the senses. Therefore Schiller says:—


    “What has never anywhere come to pass,
    That alone never grows old.”


Indeed I must attribute greater value to biographies, and especially to
autobiographies, in relation to the knowledge of the nature of man, than
to history proper, at least as it is commonly handled. Partly because in
the former the data can be collected more accurately and completely than
in the latter; partly, because in history proper, it is not so much men as
nations and heroes that act, and the individuals who do appear, seem so
far off, surrounded with such pomp and circumstance, clothed in the stiff
robes of state, or heavy, inflexible armour, that it is really hard
through all this to recognise the human movements. On the other hand, the
life of the individual when described with truth, in a narrow sphere,
shows the conduct of men in all its forms and subtilties, the excellence,
the virtue, and even holiness of a few, the perversity, meanness, and
knavery of most, the dissolute profligacy of some. Besides, in the only
aspect we are considering here, that of the inner significance of the
phenomenal, it is quite the same whether the objects with which the action
is concerned, are, relatively considered, trifling or important,
farm-houses or kingdoms: for all these things in themselves are without
significance, and obtain it only in so far as the will is moved by them.
The motive has significance only through its relation to the will, while
the relation which it has as a thing to other things like itself, does not
concern us here. As a circle of one inch in diameter, and a circle of
forty million miles in diameter, have precisely the same geometrical
properties, so are the events and the history of a village and a kingdom
essentially the same; and we may study and learn to know mankind as well
in the one as in the other. It is also a mistake to suppose that
autobiographies are full of deceit and dissimulation. On the contrary,
lying (though always possible) is perhaps more difficult there than
elsewhere. Dissimulation is easiest in mere conversation; indeed, though
it may sound paradoxical, it is really more difficult even in a letter.
For in the case of a letter the writer is alone, and looks into himself,
and not out on the world, so that what is strange and distant does not
easily approach him; and he has not the test of the impression made upon
another before his eyes. But the receiver of the letter peruses it quietly
in a mood unknown to the writer, reads it repeatedly and at different
times, and thus easily finds out the concealed intention. We also get to
know an author as a man most easily from his books, because all these
circumstances act here still more strongly and permanently. And in an
autobiography it is so difficult to dissimulate, that perhaps there does
not exist a single one that is not, as a whole, more true, than any
history that ever was written. The man who writes his own life surveys it
as a whole, the particular becomes small, the near becomes distant, the
distant becomes near again, the motives that influenced him shrink; he
seats himself at the confessional, and has done so of his own free will;
the spirit of lying does not so easily take hold of him here, for there is
also in every man an inclination to truth which has first to be overcome
whenever he lies, and which here has taken up a specially strong position.
The relation between biography and the history of nations may be made
clear for perception by means of the following comparison: History shows
us mankind as a view from a high mountain shows us nature; we see much at
a time, wide stretches, great masses, but nothing is distinct nor
recognisable in all the details of its own peculiar nature. On the other
hand, the representation of the life of the individual shows us the man,
as we see nature if we go about among her trees, plants, rocks, and
waters. But in landscape-painting, in which the artist lets us look at
nature with his eyes, the knowledge of the Ideas, and the condition of
pure will-less knowing, which is demanded by these, is made much easier
for us; and, in the same way, poetry is far superior both to history and
biography, in the representation of the Ideas which may be looked for in
all three. For here also genius holds up to us the magic glass, in which
all that is essential and significant appears before us collected and
placed in the clearest light, and what is accidental and foreign is left
out.(60)

The representation of the Idea of man, which is the work of the poet, may
be performed, so that what is represented is also the representer. This is
the case in lyrical poetry, in songs, properly so called, in which the
poet only perceives vividly his own state and describes it. Thus a certain
subjectivity is essential to this kind of poetry from the nature of its
object. Again, what is to be represented may be entirely different from
him who represents it, as is the case in all other kinds of poetry, in
which the poet more or less conceals himself behind his representation,
and at last disappears altogether. In the ballad the poet still expresses
to some extent his own state through the tone and proportion of the whole;
therefore, though much more objective than the lyric, it has yet something
subjective. This becomes less in the idyll, still less in the romantic
poem, almost entirely disappears in the true epic, and even to the last
vestige in the drama, which is the most objective and, in more than one
respect, the completest and most difficult form of poetry. The lyrical
form of poetry is consequently the easiest, and although art, as a whole,
belongs only to the true man of genius, who so rarely appears, even a man
who is not in general very remarkable may produce a beautiful song if, by
actual strong excitement from without, some inspiration raises his mental
powers; for all that is required for this is a lively perception of his
own state at a moment of emotional excitement. This is proved by the
existence of many single songs by individuals who have otherwise remained
unknown; especially the German national songs, of which we have an
exquisite collection in the “Wunderhorn;” and also by innumerable
love-songs and other songs of the people in all languages;—for to seize
the mood of a moment and embody it in a song is the whole achievement of
this kind of poetry. Yet in the lyrics of true poets the inner nature of
all mankind is reflected, and all that millions of past, present, and
future men have found, or will find, in the same situations, which are
constantly recurring, finds its exact expression in them. And because
these situations, by constant recurrence, are permanent as man himself and
always call up the same sensations, the lyrical productions of genuine
poets remain through thousands of years true, powerful, and fresh. But if
the poet is always the universal man, then all that has ever moved a human
heart, all that human nature in any situation has ever produced from
itself, all that dwells and broods in any human breast—is his theme and
his material, and also all the rest of nature. Therefore the poet may just
as well sing of voluptuousness as of mysticism, be Anacreon or Angelus
Silesius, write tragedies or comedies, represent the sublime or the common
mind—according to humour or vocation. And no one has the right to
prescribe to the poet what he ought to be—noble and sublime, moral, pious,
Christian, one thing or another, still less to reproach him because he is
one thing and not another. He is the mirror of mankind, and brings to its
consciousness what it feels and does.

If we now consider more closely the nature of the lyric proper, and select
as examples exquisite and pure models, not those that approach in any way
to some other form of poetry, such as the ballad, the elegy, the hymn, the
epigram, &c., we shall find that the peculiar nature of the lyric, in the
narrowest sense, is this: It is the subject of will, _i.e._, his own
volition, which the consciousness of the singer feels; often as a released
and satisfied desire (joy), but still oftener as a restricted desire
(grief), always as an emotion, a passion, a moved frame of mind. Besides
this, however, and along with it, by the sight of surrounding nature, the
singer becomes conscious of himself as the subject of pure, will-less
knowing, whose unbroken blissful peace now appears, in contrast to the
stress of desire which is always restricted and always needy. The feeling
of this contrast, this alternation, is really what the lyric as a whole
expresses, and what principally constitutes the lyrical state of mind. In
it pure knowing comes to us, as it were, to deliver us from desire and its
stain; we follow, but only for an instant; desire, the remembrance of our
own personal ends, tears us anew from peaceful contemplation; yet ever
again the next beautiful surrounding in which the pure will-less knowledge
presents itself to us, allures us away from desire. Therefore, in the
lyric and the lyrical mood, desire (the personal interest of the ends),
and pure perception of the surrounding presented, are wonderfully mingled
with each other; connections between them are sought for and imagined; the
subjective disposition, the affection of the will, imparts its own hue to
the perceived surrounding, and conversely, the surroundings communicate
the reflex of their colour to the will. The true lyric is the expression
of the whole of this mingled and divided state of mind. In order to make
clear by examples this abstract analysis of a frame of mind that is very
far from all abstraction, any of the immortal songs of Goethe may be
taken. As specially adapted for this end I shall recommend only a few:
“The Shepherd’s Lament,” “Welcome and Farewell,” “To the Moon,” “On the
Lake,” “Autumn;” also the songs in the “Wunderhorn” are excellent
examples; particularly the one which begins, “O Bremen, I must now leave
thee.” As a comical and happy parody of the lyrical character a song of
Voss strikes me as remarkable. It describes the feeling of a drunk plumber
falling from a tower, who observes in passing that the clock on the tower
is at half-past eleven, a remark which is quite foreign to his condition,
and thus belongs to knowledge free from will. Whoever accepts the view
that has been expressed of the lyrical frame of mind, will also allow,
that it is the sensuous and poetical knowledge of the principle which I
established in my essay on the Principle of Sufficient Reason, and have
also referred to in this work, that the identity of the subject of knowing
with that of willing may be called the miracle κατ᾽ εξοχην; so that the
poetical effect of the lyric rests finally on the truth of that principle.
In the course of life these two subjects, or, in popular language, head
and heart, are ever becoming further apart; men are always separating more
between their subjective feeling and their objective knowledge. In the
child the two are still entirely blended together; it scarcely knows how
to distinguish itself from its surroundings, it is at one with them. In
the young man all perception chiefly affects feeling and mood, and even
mingles with it, as Byron very beautifully expresses—


    “I live not in myself, but I become
    Portion of that around me; and to me
    High mountains are a feeling.”


This is why the youth clings so closely to the perceptible and outward
side of things; this is why he is only fit for lyrical poetry, and only
the full-grown man is capable of the drama. The old man we can think of as
at the most an epic poet, like Ossian, and Homer, for narration is
characteristic of old age.

In the more objective kinds of poetry, especially in the romance, the
epic, and the drama, the end, the revelation of the Idea of man, is
principally attained by two means, by true and profound representation of
significant characters, and by the invention of pregnant situations in
which they disclose themselves. For as it is incumbent upon the chemist
not only to exhibit the simple elements, pure and genuine, and their
principal compounds, but also to expose them to the influence of such
reagents as will clearly and strikingly bring out their peculiar
qualities, so is it incumbent on the poet not only to present to us
significant characters truly and faithfully as nature itself; but, in
order that we may get to know them, he must place them in those situations
in which their peculiar qualities will fully unfold themselves, and appear
distinctly in sharp outline; situations which are therefore called
significant. In real life, and in history, situations of this kind are
rarely brought about by chance, and they stand alone, lost and concealed
in the multitude of those which are insignificant. The complete
significance of the situations ought to distinguish the romance, the epic,
and the drama from real life as completely as the arrangement and
selection of significant characters. In both, however, absolute truth is a
necessary condition of their effect, and want of unity in the characters,
contradiction either of themselves or of the nature of humanity in
general, as well as impossibility, or very great improbability in the
events, even in mere accessories, offend just as much in poetry as badly
drawn figures, false perspective, or wrong lighting in painting. For both
in poetry and painting we demand the faithful mirror of life, of man, of
the world, only made more clear by the representation, and more
significant by the arrangement. For there is only one end of all the arts,
the representation of the Ideas; and their essential difference lies
simply in the different grades of the objectification of will to which the
Ideas that are to be represented belong. This also determines the material
of the representation. Thus the arts which are most widely separated may
yet throw light on each other. For example, in order to comprehend fully
the Ideas of water it is not sufficient to see it in the quiet pond or in
the evenly-flowing stream; but these Ideas disclose themselves fully only
when the water appears under all circumstances and exposed to all kinds of
obstacles. The effects of the varied circumstances and obstacles give it
the opportunity of fully exhibiting all its qualities. This is why we find
it beautiful when it tumbles, rushes, and foams, or leaps into the air, or
falls in a cataract of spray; or, lastly, if artificially confined it
springs up in a fountain. Thus showing itself different under different
circumstances, it yet always faithfully asserts its character; it is just
as natural to it to spout up as to lie in glassy stillness; it is as ready
for the one as for the other as soon as the circumstances appear. Now,
what the engineer achieves with the fluid matter of water, the architect
achieves with the rigid matter of stone, and just this the epic or
dramatic poet achieves with the Idea of man. Unfolding and rendering
distinct the Idea expressing itself in the object of every art, the Idea
of the will which objectifies itself at each grade, is the common end of
all the arts. The life of man, as it shows itself for the most part in the
real world, is like the water, as it is generally seen in the pond and the
river; but in the epic, the romance, the tragedy, selected characters are
placed in those circumstances in which all their special qualities unfold
themselves, the depths of the human heart are revealed, and become visible
in extraordinary and very significant actions. Thus poetry objectifies the
Idea of man, an Idea which has the peculiarity of expressing itself in
highly individual characters.

Tragedy is to be regarded, and is recognised as the summit of poetical
art, both on account of the greatness of its effect and the difficulty of
its achievement. It is very significant for our whole system, and well
worthy of observation, that the end of this highest poetical achievement
is the representation of the terrible side of life. The unspeakable pain,
the wail of humanity, the triumph of evil, the scornful mastery of chance,
and the irretrievable fall of the just and innocent, is here presented to
us; and in this lies a significant hint of the nature of the world and of
existence. It is the strife of will with itself, which here, completely
unfolded at the highest grade of its objectivity, comes into fearful
prominence. It becomes visible in the suffering of men, which is now
introduced, partly through chance and error, which appear as the rulers of
the world, personified as fate, on account of their insidiousness, which
even reaches the appearance of design; partly it proceeds from man
himself, through the self-mortifying efforts of a few, through the
wickedness and perversity of most. It is one and the same will that lives
and appears in them all, but whose phenomena fight against each other and
destroy each other. In one individual it appears powerfully, in another
more weakly; in one more subject to reason, and softened by the light of
knowledge, in another less so, till at last, in some single case, this
knowledge, purified and heightened by suffering itself, reaches the point
at which the phenomenon, the veil of Mâya, no longer deceives it. It sees
through the form of the phenomenon, the _principium individuationis_. The
egoism which rests on this perishes with it, so that now the _motives_
that were so powerful before have lost their might, and instead of them
the complete knowledge of the nature of the world, which has a _quieting_
effect on the will, produces resignation, the surrender not merely of
life, but of the very will to live. Thus we see in tragedies the noblest
men, after long conflict and suffering, at last renounce the ends they
have so keenly followed, and all the pleasures of life for ever, or else
freely and joyfully surrender life itself. So is it with the steadfast
prince of Calderon; with Gretchen in “Faust;” with Hamlet, whom his friend
Horatio would willingly follow, but is bade remain a while, and in this
harsh world draw his breath in pain, to tell the story of Hamlet, and
clear his memory; so also is it with the Maid of Orleans, the Bride of
Messina; they all die purified by suffering, _i.e._, after the will to
live which was formerly in them is dead. In the “Mohammed” of Voltaire
this is actually expressed in the concluding words which the dying Palmira
addresses to Mohammad: “The world is for tyrants: live!” On the other
hand, the demand for so-called poetical justice rests on entire
misconception of the nature of tragedy, and, indeed, of the nature of the
world itself. It boldly appears in all its dulness in the criticisms which
Dr. Samuel Johnson made on particular plays of Shakespeare, for he very
naïvely laments its entire absence. And its absence is certainly obvious,
for in what has Ophelia, Desdemona, or Cordelia offended? But only the
dull, optimistic, Protestant-rationalistic, or peculiarly Jewish view of
life will make the demand for poetical justice, and find satisfaction in
it. The true sense of tragedy is the deeper insight, that it is not his
own individual sins that the hero atones for, but original sin, _i.e._,
the crime of existence itself:


    “Pues el delito mayor
    Del hombre es haber nacido;”

    (“For the greatest crime of man
    Is that he was born;”)


as Calderon exactly expresses it.

I shall allow myself only one remark, more closely concerning the
treatment of tragedy. The representation of a great misfortune is alone
essential to tragedy. But the many different ways in which this is
introduced by the poet may be brought under three specific conceptions. It
may happen by means of a character of extraordinary wickedness, touching
the utmost limits of possibility, who becomes the author of the
misfortune; examples of this kind are Richard III., Iago in “Othello,”
Shylock in “The Merchant of Venice,” Franz Moor, Phædra of Euripides,
Creon in the “Antigone,” &c., &c. Secondly, it may happen through blind
fate, _i.e._, chance and error; a true pattern of this kind is the Œdipus
Rex of Sophocles, the “Trachiniæ” also; and in general most of the
tragedies of the ancients belong to this class. Among modern tragedies,
“Romeo and Juliet,” “Tancred” by Voltaire, and “The Bride of Messina,” are
examples. Lastly, the misfortune may be brought about by the mere position
of the _dramatis personæ_ with regard to each other, through their
relations; so that there is no need either for a tremendous error or an
unheard-of accident, nor yet for a character whose wickedness reaches the
limits of human possibility; but characters of ordinary morality, under
circumstances such as often occur, are so situated with regard to each
other that their position compels them, knowingly and with their eyes
open, to do each other the greatest injury, without any one of them being
entirely in the wrong. This last kind of tragedy seems to me far to
surpass the other two, for it shows us the greatest misfortune, not as an
exception, not as something occasioned by rare circumstances or monstrous
characters, but as arising easily and of itself out of the actions and
characters of men, indeed almost as essential to them, and thus brings it
terribly near to us. In the other two kinds we may look on the prodigious
fate and the horrible wickedness as terrible powers which certainly
threaten us, but only from afar, which we may very well escape without
taking refuge in renunciation. But in the last kind of tragedy we see that
those powers which destroy happiness and life are such that their path to
us also is open at every moment; we see the greatest sufferings brought
about by entanglements that our fate might also partake of, and through
actions that perhaps we also are capable of performing, and so could not
complain of injustice; then shuddering we feel ourselves already in the
midst of hell. This last kind of tragedy is also the most difficult of
achievement; for the greatest effect has to be produced in it with the
least use of means and causes of movement, merely through the position and
distribution of the characters; therefore even in many of the best
tragedies this difficulty is evaded. Yet one tragedy may be referred to as
a perfect model of this kind, a tragedy which in other respects is far
surpassed by more than one work of the same great master; it is “Clavigo.”
“Hamlet” belongs to a certain extent to this class, as far as the relation
of Hamlet to Laertes and Ophelia is concerned. “Wallenstein” has also this
excellence. “Faust” belongs entirely to this class, if we regard the
events connected with Gretchen and her brother as the principal action;
also the “Cid” of Corneille, only that it lacks the tragic conclusion,
while on the contrary the analogous relation of Max to Thecla has it.(61)

§ 52. Now that we have considered all the fine arts in the general way
that is suitable to our point of view, beginning with architecture, the
peculiar end of which is to elucidate the objectification of will at the
lowest grades of its visibility, in which it shows itself as the dumb
unconscious tendency of the mass in accordance with laws, and yet already
reveals a breach of the unity of will with itself in a conflict between
gravity and rigidity—and ending with the consideration of tragedy, which
presents to us at the highest grades of the objectification of will this
very conflict with itself in terrible magnitude and distinctness; we find
that there is still another fine art which has been excluded from our
consideration, and had to be excluded, for in the systematic connection of
our exposition there was no fitting place for it—I mean _music_. It stands
alone, quite cut off from all the other arts. In it we do not recognise
the copy or repetition of any Idea of existence in the world. Yet it is
such a great and exceedingly noble art, its effect on the inmost nature of
man is so powerful, and it is so entirely and deeply understood by him in
his inmost consciousness as a perfectly universal language, the
distinctness of which surpasses even that of the perceptible world itself,
that we certainly have more to look for in it than an _exercitum
arithmeticæ occultum nescientis se numerare animi_,(62) which Leibnitz
called it. Yet he was perfectly right, as he considered only its immediate
external significance, its form. But if it were nothing more, the
satisfaction which it affords would be like that which we feel when a sum
in arithmetic comes out right, and could not be that intense pleasure with
which we see the deepest recesses of our nature find utterance. From our
standpoint, therefore, at which the æsthetic effect is the criterion, we
must attribute to music a far more serious and deep significance,
connected with the inmost nature of the world and our own self, and in
reference to which the arithmetical proportions, to which it may be
reduced, are related, not as the thing signified, but merely as the sign.
That in some sense music must be related to the world as the
representation to the thing represented, as the copy to the original, we
may conclude from the analogy of the other arts, all of which possess this
character, and affect us on the whole in the same way as it does, only
that the effect of music is stronger, quicker, more necessary and
infallible. Further, its representative relation to the world must be very
deep, absolutely true, and strikingly accurate, because it is instantly
understood by every one, and has the appearance of a certain
infallibility, because its form may be reduced to perfectly definite rules
expressed in numbers, from which it cannot free itself without entirely
ceasing to be music. Yet the point of comparison between music and the
world, the respect in which it stands to the world in the relation of a
copy or repetition, is very obscure. Men have practised music in all ages
without being able to account for this; content to understand it directly,
they renounce all claim to an abstract conception of this direct
understanding itself.

I gave my mind entirely up to the impression of music in all its forms,
and then returned to reflection and the system of thought expressed in the
present work, and thus I arrived at an explanation of the inner nature of
music and of the nature of its imitative relation to the world—which from
analogy had necessarily to be presupposed—an explanation which is quite
sufficient for myself, and satisfactory to my investigation, and which
will doubtless be equally evident to any one who has followed me thus far
and has agreed with my view of the world. Yet I recognise the fact that it
is essentially impossible to prove this explanation, for it assumes and
establishes a relation of music, as idea, to that which from its nature
can never be idea, and music will have to be regarded as the copy of an
original which can never itself be directly presented as idea. I can
therefore do no more than state here, at the conclusion of this third
book, which has been principally devoted to the consideration of the arts,
the explanation of the marvellous art of music which satisfies myself, and
I must leave the acceptance or denial of my view to the effect produced
upon each of my readers both by music itself and by the whole system of
thought communicated in this work. Moreover, I regard it as necessary, in
order to be able to assent with full conviction to the exposition of the
significance of music I am about to give, that one should often listen to
music with constant reflection upon my theory concerning it, and for this
again it is necessary to be very familiar with the whole of my system of
thought.

The (Platonic) Ideas are the adequate objectification of will. To excite
or suggest the knowledge of these by means of the representation of
particular things (for works of art themselves are always representations
of particular things) is the end of all the other arts, which can only be
attained by a corresponding change in the knowing subject. Thus all these
arts objectify the will indirectly only by means of the Ideas; and since
our world is nothing but the manifestation of the Ideas in multiplicity,
though their entrance into the _principium individuationis_ (the form of
the knowledge possible for the individual as such), music also, since it
passes over the Ideas, is entirely independent of the phenomenal world,
ignores it altogether, could to a certain extent exist if there was no
world at all, which cannot be said of the other arts. Music is as _direct_
an objectification and copy of the whole _will_ as the world itself, nay,
even as the Ideas, whose multiplied manifestation constitutes the world of
individual things. Music is thus by no means like the other arts, the copy
of the Ideas, but the _copy of the will itself_, whose objectivity the
Ideas are. This is why the effect of music is so much more powerful and
penetrating than that of the other arts, for they speak only of shadows,
but it speaks of the thing itself. Since, however, it is the same will
which objectifies itself both in the Ideas and in music, though in quite
different ways, there must be, not indeed a direct likeness, but yet a
parallel, an analogy, between music and the Ideas whose manifestation in
multiplicity and incompleteness is the visible world. The establishing of
this analogy will facilitate, as an illustration, the understanding of
this exposition, which is so difficult on account of the obscurity of the
subject.

I recognise in the deepest tones of harmony, in the bass, the lowest
grades of the objectification of will, unorganised nature, the mass of the
planet. It is well known that all the high notes which are easily sounded,
and die away more quickly, are produced by the vibration in their vicinity
of the deep bass-notes. When, also, the low notes sound, the high notes
always sound faintly, and it is a law of harmony that only those high
notes may accompany a bass-note which actually already sound along with it
of themselves (its _sons harmoniques_) on account of its vibration. This
is analogous to the fact that the whole of the bodies and organisations of
nature must be regarded as having come into existence through gradual
development out of the mass of the planet; this is both their supporter
and their source, and the same relation subsists between the high notes
and the bass. There is a limit of depth, below which no sound is audible.
This corresponds to the fact that no matter can be perceived without form
and quality, _i.e._, without the manifestation of a force which cannot be
further explained, in which an Idea expresses itself, and, more generally,
that no matter can be entirely without will. Thus, as a certain pitch is
inseparable from the note as such, so a certain grade of the manifestation
of will is inseparable from matter. Bass is thus, for us, in harmony what
unorganised nature, the crudest mass, upon which all rests, and from which
everything originates and develops, is in the world. Now, further, in the
whole of the complemental parts which make up the harmony between the bass
and the leading voice singing the melody, I recognise the whole gradation
of the Ideas in which the will objectifies itself. Those nearer to the
bass are the lower of these grades, the still unorganised, but yet
manifold phenomenal things; the higher represent to me the world of plants
and beasts. The definite intervals of the scale are parallel to the
definite grades of the objectification of will, the definite species in
nature. The departure from the arithmetical correctness of the intervals,
through some temperament, or produced by the key selected, is analogous to
the departure of the individual from the type of the species. Indeed, even
the impure discords, which give no definite interval, may be compared to
the monstrous abortions produced by beasts of two species, or by man and
beast. But to all these bass and complemental parts which make up the
_harmony_ there is wanting that connected progress which belongs only to
the high voice singing the melody, and it alone moves quickly and lightly
in modulations and runs, while all these others have only a slower
movement without a connection in each part for itself. The deep bass moves
most slowly, the representative of the crudest mass. Its rising and
falling occurs only by large intervals, in thirds, fourths, fifths, never
by _one_ tone, unless it is a base inverted by double counterpoint. This
slow movement is also physically essential to it; a quick run or shake in
the low notes cannot even be imagined. The higher complemental parts,
which are parallel to animal life, move more quickly, but yet without
melodious connection and significant progress. The disconnected course of
all the complemental parts, and their regulation by definite laws, is
analogous to the fact that in the whole irrational world, from the crystal
to the most perfect animal, no being has a connected consciousness of its
own which would make its life into a significant whole, and none
experiences a succession of mental developments, none perfects itself by
culture, but everything exists always in the same way according to its
kind, determined by fixed law. Lastly, in the _melody_, in the high,
singing, principal voice leading the whole and progressing with
unrestrained freedom, in the unbroken significant connection of _one_
thought from beginning to end representing a whole, I recognise the
highest grade of the objectification of will, the intellectual life and
effort of man. As he alone, because endowed with reason, constantly looks
before and after on the path of his actual life and its innumerable
possibilities, and so achieves a course of life which is intellectual, and
therefore connected as a whole; corresponding to this, I say, the _melody_
has significant intentional connection from beginning to end. It records,
therefore, the history of the intellectually enlightened will. This will
expresses itself in the actual world as the series of its deeds; but
melody says more, it records the most secret history of this
intellectually-enlightened will, pictures every excitement, every effort,
every movement of it, all that which the reason collects under the wide
and negative concept of feeling, and which it cannot apprehend further
through its abstract concepts. Therefore it has always been said that
music is the language of feeling and of passion, as words are the language
of reason. Plato explains it as ἡ των μελων κινησις μεμιμημενη, εν τοις
παθημασιν ὁταν ψυχη γινηται (_melodiarum motus, animi affectus imitans_),
De Leg. vii.; and also Aristotle says: δια τι οἱ ρυθμοι και τα μελη, φωνη
ουσα, ηθεσιν εοικε (_cur numeri musici et modi, qui voces sunt, moribus
similes sese exhibent?_): Probl. c. 19.

Now the nature of man consists in this, that his will strives, is
satisfied and strives anew, and so on for ever. Indeed, his happiness and
well-being consist simply in the quick transition from wish to
satisfaction, and from satisfaction to a new wish. For the absence of
satisfaction is suffering, the empty longing for a new wish, languor,
_ennui_. And corresponding to this the nature of melody is a constant
digression and deviation from the key-note in a thousand ways, not only to
the harmonious intervals to the third and dominant, but to every tone, to
the dissonant sevenths and to the superfluous degrees; yet there always
follows a constant return to the key-note. In all these deviations melody
expresses the multifarious efforts of will, but always its satisfaction
also by the final return to an harmonious interval, and still more, to the
key-note. The composition of melody, the disclosure in it of all the
deepest secrets of human willing and feeling, is the work of genius, whose
action, which is more apparent here than anywhere else, lies far from all
reflection and conscious intention, and may be called an inspiration. The
conception is here, as everywhere in art, unfruitful. The composer reveals
the inner nature of the world, and expresses the deepest wisdom in a
language which his reason does not understand; as a person under the
influence of mesmerism tells things of which he has no conception when he
awakes. Therefore in the composer, more than in any other artist, the man
is entirely separated and distinct from the artist. Even in the
explanation of this wonderful art, the concept shows its poverty and
limitation. I shall try, however, to complete our analogy. As quick
transition from wish to satisfaction, and from satisfaction to a new wish,
is happiness and well-being, so quick melodies without great deviations
are cheerful; slow melodies, striking painful discords, and only winding
back through many bars to the keynote are, as analogous to the delayed and
hardly won satisfaction, sad. The delay of the new excitement of will,
languor, could have no other expression than the sustained keynote, the
effect of which would soon be unbearable; very monotonous and unmeaning
melodies approach this effect. The short intelligible subjects of quick
dance-music seem to speak only of easily attained common pleasure. On the
other hand, the _Allegro maestoso_, in elaborate movements, long passages,
and wide deviations, signifies a greater, nobler effort towards a more
distant end, and its final attainment. The _Adagio_ speaks of the pain of
a great and noble effort which despises all trifling happiness. But how
wonderful is the effect of the _minor_ and _major_! How astounding that
the change of half a tone, the entrance of a minor third instead of a
major, at once and inevitably forces upon us an anxious painful feeling,
from which again we are just as instantaneously delivered by the major.
The _Adagio_ lengthens in the minor the expression of the keenest pain,
and becomes even a convulsive wail. Dance-music in the minor seems to
indicate the failure of that trifling happiness which we ought rather to
despise, seems to speak of the attainment of a lower end with toil and
trouble. The inexhaustibleness of possible melodies corresponds to the
inexhaustibleness of Nature in difference of individuals, physiognomies,
and courses of life. The transition from one key to an entirely different
one, since it altogether breaks the connection with what went before, is
like death, for the individual ends in it; but the will which appeared in
this individual lives after him as before him, appearing in other
individuals, whose consciousness, however, has no connection with his.

But it must never be forgotten, in the investigation of all these
analogies I have pointed out, that music has no direct, but merely an
indirect relation to them, for it never expresses the phenomenon, but only
the inner nature, the in-itself of all phenomena, the will itself. It does
not therefore express this or that particular and definite joy, this or
that sorrow, or pain, or horror, or delight, or merriment, or peace of
mind; but joy, sorrow, pain, horror, delight, merriment, peace of mind
_themselves_, to a certain extent in the abstract, their essential nature,
without accessories, and therefore without their motives. Yet we
completely understand them in this extracted quintessence. Hence it arises
that our imagination is so easily excited by music, and now seeks to give
form to that invisible yet actively moved spirit-world which speaks to us
directly, and clothe it with flesh and blood, _i.e._, to embody it in an
analogous example. This is the origin of the song with words, and finally
of the opera, the text of which should therefore never forsake that
subordinate position in order to make itself the chief thing and the music
a mere means of expressing it, which is a great misconception and a piece
of utter perversity; for music always expresses only the quintessence of
life and its events, never these themselves, and therefore their
differences do not always affect it. It is precisely this universality,
which belongs exclusively to it, together with the greatest
determinateness, that gives music the high worth which it has as the
panacea for all our woes. Thus, if music is too closely united to the
words, and tries to form itself according to the events, it is striving to
speak a language which is not its own. No one has kept so free from this
mistake as Rossini; therefore his music speaks _its own language_ so
distinctly and purely that it requires no words, and produces its full
effect when rendered by instruments alone.

According to all this, we may regard the phenomenal world, or nature, and
music as two different expressions of the same thing, which is therefore
itself the only medium of their analogy, so that a knowledge of it is
demanded in order to understand that analogy. Music, therefore, if
regarded as an expression of the world, is in the highest degree a
universal language, which is related indeed to the universality of
concepts, much as they are related to the particular things. Its
universality, however, is by no means that empty universality of
abstraction, but quite of a different kind, and is united with thorough
and distinct definiteness. In this respect it resembles geometrical
figures and numbers, which are the universal forms of all possible objects
of experience and applicable to them all _a priori_, and yet are not
abstract but perceptible and thoroughly determined. All possible efforts,
excitements, and manifestations of will, all that goes on in the heart of
man and that reason includes in the wide, negative concept of feeling, may
be expressed by the infinite number of possible melodies, but always in
the universal, in the mere form, without the material, always according to
the thing-in-itself, not the phenomenon, the inmost soul, as it were, of
the phenomenon, without the body. This deep relation which music has to
the true nature of all things also explains the fact that suitable music
played to any scene, action, event, or surrounding seems to disclose to us
its most secret meaning, and appears as the most accurate and distinct
commentary upon it. This is so truly the case, that whoever gives himself
up entirely to the impression of a symphony, seems to see all the possible
events of life and the world take place in himself, yet if he reflects, he
can find no likeness between the music and the things that passed before
his mind. For, as we have said, music is distinguished from all the other
arts by the fact that it is not a copy of the phenomenon, or, more
accurately, the adequate objectivity of will, but is the direct copy of
the will itself, and therefore exhibits itself as the metaphysical to
everything physical in the world, and as the thing-in-itself to every
phenomenon. We might, therefore, just as well call the world embodied
music as embodied will; and this is the reason why music makes every
picture, and indeed every scene of real life and of the world, at once
appear with higher significance, certainly all the more in proportion as
its melody is analogous to the inner spirit of the given phenomenon. It
rests upon this that we are able to set a poem to music as a song, or a
perceptible representation as a pantomime, or both as an opera. Such
particular pictures of human life, set to the universal language of music,
are never bound to it or correspond to it with stringent necessity; but
they stand to it only in the relation of an example chosen at will to a
general concept. In the determinateness of the real, they represent that
which music expresses in the universality of mere form. For melodies are
to a certain extent, like general concepts, an abstraction from the
actual. This actual world, then, the world of particular things, affords
the object of perception, the special and individual, the particular case,
both to the universality of the concepts and to the universality of the
melodies. But these two universalities are in a certain respect opposed to
each other; for the concepts contain particulars only as the first forms
abstracted from perception, as it were, the separated shell of things;
thus they are, strictly speaking, _abstracta_; music, on the other hand,
gives the inmost kernel which precedes all forms, or the heart of things.
This relation may be very well expressed in the language of the schoolmen
by saying the concepts are the _universalia post rem_, but music gives the
_universalia ante rem_, and the real world the _universalia in re_. To the
universal significance of a melody to which a poem has been set, it is
quite possible to set other equally arbitrarily selected examples of the
universal expressed in this poem corresponding to the significance of the
melody in the same degree. This is why the same composition is suitable to
many verses; and this is also what makes the _vaudeville_ possible. But
that in general a relation is possible between a composition and a
perceptible representation rests, as we have said, upon the fact that both
are simply different expressions of the same inner being of the world.
When now, in the particular case, such a relation is actually given, that
is to say, when the composer has been able to express in the universal
language of music the emotions of will which constitute the heart of an
event, then the melody of the song, the music of the opera, is expressive.
But the analogy discovered by the composer between the two must have
proceeded from the direct knowledge of the nature of the world unknown to
his reason, and must not be an imitation produced with conscious intention
by means of conceptions, otherwise the music does not express the inner
nature of the will itself, but merely gives an inadequate imitation of its
phenomenon. All specially imitative music does this; for example, “The
Seasons,” by Haydn; also many passages of his “Creation,” in which
phenomena of the external world are directly imitated; also all
battle-pieces. Such music is entirely to be rejected.

The unutterable depth of all music by virtue of which it floats through
our consciousness as the vision of a paradise firmly believed in yet ever
distant from us, and by which also it is so fully understood and yet so
inexplicable, rests on the fact that it restores to us all the emotions of
our inmost nature, but entirely without reality and far removed from their
pain. So also the seriousness which is essential to it, which excludes the
absurd from its direct and peculiar province, is to be explained by the
fact that its object is not the idea, with reference to which alone
deception and absurdity are possible; but its object is directly the will,
and this is essentially the most serious of all things, for it is that on
which all depends. How rich in content and full of significance the
language of music is, we see from the repetitions, as well as the _Da
capo_, the like of which would be unbearable in works composed in a
language of words, but in music are very appropriate and beneficial, for,
in order to comprehend it fully, we must hear it twice.

In the whole of this exposition of music I have been trying to bring out
clearly that it expresses in a perfectly universal language, in a
homogeneous material, mere tones, and with the greatest determinateness
and truth, the inner nature, the in-itself of the world, which we think
under the concept of will, because will is its most distinct
manifestation. Further, according to my view and contention, philosophy is
nothing but a complete and accurate repetition or expression of the nature
of the world in very general concepts, for only in such is it possible to
get a view of that whole nature which will everywhere be adequate and
applicable. Thus, whoever has followed me and entered into my mode of
thought, will not think it so very paradoxical if I say, that supposing it
were possible to give a perfectly accurate, complete explanation of music,
extending even to particulars, that is to say, a detailed repetition in
concepts of what it expresses, this would also be a sufficient repetition
and explanation of the world in concepts, or at least entirely parallel to
such an explanation, and thus it would be the true philosophy.
Consequently the saying of Leibnitz quoted above, which is quite accurate
from a lower standpoint, may be parodied in the following way to suit our
higher view of music: _Musica est exercitium metaphysices occultum
nescientis se philosophari animi_; for _scire_, to know, always means to
have fixed in abstract concepts. But further, on account of the truth of
the saying of Leibnitz, which is confirmed in various ways, music,
regarded apart from its æsthetic or inner significance, and looked at
merely externally and purely empirically, is simply the means of
comprehending directly and in the concrete large numbers and complex
relations of numbers, which otherwise we could only know indirectly by
fixing them in concepts. Therefore by the union of these two very
different but correct views of music we may arrive at a conception of the
possibility of a philosophy of number, such as that of Pythagoras and of
the Chinese in Y-King, and then interpret in this sense the saying of the
Pythagoreans which Sextus Empiricus quotes (adv. Math., L. vii.): τῳ
αριθμῳ δε τα παντ᾽ επεοικεν (_numero cuncta assimilantur_). And if,
finally, we apply this view to the interpretation of harmony and melody
given above, we shall find that a mere moral philosophy without an
explanation of Nature, such as Socrates wanted to introduce, is precisely
analogous to a mere melody without harmony, which Rousseau exclusively
desired; and, in opposition to this mere physics and metaphysics without
ethics, will correspond to mere harmony without melody. Allow me to add to
these cursory observations a few more remarks concerning the analogy of
music with the phenomenal world. We found in the second book that the
highest grade of the objectification of will, man, could not appear alone
and isolated, but presupposed the grades below him, as these again
presupposed the grades lower still. In the same way music, which directly
objectifies the will, just as the world does, is complete only in full
harmony. In order to achieve its full effect, the high leading voice of
the melody requires the accompaniment of all the other voices, even to the
lowest bass, which is to be regarded as the origin of all. The melody
itself enters as an integral part into the harmony, as the harmony enters
into it, and only thus, in the full harmonious whole, music expresses what
it aims at expressing. Thus also the one will outside of time finds its
full objectification only in the complete union of all the steps which
reveal its nature in the innumerable ascending grades of distinctness. The
following analogy is also very remarkable. We have seen in the preceding
book that notwithstanding the self-adaptation of all the phenomena of will
to each other as regards their species, which constitutes their
teleological aspect, there yet remains an unceasing conflict between those
phenomena as individuals, which is visible at every grade, and makes the
world a constant battle-field of all those manifestations of one and the
same will, whose inner contradiction with itself becomes visible through
it. In music also there is something corresponding to this. A complete,
pure, harmonious system of tones is not only physically but arithmetically
impossible. The numbers themselves by which the tones are expressed have
inextricable irrationality. There is no scale in which, when it is
counted, every fifth will be related to the keynote as 2 to 3, every major
third as 4 to 5, every minor third as 5 to 6, and so on. For if they are
correctly related to the keynote, they can no longer be so to each other;
because, for example, the fifth must be the minor third to the third, &c.
For the notes of the scale may be compared to actors who must play now one
part, now another. Therefore a perfectly accurate system of music cannot
even be thought, far less worked out; and on this account all possible
music deviates from perfect purity; it can only conceal the discords
essential to it by dividing them among all the notes, _i.e._, by
temperament. On this see Chladni’s “Akustik,” § 30, and his “Kurze
Uebersicht der Schall- und Klanglehre.”(63)

I might still have something to say about the way in which music is
perceived, namely, in and through time alone, with absolute exclusion of
space, and also apart from the influence of the knowledge of causality,
thus without understanding; for the tones make the æsthetic impression as
effect, and without obliging us to go back to their causes, as in the case
of perception. I do not wish, however, to lengthen this discussion, as I
have perhaps already gone too much into detail with regard to some things
in this Third Book, or have dwelt too much on particulars. But my aim made
it necessary, and it will be the less disapproved if the importance and
high worth of art, which is seldom sufficiently recognised, be kept in
mind. For if, according to our view, the whole visible world is just the
objectification, the mirror, of the will, conducting it to knowledge of
itself, and, indeed, as we shall soon see, to the possibility of its
deliverance; and if, at the same time, the world as idea, if we regard it
in isolation, and, freeing ourselves from all volition, allow it alone to
take possession of our consciousness, is the most joy-giving and the only
innocent side of life; we must regard art as the higher ascent, the more
complete development of all this, for it achieves essentially just what is
achieved by the visible world itself, only with greater concentration,
more perfectly, with intention and intelligence, and therefore may be
called, in the full significance of the word, the flower of life. If the
whole world as idea is only the visibility of will, the work of art is to
render this visibility more distinct. It is the _camera obscura_ which
shows the objects more purely, and enables us to survey them and
comprehend them better. It is the play within the play, the stage upon the
stage in “Hamlet.”

The pleasure we receive from all beauty, the consolation which art
affords, the enthusiasm of the artist, which enables him to forget the
cares of life,—the latter an advantage of the man of genius over other
men, which alone repays him for the suffering that increases in proportion
to the clearness of consciousness, and for the desert loneliness among men
of a different race,—all this rests on the fact that the in-itself of
life, the will, existence itself, is, as we shall see farther on, a
constant sorrow, partly miserable, partly terrible; while, on the
contrary, as idea alone, purely contemplated, or copied by art, free from
pain, it presents to us a drama full of significance. This purely knowable
side of the world, and the copy of it in any art, is the element of the
artist. He is chained to the contemplation of the play, the
objectification of will; he remains beside it, does not get tired of
contemplating it and representing it in copies; and meanwhile he bears
himself the cost of the production of that play, _i.e._, he himself is the
will which objectifies itself, and remains in constant suffering. That
pure, true, and deep knowledge of the inner nature of the world becomes
now for him an end in itself: he stops there. Therefore it does not become
to him a quieter of the will, as, we shall see in the next book, it does
in the case of the saint who has attained to resignation; it does not
deliver him for ever from life, but only at moments, and is therefore not
for him a path out of life, but only an occasional consolation in it, till
his power, increased by this contemplation and at last tired of the play,
lays hold on the real. The St. Cecilia of Raphael may be regarded as a
representation of this transition. To the real, then, we now turn in the
following book.





FOURTH BOOK. THE WORLD AS WILL.




Second Aspect. The Assertion And Denial Of The Will To Live, When
Self-Consciousness Has Been Attained.


    Tempore quo cognitio simul advenit, amor e medio
                supersurrexit.—_Oupnek’hat,_
    _Studio Anquetil Duperron_, vol. ii. p. 216.


§ 53. The last part of our work presents itself as the most serious, for
it relates to the action of men, the matter which concerns every one
directly and can be foreign or indifferent to none. It is indeed so
characteristic of the nature of man to relate everything else to action,
that in every systematic investigation he will always treat the part that
has to do with action as the result or outcome of the whole work, so far,
at least, as it interests him, and will therefore give his most serious
attention to this part, even if to no other. In this respect the following
part of our work would, in ordinary language, be called practical
philosophy, in opposition to the theoretical, which has occupied us
hitherto. But, in my opinion, all philosophy is theoretical, because it is
essential to it that it should retain a purely contemplative attitude, and
should investigate, not prescribe. To become, on the contrary, practical,
to guide conduct, to transform character, are old claims, which with
fuller insight it ought finally to give up. For here, where the worth or
worthlessness of an existence, where salvation or damnation are in
question, the dead conceptions of philosophy do not decide the matter, but
the inmost nature of man himself, the Dæmon that guides him and that has
not chosen him, but been chosen by him, as Plato would say; his
intelligible character, as Kant expresses himself. Virtue cannot be taught
any more than genius; indeed, for it the concept is just as unfruitful as
it is in art, and in both cases can only be used as an instrument. It
would, therefore, be just as absurd to expect that our moral systems and
ethics will produce virtuous, noble, and holy men, as that our æsthetics
will produce poets, painters, and musicians.

Philosophy can never do more than interpret and explain what is given. It
can only bring to distinct abstract knowledge of the reason the nature of
the world which in the concrete, that is, as feeling, expresses itself
comprehensibly to every one. This, however, it does in every possible
reference and from every point of view. Now, as this attempt has been made
from other points of view in the three preceding books with the generality
that is proper to philosophy, in this book the action of men will be
considered in the same way; and this side of the world might, indeed, be
considered the most important of all, not only subjectively, as I remarked
above, but also objectively. In considering it I shall faithfully adhere
to the method I have hitherto followed, and shall support myself by
presupposing all that has already been advanced. There is, indeed, just
one thought which forms the content of this whole work. I have endeavoured
to work it out in all other spheres, and I shall now do so with regard to
human action. I shall then have done all that is in my power to
communicate it as fully as possible.

The given point of view, and the method of treatment announced, are
themselves sufficient to indicate that in this ethical book no precepts,
no doctrine of duty must be looked for; still less will a general moral
principle be given, an universal receipt, as it were, for the production
of all the virtues. Neither shall we talk of an “_absolute ought_,” for
this contains a contradiction, as is explained in the Appendix; nor yet of
a “_law of freedom_,” which is in the same position. In general, we shall
not speak at all of “ought,” for this is how one speaks to children and to
nations still in their childhood, but not to those who have appropriated
all the culture of a full-grown age. It is a palpable contradiction to
call the will free, and yet to prescribe laws for it according to which it
ought to will. “Ought to will!”—wooden iron! But it follows from the point
of view of our system that the will is not only free, but almighty. From
it proceeds not only its action, but also its world; and as the will is,
so does its action and its world become. Both are the self-knowledge of
the will and nothing more. The will determines itself, and at the same
time both its action and its world; for besides it there is nothing, and
these are the will itself. Only thus is the will truly autonomous, and
from every other point of view it is heteronomous. Our philosophical
endeavours can only extend to exhibiting and explaining the action of men
in its inner nature and content, the various and even opposite maxims,
whose living expression it is. This we shall do in connection with the
preceding portion of our work, and in precisely the same way as we have
hitherto explained the other phenomena of the world, and have sought to
bring their inmost nature to distinct abstract knowledge. Our philosophy
will maintain the same _immanency_ in the case of action, as in all that
we have hitherto considered. Notwithstanding Kant’s great doctrine, it
will not attempt to use the forms of the phenomenon, the universal
expression of which is the principle of sufficient reason, as a
leaping-pole to jump over the phenomenon itself, which alone gives meaning
to these forms, and land in the boundless sphere of empty fictions. But
this actual world of experience, in which we are, and which is in us,
remains both the material and the limits of our consideration: a world
which is so rich in content that even the most searching investigation of
which the human mind is capable could not exhaust it. Since then the real
world of experience will never fail to afford material and reality to our
ethical investigations, any more than to those we have already conducted,
nothing will be less needful than to take refuge in negative conceptions
void of content, and then somehow or other make even ourselves believe
that we are saying something when we speak with lifted eyebrows of
“absolutes,” “infinites,” “supersensibles,” and whatever other mere
negations of this sort there may be (ουδεν εστι, η το της στερησεως ονομα,
μετα αμυδρας επινοιας—_nihil est, nisi negationis nomen, cum obscura
notione_.—Jul. or. 5), instead of which it would be shorter to say at once
cloud-cuckoo-town (νεφελοκοκκυγια): we shall not require to serve up
covered empty dishes of this kind. Finally, we shall not in this book, any
more than in those which have preceded it, narrate histories and give them
out as philosophy. For we are of opinion that whoever supposes that the
inner nature of the world can in any way, however plausibly disguised, be
_historically_ comprehended, is infinitely far from a philosophical
knowledge of the world. Yet this is what is supposed whenever a
“becoming,” or a “having become,” or an “about to become” enters into a
theory of the nature of the world, whenever an earlier or a later has the
least place in it; and in this way a beginning and an end of the world,
and the path it pursues between them, is, either openly or disguisedly,
both sought for and found, and the individual who philosophises even
recognises his own position on that path. Such _historical philosophising_
in most cases produces a cosmogony which admits of many varieties, or else
a system of emanations, a doctrine of successive disengagements from one
being; or, finally, driven in despair from fruitless efforts upon these
paths to the last path of all, it takes refuge in the converse doctrine of
a constant becoming, springing up, arising, coming to light out of
darkness, out of the hidden ground source or groundlessness, or whatever
other nonsense of this sort there may be, which is most shortly disposed
of with the remark that at the present moment a whole eternity, _i.e._, an
endless time, has already passed, so that everything that can or ought to
become must have already done so. For all such historical philosophy,
whatever airs it may give itself, regards _time_ just as if Kant had never
lived, as a quality of the thing-in-itself, and thus stops at that which
Kant calls the phenomenon in opposition to the thing-in-itself; which
Plato calls the becoming and never being, in opposition to the being and
never becoming; and which, finally, is called in the Indian philosophy the
web of Mâya. It is just the knowledge which belongs to the principle of
sufficient reason, with which no one can penetrate to the inner nature of
things, but endlessly pursues phenomena, moving without end or aim, like a
squirrel in its wheel, till, tired out at last, he stops at some point or
other arbitrarily chosen, and now desires to extort respect for it from
others also. The genuine philosophical consideration of the world, _i.e._,
the consideration that affords us a knowledge of its inner nature, and so
leads us beyond the phenomenon, is precisely that method which does not
concern itself with the whence, the whither, and the why of the world, but
always and everywhere demands only the what; the method which considers
things not according to any relation, not as becoming and passing away, in
short, not according to one of the four forms of the principle of
sufficient reason; but, on the contrary, just that which remains when all
that belongs to the form of knowledge proper to that principle has been
abstracted, the inner nature of the world, which always appears unchanged
in all the relations, but is itself never subject to them, and has the
Ideas of the world as its object or material. From such knowledge as this
proceeds philosophy, like art, and also, as we shall see in this book,
that disposition of mind which alone leads to true holiness and to
deliverance from the world.

§ 54. The first three books will, it is hoped, have conveyed the distinct
and certain knowledge that the world as idea is the complete mirror of the
will, in which it knows itself in ascending grades of distinctness and
completeness, the highest of which is man, whose nature, however, receives
its complete expression only through the whole connected series of his
actions. The self-conscious connection of these actions is made possible
by reason, which enables a man constantly to survey the whole in the
abstract.

The will, which, considered purely in itself, is without knowledge, and is
merely a blind incessant impulse, as we see it appear in unorganised and
vegetable nature and their laws, and also in the vegetative part of our
own life, receives through the addition of the world as idea, which is
developed in subjection to it, the knowledge of its own willing and of
what it is that it wills. And this is nothing else than the world as idea,
life, precisely as it exists. Therefore we called the phenomenal world the
mirror of the will, its objectivity. And since what the will wills is
always life, just because life is nothing but the representation of that
willing for the idea, it is all one and a mere pleonism if, instead of
simply saying “the will,” we say “the will to live.”

Will is the thing-in-itself, the inner content, the essence of the world.
Life, the visible world, the phenomenon, is only the mirror of the will.
Therefore life accompanies the will as inseparably as the shadow
accompanies the body; and if will exists, so will life, the world, exist.
Life is, therefore, assured to the will to live; and so long as we are
filled with the will to live we need have no fear for our existence, even
in the presence of death. It is true we see the individual come into being
and pass away; but the individual is only phenomenal, exists only for the
knowledge which is bound to the principle of sufficient reason, to the
_principio individuationis_. Certainly, for this kind of knowledge, the
individual receives his life as a gift, rises out of nothing, then suffers
the loss of this gift through death, and returns again to nothing. But we
desire to consider life philosophically, _i.e._, according to its Ideas,
and in this sphere we shall find that neither the will, the
thing-in-itself in all phenomena, nor the subject of knowing, that which
perceives all phenomena, is affected at all by birth or by death. Birth
and death belong merely to the phenomenon of will, thus to life; and it is
essential to this to exhibit itself in individuals which come into being
and pass away, as fleeting phenomena appearing in the form of
time—phenomena of that which in itself knows no time, but must exhibit
itself precisely in the way we have said, in order to objectify its
peculiar nature. Birth and death belong in like manner to life, and hold
the balance as reciprocal conditions of each other, or, if one likes the
expression, as poles of the whole phenomenon of life. The wisest of all
mythologies, the Indian, expresses this by giving to the very god that
symbolises destruction, death (as Brahma, the most sinful and the lowest
god of the Trimurti, symbolises generation, coming into being, and Vishnu
maintaining or preserving), by giving, I say, to Siva as an attribute not
only the necklace of skulls, but also the lingam, the symbol of
generation, which appears here as the counterpart of death, thus
signifying that generation and death are essentially correlatives, which
reciprocally neutralise and annul each other. It was precisely the same
sentiment that led the Greeks and Romans to adorn their costly sarcophagi,
just as we see them now, with feasts, dances, marriages, the chase, fights
of wild beasts, bacchanalians, &c.; thus with representations of the full
ardour of life, which they place before us not only in such revels and
sports, but also in sensual groups, and even go so far as to represent the
sexual intercourse of satyrs and goats. Clearly the aim was to point in
the most impressive manner away from the death of the mourned individual
to the immortal life of nature, and thus to indicate, though without
abstract knowledge, that the whole of nature is the phenomenon and also
the fulfilment of the will to live. The form of this phenomenon is time,
space, and causality, and by means of these individuation, which carries
with it that the individual must come into being and pass away. But this
no more affects the will to live, of whose manifestation the individual
is, as it were, only a particular example or specimen, than the death of
an individual injures the whole of nature. For it is not the individual,
but only the species that Nature cares for, and for the preservation of
which she so earnestly strives, providing for it with the utmost
prodigality through the vast surplus of the seed and the great strength of
the fructifying impulse. The individual, on the contrary, neither has nor
can have any value for Nature, for her kingdom is infinite time and
infinite space, and in these infinite multiplicity of possible
individuals. Therefore she is always ready to let the individual fall, and
hence it is not only exposed to destruction in a thousand ways by the most
insignificant accident, but originally destined for it, and conducted
towards it by Nature herself from the moment it has served its end of
maintaining the species. Thus Nature naïvely expresses the great truth
that only the Ideas, not the individuals, have, properly speaking,
reality, _i.e._, are complete objectivity of the will. Now, since man is
Nature itself, and indeed Nature at the highest grade of its
self-consciousness, but Nature is only the objectified will to live, the
man who has comprehended and retained this point of view may well console
himself, when contemplating his own death and that of his friends, by
turning his eyes to the immortal life of Nature, which he himself is. This
is the significance of Siva with the lingam, and of those ancient
sarcophagi with their pictures of glowing life, which say to the mourning
beholder, _Natura non contristatur_.

That generation and death are to be regarded as something belonging to
life, and essential to this phenomenon of the will, arises also from the
fact that they both exhibit themselves merely as higher powers of the
expression of that in which all the rest of life consists. This is through
and through nothing else than the constant change of matter in the fixed
permanence of form; and this is what constitutes the transitoriness of the
individual and the permanence of the species. Constant nourishment and
renewal differ from generation only in degree, and constant excretion
differs only in degree from death. The first shows itself most simply and
distinctly in the plant. The plant is throughout a constant recurrence of
the same impulse of its simplest fibre, which groups itself into leaf and
branch. It is a systematic aggregate of similar plants supporting each
other, whose constant reproduction is its single impulse. It ascends to
the full satisfaction of this tendency through the grades of its
metamorphosis, finally to the blossom and fruit, that compendium of its
existence and effort in which it now attains, by a short way, to that
which is its single aim, and at a stroke produces a thousand-fold what, up
till then, it effected only in the particular case—the repetition of
itself. Its earlier growth and development stands in the same relation to
its fruit as writing stands to printing. With the animal it is clearly
quite the same. The process of nourishing is a constant reproduction; the
process of reproduction is a higher power of nourishing. The pleasure
which accompanies the act of procreation is a higher power of the
agreeableness of the sense of life. On the other hand, excretion, the
constant exhalation and throwing off of matter, is the same as that which,
at a higher power, death, is the contrary of generation. And if here we
are always content to retain the form without lamenting the discarded
matter, we ought to bear ourselves in the same way if in death the same
thing happens, in a higher degree and to the whole, as takes place daily
and hourly in a partial manner in excretion: if we are indifferent to the
one, we ought not to shrink from the other. Therefore, from this point of
view, it appears just as perverse to desire the continuance of an
individuality which will be replaced by other individuals as to desire the
permanence of matter which will be replaced by other matter. It appears
just as foolish to embalm the body as it would be carefully to preserve
its excrement. As to the individual consciousness which is bound to the
individual body, it is absolutely interrupted every day by sleep. Deep
sleep is, while it lasts, in no way different from death, into which, in
fact, it often passes continuously, as in the case of freezing to death.
It differs only with regard to the future, the awaking. Death is a sleep
in which individuality is forgotten; everything else wakes again, or
rather never slept.(64)

Above all things, we must distinctly recognise that the form of the
phenomenon of will, the form of life or reality, is really only the
_present_, not the future nor the past. The latter are only in the
conception, exist only in the connection of knowledge, so far as it
follows the principle of sufficient reason. No man has ever lived in the
past, and none will live in the future; the _present_ alone is the form of
all life, and is its sure possession which can never be taken from it. The
present always exists, together with its content. Both remain fixed
without wavering, like the rainbow on the waterfall. For life is firm and
certain in the will, and the present is firm and certain in life.
Certainly, if we reflect on the thousands of years that are past, of the
millions of men who lived in them, we ask, What were they? what has become
of them? But, on the other hand, we need only recall our own past life and
renew its scenes vividly in our imagination, and then ask again, What was
all this? what has become of it? As it is with it, so is it with the life
of those millions. Or should we suppose that the past could receive a new
existence because it has been sealed by death? Our own past, the most
recent part of it, and even yesterday, is now no more than an empty dream
of the fancy, and such is the past of all those millions. What was? What
is? The will, of which life is the mirror, and knowledge free from will,
which beholds it clearly in that mirror. Whoever has not yet recognised
this, or will not recognise it, must add to the question asked above as to
the fate of past generations of men this question also: Why he, the
questioner, is so fortunate as to be conscious of this costly, fleeting,
and only real present, while those hundreds of generations of men, even
the heroes and philosophers of those ages, have sunk into the night of the
past, and have thus become nothing; but he, his insignificant ego,
actually exists? or more shortly, though somewhat strangely: Why this now,
his now, _is_ just now and _was_ not long ago? Since he asks such strange
questions, he regards his existence and his time as independent of each
other, and the former as projected into the latter. He assumes indeed two
nows—one which belongs to the object, the other which belongs to the
subject, and marvels at the happy accident of their coincidence. But in
truth, only the point of contact of the object, the form of which is time,
with the subject, which has no mode of the principle of sufficient reason
as its form, constitutes the present, as is shown in the essay on the
principle of sufficient reason. Now all object is the will so far as it
has become idea, and the subject is the necessary correlative of the
object. But real objects are only in the present; the past and the future
contain only conceptions and fancies, therefore the present is the
essential form of the phenomenon of the will, and inseparable from it. The
present alone is that which always exists and remains immovable. That
which, empirically apprehended, is the most transitory of all, presents
itself to the metaphysical vision, which sees beyond the forms of
empirical perception, as that which alone endures, the _nunc stans_ of the
schoolmen. The source and the supporter of its content is the will to live
or the thing-in-itself,—which we are. That which constantly becomes and
passes away, in that it has either already been or is still to be, belongs
to the phenomenon as such on account of its forms, which make coming into
being and passing away possible. Accordingly, we must think:—_Quid
fuit?_—_Quod est._ _Quid erit?_—_Quod fuit;_ and take it in the strict
meaning of the words; thus understand not _simile_ but _idem_. For life is
certain to the will, and the present is certain to life. Thus it is that
every one can say, “I am once for all lord of the present, and through all
eternity it will accompany me as my shadow: therefore I do not wonder
where it has come from, and how it happens that it is exactly now.” We
might compare time to a constantly revolving sphere; the half that was
always sinking would be the past, that which was always rising would be
the future; but the indivisible point at the top, where the tangent
touches, would be the extensionless present. As the tangent does not
revolve with the sphere, neither does the present, the point of contact of
the object, the form of which is time, with the subject, which has no
form, because it does not belong to the knowable, but is the condition of
all that is knowable. Or, time is like an unceasing stream, and the
present a rock on which the stream breaks itself, but does not carry away
with it. The will, as thing-in-itself, is just as little subordinate to
the principle of sufficient reason as the subject of knowledge, which,
finally, in a certain regard is the will itself or its expression. And as
life, its own phenomenon, is assured to the will, so is the present, the
single form of real life. Therefore we have not to investigate the past
before life, nor the future after death: we have rather to know the
_present_, the one form in which the will manifests itself.(65) It will
not escape from the will, but neither will the will escape from it. If,
therefore, life as it is satisfies, whoever affirms it in every way may
regard it with confidence as endless, and banish the fear of death as an
illusion that inspires him with the foolish dread that he can ever be
robbed of the present, and foreshadows a time in which there is no
present; an illusion with regard to time analogous to the illusion with
regard to space through which every one imagines the position on the globe
he happens to occupy as above, and all other places as below. In the same
way every one links the present to his own individuality, and imagines
that all present is extinguished with it; that then past and future might
be without a present. But as on the surface of the globe every place is
above, so the form of all life is the _present_, and to fear death because
it robs us of the present, is just as foolish as to fear that we may slip
down from the round globe upon which we have now the good fortune to
occupy the upper surface. The present is the form essential to the
objectification of the will. It cuts time, which extends infinitely in
both directions, as a mathematical point, and stands immovably fixed, like
an everlasting mid-day with no cool evening, as the actual sun burns
without intermission, while it only seems to sink into the bosom of night.
Therefore, if a man fears death as his annihilation, it is just as if he
were to think that the sun cries out at evening, “Woe is me! for I go down
into eternal night.”(66) And conversely, whoever is oppressed with the
burden of life, whoever desires life and affirms it, but abhors its
torments, and especially can no longer endure the hard lot that has fallen
to himself, such a man has no deliverance to hope for from death, and
cannot right himself by suicide. The cool shades of Orcus allure him only
with the false appearance of a haven of rest. The earth rolls from day
into night, the individual dies, but the sun itself shines without
intermission, an eternal noon. Life is assured to the will to live; the
form of life is an endless present, no matter how the individuals, the
phenomena of the Idea, arise and pass away in time, like fleeting dreams.
Thus even already suicide appears to us as a vain and therefore a foolish
action; when we have carried our investigation further it will appear to
us in a still less favourable light.

Dogmas change and our knowledge is deceptive; but Nature never errs, her
procedure is sure, and she never conceals it. Everything is entirely in
Nature, and Nature is entire in everything. She has her centre in every
brute. It has surely found its way into existence, and it will surely find
its way out of it. In the meantime it lives, fearless and without care, in
the presence of annihilation, supported by the consciousness that it is
Nature herself, and imperishable as she is. Man alone carries about with
him, in abstract conceptions, the certainty of his death; yet this can
only trouble him very rarely, when for a single moment some occasion calls
it up to his imagination. Against the mighty voice of Nature reflection
can do little. In man, as in the brute which does not think, the certainty
that springs from his inmost consciousness that he himself is Nature, the
world, predominates as a lasting frame of mind; and on account of this no
man is observably disturbed by the thought of certain and never-distant
death, but lives as if he would live for ever. Indeed this is carried so
far that we may say that no one has really a lively conviction of the
certainty of his death, otherwise there would be no great difference
between his frame of mind and that of a condemned criminal. Every one
recognises that certainty in the abstract and theoretically, but lays it
aside like other theoretical truths which are not applicable to practice,
without really receiving it into his living consciousness. Whoever
carefully considers this peculiarity of human character will see that the
psychological explanations of it, from habit and acquiescence in the
inevitable, are by no means sufficient, and that its true explanation lies
in the deeper ground we have given. The same fact explains the
circumstance that at all times and among all peoples dogmas of some kind
or other relating to the continued existence of the individual after death
arise, and are believed in, although the evidence in support of them must
always be very insufficient, and the evidence against them forcible and
varied. But, in truth, this really requires no proof, but is recognised by
the healthy understanding as a fact, and confirmed by the confidence that
Nature never lies any more than she errs, but openly exhibits and naïvely
expresses her action and her nature, while only we ourselves obscure it by
our folly, in order to establish what is agreeable to our limited point of
view.

But this that we have brought to clearest consciousness, that although the
particular phenomenon of the will has a temporal beginning and end, the
will itself as thing-in-itself is not affected by it, nor yet the
correlative of all object, the knowing but never known subject, and that
life is always assured to the will to live—this is not to be numbered with
the doctrines of immortality. For permanence has no more to do with the
will or with the pure subject of knowing, the eternal eye of the world,
than transitoriness, for both are predicates that are only valid in time,
and the will and the pure subject of knowing lie outside time. Therefore
the egoism of the individual (this particular phenomenon of will
enlightened by the subject of knowing) can extract as little nourishment
and consolation for his wish to endure through endless time from the view
we have expressed, as he could from the knowledge that after his death the
rest of the eternal world would continue to exist, which is just the
expression of the same view considered objectively, and therefore
temporally. For every individual is transitory only as phenomenon, but as
thing-in-itself is timeless, and therefore endless. But it is also only as
phenomenon that an individual is distinguished from the other things of
the world; as thing-in-itself he is the will which appears in all, and
death destroys the illusion which separates his consciousness from that of
the rest: this is immortality. His exemption from death, which belongs to
him only as thing-in-itself, is for the phenomenon one with the
immortality of the rest of the external world.(67) Hence also, it arises
that although the inward and merely felt consciousness of that which we
have raised to distinct knowledge is indeed, as we have said, sufficient
to prevent the thought of death from poisoning the life of the rational
being, because this consciousness is the basis of that love of life which
maintains everything living, and enables it to live on at ease as if there
were no such thing as death, so long as it is face to face with life, and
turns its attention to it, yet it will not prevent the individual from
being seized with the fear of death, and trying in every way to escape
from it, when it presents itself to him in some particular real case, or
even only in his imagination, and he is compelled to contemplate it. For
just as, so long as his knowledge was directed to life as such, he was
obliged to recognise immortality in it, so when death is brought before
his eyes, he is obliged to recognise it as that which it is, the temporal
end of the particular temporal phenomenon. What we fear in death is by no
means the pain, for it lies clearly on this side of death, and, moreover,
we often take refuge in death from pain, just as, on the contrary, we
sometimes endure the most fearful suffering merely to escape death for a
while, although it would be quick and easy. Thus we distinguish pain and
death as two entirely different evils. What we fear in death is the end of
the individual, which it openly professes itself to be, and since the
individual is a particular objectification of the will to live itself, its
whole nature struggles against death. Now when feeling thus exposes us
helpless, reason can yet step in and for the most part overcome its
adverse influence, for it places us upon a higher standpoint, from which
we no longer contemplate the particular but the whole. Therefore a
philosophical knowledge of the nature of the world, which extended to the
point we have now reached in this work but went no farther, could even at
this point of view overcome the terror of death in the measure in which
reflection had power over direct feeling in the given individual. A man
who had thoroughly assimilated the truths we have already advanced, but
had not come to know, either from his own experience or from a deeper
insight, that constant suffering is essential to life, who found
satisfaction and all that he wished in life, and could calmly and
deliberately desire that his life, as he had hitherto known it, should
endure for ever or repeat itself ever anew, and whose love of life was so
great that he willingly and gladly accepted all the hardships and miseries
to which it is exposed for the sake of its pleasures,—such a man would
stand “with firm-knit bones on the well-rounded, enduring earth,” and
would have nothing to fear. Armed with the knowledge we have given him, he
would await with indifference the death that hastens towards him on the
wings of time. He would regard it as a false illusion, an impotent
spectre, which frightens the weak but has no power over him who knows that
he is himself the will of which the whole world is the objectification or
copy, and that therefore he is always certain of life, and also of the
present, the peculiar and only form of the phenomenon of the will. He
could not be terrified by an endless past or future in which he would not
be, for this he would regard as the empty delusion of the web of Mâya.
Thus he would no more fear death than the sun fears the night. In the
“Bhagavad-Gita” Krishna thus raises the mind of his young pupil Arjuna,
when, seized with compunction at the sight of the arrayed hosts (somewhat
as Xerxes was), he loses heart and desires to give up the battle in order
to avert the death of so many thousands. Krishna leads him to this point
of view, and the death of those thousands can no longer restrain him; he
gives the sign for battle. This point of view is also expressed by
Goethe’s Prometheus, especially when he says—


    “Here sit I, form mankind
    In my own image,
    A race like to myself,
    To suffer and to weep,
    Rejoice, enjoy,
    And heed thee not,
    As I.”


The philosophy of Bruno and that of Spinoza might also lead any one to
this point of view whose conviction was not shaken and weakened by their
errors and imperfections. That of Bruno has properly no ethical theory at
all, and the theory contained in the philosophy of Spinoza does not really
proceed from the inner nature of his doctrine, but is merely tacked on to
it by means of weak and palpable sophisms, though in itself it is
praiseworthy and beautiful. Finally, there are many men who would occupy
this point of view if their knowledge kept pace with their will, _i.e._,
if, free from all illusion, they were in a position to become clearly and
distinctly themselves. For this is, for knowledge, the point of view of
the complete _assertion of the will to live_.

That the will asserts itself means, that while in its objectivity, _i.e._,
in the world and life, its own nature is completely and distinctly given
it as idea, this knowledge does not by any means check its volition; but
this very life, so known, is willed as such by the will with knowledge,
consciously and deliberately, just as up to this point it willed it as
blind effort without knowledge. The opposite of this, the _denial of the
will to live_, shows itself if, when that knowledge is attained, volition
ends, because the particular known phenomena no longer act as _motives_
for willing, but the whole knowledge of the nature of the world, the
mirror of the will, which has grown up through the comprehension of the
_Ideas_, becomes a _quieter_ of the will; and thus free, the will
suppresses itself. These quite unfamiliar conceptions are difficult to
understand when expressed in this general way, but it is hoped they will
become clear through the exposition we shall give presently, with special
reference to action, of the phenomena in which, on the one hand, the
assertion in its different grades, and, on the other hand, the denial,
expresses itself. For both proceed from knowledge, yet not from abstract
knowledge, which is expressed in words, but from living knowledge, which
is expressed in action and behaviour alone, and is independent of the
dogmas which at the same time occupy the reason as abstract knowledge. To
exhibit them both, and bring them to distinct knowledge of the reason, can
alone be my aim, and not to prescribe or recommend the one or the other,
which would be as foolish as it would be useless; for the will in itself
is absolutely free and entirely self-determining, and for it there is no
law. But before we go on to the exposition referred to, we must first
explain and more exactly define this _freedom_ and its relation to
necessity. And also, with regard to the life, the assertion and denial of
which is our problem, we must insert a few general remarks connected with
the will and its objects. Through all this we shall facilitate the
apprehension of the inmost nature of the knowledge we are aiming at, of
the ethical significance of methods of action.

Since, as has been said, this whole work is only the unfolding of a single
thought, it follows that all its parts have the most intimate connection
with each other. Not merely that each part stands in a necessary relation
to what immediately precedes it, and only presupposes a recollection of
that by the reader, as is the case with all philosophies which consist
merely of a series of inferences, but that every part of the whole work is
related to every other part and presupposes it. It is, therefore,
necessary that the reader should remember not only what has just been
said, but all the earlier parts of the work, so that he may be able to
connect them with what he is reading, however much may have intervened.
Plato also makes this demand upon his readers through the intricate
digressions of his dialogues, in which he only returns to the leading
thought after long episodes, which illustrate and explain it. In our case
this demand is necessary; for the breaking up of our one single thought
into its many aspects is indeed the only means of imparting it, though not
essential to the thought itself, but merely an artificial form. The
division of four principal points of view into four books, and the most
careful bringing together of all that is related and homogeneous, assists
the exposition and its comprehension; yet the material absolutely does not
admit of an advance in a straight line, such as the progress of history,
but necessitates a more complicated exposition. This again makes a
repeated study of the book necessary, for thus alone does the connection
of all the parts with each other become distinct, and only then do they
all mutually throw light upon each other and become quite clear.(68)

§ 55. That the will as such is _free_, follows from the fact that,
according to our view, it is the thing-in-itself, the content of all
phenomena. The phenomena, on the other hand, we recognise as absolutely
subordinate to the principle of sufficient reason in its four forms. And
since we know that necessity is throughout identical with following from
given grounds, and that these are convertible conceptions, all that
belongs to the phenomenon, _i.e._, all that is object for the knowing
subject as individual, is in one aspect reason, and in another aspect
consequent; and in this last capacity is determined with absolute
necessity, and can, therefore, in no respect be other than it is. The
whole content of Nature, the collective sum of its phenomena, is thus
throughout necessary, and the necessity of every part, of every
phenomenon, of every event, can always be proved, because it must be
possible to find the reason from which it follows as a consequent. This
admits of no exception: it follows from the unrestricted validity of the
principle of sufficient reason. In another aspect, however, the same world
is for us, in all its phenomena, objectivity of will. And the will, since
it is not phenomenon, is not idea or object, but thing-in-itself, and is
not subordinate to the principle of sufficient reason, the form of all
object; thus is not determined as a consequent through any reason, knows
no necessity, _i.e._, is _free_. The concept of freedom is thus properly a
negative concept, for its content is merely the denial of necessity,
_i.e._, the relation of consequent to its reason, according to the
principle of sufficient reason. Now here lies before us in its most
distinct form the solution of that great contradiction, the union of
freedom with necessity, which has so often been discussed in recent times,
yet, so far as I know, never clearly and adequately. Everything is as
phenomenon, as object, absolutely necessary: _in itself_ it is will, which
is perfectly free to all eternity. The phenomenon, the object, is
necessarily and unalterably determined in that chain of causes and effects
which admits of no interruption. But the existence in general of this
object, and its specific nature, _i.e._, the Idea which reveals itself in
it, or, in other words, its character, is a direct manifestation of will.
Thus, in conformity with the freedom of this will, the object might not be
at all, or it might be originally and essentially something quite
different from what it is, in which case, however, the whole chain of
which it is a link, and which is itself a manifestation of the same will,
would be quite different also. But once there and existing, it has entered
the chain of causes and effects, is always necessarily determined in it,
and can, therefore, neither become something else, _i.e._, change itself,
nor yet escape from the chain, _i.e._, vanish. Man, like every other part
of Nature, is objectivity of the will; therefore all that has been said
holds good of him. As everything in Nature has its forces and qualities,
which react in a definite way when definitely affected, and constitute its
character, man also has his _character_, from which the motives call forth
his actions with necessity. In this manner of conduct his empirical
character reveals itself, but in this again his intelligible character,
the will in itself, whose determined phenomenon he is. But man is the most
complete phenomenon of will, and, as we explained in the Second Book, he
had to be enlightened with so high a degree of knowledge in order to
maintain himself in existence, that in it a perfectly adequate copy or
repetition of the nature of the world under the form of the idea became
possible: this is the comprehension of the Ideas, the pure mirror of the
world, as we learnt in the Third Book. Thus in man the will can attain to
full self-consciousness, to distinct and exhaustive knowledge of its own
nature, as it mirrors itself in the whole world. We saw in the preceding
book that art springs from the actual presence of this degree of
knowledge; and at the end of our whole work it will further appear that,
through the same knowledge, in that the will relates it to itself, a
suppression and self-denial of the will in its most perfect manifestation
is possible. So that the freedom which otherwise, as belonging to the
thing-in-itself, can never show itself in the phenomenon, in such a case
does also appear in it, and, by abolishing the nature which lies at the
foundation of the phenomenon, while the latter itself still continues to
exist in time, it brings about a contradiction of the phenomenon with
itself, and in this way exhibits the phenomena of holiness and
self-renunciation. But all this can only be fully understood at the end of
this book. What has just been said merely affords a preliminary and
general indication of how man is distinguished from all the other
phenomena of will by the fact that freedom, _i.e._, independence of the
principle of sufficient reason, which only belongs to the will as
thing-in-itself, and contradicts the phenomenon, may yet possibly, in his
case, appear in the phenomenon also, where, however, it necessarily
exhibits itself as a contradiction of the phenomenon with itself. In this
sense, not only the will in itself, but man also may certainly be called
free, and thus distinguished from all other beings. But how this is to be
understood can only become clear through all that is to follow, and for
the present we must turn away from it altogether. For, in the first place,
we must beware of the error that the action of the individual definite man
is subject to no necessity, _i.e._, that the power of the motive is less
certain than the power of the cause, or the following of the conclusion
from the premises. The freedom of the will as thing-in-itself, if, as has
been said, we abstract from the entirely exceptional case mentioned above,
by no means extends directly to its phenomenon, not even in the case in
which this reaches the highest made of its visibility, and thus does not
extend to the rational animal endowed with individual character, _i.e._,
the person. The person is never free although he is the phenomenon of a
free will; for he is already the determined phenomenon of the free
volition of this will, and, because he enters the form of every object,
the principle of sufficient reason, he develops indeed the unity of that
will in a multiplicity of actions, but on account of the timeless unity of
that volition in itself, this multiplicity exhibits in itself the regular
conformity to law of a force of Nature. Since, however, it is that free
volition that becomes visible in the person and the whole of his conduct,
relating itself to him as the concept to the definition, every individual
action of the person is to be ascribed to the free will, and directly
proclaims itself as such in consciousness. Therefore, as was said in the
Second Book, every one regards himself _a priori_ (_i.e._, here in this
original feeling) as free in his individual actions, in the sense that in
every given case every action is possible for him, and he only recognises
_a posteriori_ from experience and reflection upon experience that his
actions take place with absolute necessity from the coincidence of his
character with his motives. Hence it arises that every uncultured man,
following his feeling, ardently defends complete freedom in particular
actions, while the great thinkers of all ages, and indeed the more
profound systems of religion, have denied it. But whoever has come to see
clearly that the whole nature of man is will, and he himself only a
phenomenon of this will, and that such a phenomenon has, even from the
subject itself, the principle of sufficient reason as its necessary form,
which here appears as the law of motivation,—such a man will regard it as
just as absurd to doubt the inevitable nature of an action when the motive
is presented to a given character, as to doubt that the three angles of
any triangle are together equal to two right angles. Priestley has very
sufficiently proved the necessity of the individual action in his
“Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity;” but Kant, whose merit in this
respect is specially great, first proved the coexistence of this necessity
with the freedom of the will in itself, _i.e._, apart from the
phenomenon,(69) by establishing the distinction between the intelligible
and the empirical character. I entirely adhere to this distinction, for
the former is the will as thing-in-itself so far as it appears in a
definite individual in a definite grade, and the latter is this phenomenon
itself as it exhibits itself in time in the mode of action, and in space
in the physical structure. In order to make the relation of the two
comprehensible, the best expression is that which I have already used in
the introductory essay, that the intelligible character of every man is to
be regarded as an act of will outside time, and therefore indivisible and
unchangeable, and the manifestation of this act of will developed and
broken up in time and space and all the forms of the principle of
sufficient reason is the empirical character as it exhibits itself for
experience in the whole conduct and life of this man. As the whole tree is
only the constantly repeated manifestation of one and the same tendency,
which exhibits itself in its simplest form in the fibre, and recurs and is
easily recognised in the construction of the leaf, shoot, branch, and
trunk, so all a man’s deeds are merely the constantly repeated expression,
somewhat varied in form, of his intelligible character, and the induction
based on the sum of all these expressions gives us his empirical
character. For the rest, I shall not at this point repeat in my own words
Kant’s masterly exposition, but presuppose it as known.

In the year 1840 I dealt with the important chapter on the freedom of the
will, thoroughly and in detail, in my crowned prize-essay upon the
subject, and exposed the reason of the delusion which led men to imagine
that they found an empirically given absolute freedom of the will, that is
to say, a _liberum arbitrium indifferentiæ_, as a fact in
self-consciousness; for the question propounded for the essay was with
great insight directed to this point. Therefore, as I refer the reader to
that work, and also to the tenth paragraph of the prize-essay on the basis
of morals, which was published along with it under the title “The Two
Fundamental Problems of Ethics,” I now omit the incomplete exposition of
the necessity of the act of will, which was given at this place in the
first edition. Instead of it I shall explain the delusion mentioned above
in a brief discussion which is presupposed in the nineteenth chapter of
the supplement to the present work, and therefore could not be given in
the prize-essay referred to.

Apart from the fact that the will as the true thing-in-itself is actually
original and independent, and that the feeling of its originality and
absoluteness must accompany its acts in self-consciousness, though here
they are already determined, there arises the illusion of an empirical
freedom of the will (instead of the transcendental freedom which alone is
to be attributed to it), and thus a freedom of its particular actions,
from that attitude of the intellect towards the will which is explained,
separated, and subordinated in the nineteenth chapter of the supplement,
especially under No. 3. The intellect knows the conclusions of the will
only _a posteriori_ and empirically; therefore when a choice is presented,
it has no data as to how the will is to decide. For the intelligible
character, by virtue of which, when motives are given, only _one_ decision
is possible and is therefore necessary, does not come within the knowledge
of the intellect, but merely the empirical character is known to it
through the succession of its particular acts. Therefore it seems to the
intellect that in a given case two opposite decisions are possible for the
will. But this is just the same thing as if we were to say of a
perpendicular beam that has lost its balance, and is hesitating which way
to fall, “It can fall either to the right hand or the left.” This _can_
has merely a subjective significance, and really means “as far as the data
known to us are concerned.” Objectively, the direction of the fall is
necessarily determined as soon as the equilibrium is lost. Accordingly,
the decision of one’s own will is undetermined only to the beholder, one’s
own intellect, and thus merely relatively and subjectively for the subject
of knowing. In itself and objectively, on the other hand, in every choice
presented to it, its decision is at once determined and necessary. But
this determination only comes into consciousness through the decision that
follows upon it. Indeed, we receive an empirical proof of this when any
difficult and important choice lies before us, but only under a condition
which is not yet present, but merely hoped for, so that in the meanwhile
we can do nothing, but must remain passive. Now we consider how we shall
decide when the circumstances occur that will give us a free activity and
choice. Generally the foresight of rational deliberation recommends one
decision, while direct inclination leans rather to the other. So long as
we are compelled to remain passive, the side of reason seems to wish to
keep the upper hand; but we see beforehand how strongly the other side
will influence us when the opportunity for action arises. Till then we are
eagerly concerned to place the motives on both sides in the clearest
light, by calm meditation on the _pro et contra_, so that every motive may
exert its full influence upon the will when the time arrives, and it may
not be misled by a mistake on the part of the intellect to decide
otherwise than it would have done if all the motives had their due
influence upon it. But this distinct unfolding of the motives on both
sides is all that the intellect can do to assist the choice. It awaits the
real decision just as passively and with the same intense curiosity as if
it were that of a foreign will. Therefore from its point of view both
decisions must seem to it equally possible; and this is just the illusion
of the empirical freedom of the will. Certainly the decision enters the
sphere of the intellect altogether empirically, as the final conclusion of
the matter; but yet it proceeded from the inner nature, the intelligible
character, of the individual will in its conflict with given motives, and
therefore with complete necessity. The intellect can do nothing more than
bring out clearly and fully the nature of the motives; it cannot determine
the will itself; for the will is quite inaccessible to it, and, as we have
seen, cannot be investigated.

If, under the same circumstances, a man could act now one way and now
another, it would be necessary that his will itself should have changed in
the meantime, and thus that it should lie in time, for change is only
possible in time; but then either the will would be a mere phenomenon, or
time would be a condition of the thing-in-itself. Accordingly the dispute
as to the freedom of the particular action, the _liberum arbitrium
indifferentiæ_, really turns on the question whether the will lies in time
or not. If, as both Kant’s doctrine and the whole of my system
necessitates, the will is the thing-in-itself outside time and outside
every form of the principle of sufficient reason, not only must the
individual act in the same way in the same circumstances, and not only
must every bad action be the sure warrant of innumerable others, which the
individual _must_ perform and _cannot_ leave, but, as Kant said, if only
the empirical character and the motives were completely given, it would be
possible to calculate the future conduct of a man just as we can calculate
an eclipse of the sun or moon. As Nature is consistent, so is the
character; every action must take place in accordance with it, just as
every phenomenon takes place according to a law of Nature: the causes in
the latter case and the motives in the former are merely the occasional
causes, as was shown in the Second Book. The will, whose phenomenon is the
whole being and life of man, cannot deny itself in the particular case,
and what the man wills on the whole, that will he also will in the
particular case.

The assertion of an empirical freedom of the will, a _liberum arbitrium
indifferentiæ_, agrees precisely with the doctrine that places the inner
nature of man in a _soul_, which is originally a _knowing_, and indeed
really an abstract _thinking_ nature, and only in consequence of this a
_willing_ nature—a doctrine which thus regards the will as of a secondary
or derivative nature, instead of knowledge which is really so. The will
indeed came to be regarded as an act of thought, and to be identified with
the judgment, especially by Descartes and Spinoza. According to this
doctrine every man must become what he is only through his knowledge; he
must enter the world as a moral cipher come to know the things in it, and
thereupon determine to be this or that, to act thus or thus, and may also
through new knowledge achieve a new course of action, that is to say,
become another person. Further, he must first know a thing to be _good_,
and in consequence of this will it, instead of first _willing_ it, and in
consequence of this calling it _good_. According to my fundamental point
of view, all this is a reversal of the true relation. Will is first and
original; knowledge is merely added to it as an instrument belonging to
the phenomenon of will. Therefore every man is what he is through his
will, and his character is original, for willing is the basis of his
nature. Through the knowledge which is added to it he comes to know in the
course of experience _what he is_, _i.e._, he learns his character. Thus
he _knows_ himself in consequence of and in accordance with the nature of
his will, instead of _willing_ in consequence of and in accordance with
his knowing. According to the latter view, he would only require to
consider how he would like best to be, and he would be it; that is its
doctrine of the freedom of the will. Thus it consists really in this, that
a man is his own work guided by the light of knowledge. I, on the
contrary, say that he is his own work before all knowledge, and knowledge
is merely added to it to enlighten it. Therefore he cannot resolve to be
this or that, nor can he become other than he is; but he _is_ once for
all, and he knows in the course of experience _what_ he is. According to
one doctrine he _wills_ what he knows, and according to the other he
_knows_ what he wills.

The Greeks called the character ηθος, and its expression, _i.e._, morals,
ηθη. But this word comes from εθος, custom; they chose it in order to
express metaphorically the constancy of character through the constancy of
custom. Το γαρ ηθος απο του εθους εχει την επωνυμιαν. ηθικε γαρ καλειται
δια το εθιζεσθαι (_a voce_ ηθος, _i.e._, _consuetudo_ ηθος _est
appellatum: ethica ergo dicta est_ απο του εθιζεσθαι, _sivi ab
assuescendo_) says Aristotle (Eth. Magna, i. 6, p. 1186, and Eth. Eud., p.
1220, and Eth. Nic., p. 1103, ed. Ber.) Stobæus quotes: οἱ δε κατα Ζηνωνα
τροπικως; ηθος εστι πηγη βιου αφ᾽ ἡς αἱ κατα μερος πραξεις ρεουσι (_Stoici
autem, Zenonis castra sequentes, metaphorice ethos definiunt vitæ fontem,
e quo singulæ manant actiones_), ii. ch. 7. In Christian theology we find
the dogma of predestination in consequence of election and non-election
(Rom. ix. 11-24), clearly originating from the knowledge that man does not
change himself, but his life and conduct, _i.e._, his empirical character,
is only the unfolding of his intelligible character, the development of
decided and unchangeable natural dispositions recognisable even in the
child; therefore, as it were, even at his birth his conduct is firmly
determined, and remains essentially the same to the end. This we entirely
agree with; but certainly the consequences which followed from the union
of this perfectly correct insight with the dogmas that already existed in
Jewish theology, and which now gave rise to the great difficulty, the
Gordian knot upon which most of the controversies of the Church turned, I
do not undertake to defend, for even the Apostle Paul scarcely succeeded
in doing so by means of his simile of the potter’s vessels which he
invented for the purpose, for the result he finally arrived at was nothing
else than this:—


    “Let mankind
    Fear the gods!
    They hold the power
    In everlasting hands:
    And they can use it
    As seems good to them.”


Such considerations, however, are really foreign to our subject. Some
explanation as to the relation between the character and the knowledge in
which all its motives lie, will now be more to the point.

The motives which determine the manifestation of the character or conduct
influence it through the medium of knowledge. But knowledge is changeable,
and often vacillates between truth and error, yet, as a rule, is rectified
more and more in the course of life, though certainly in very different
degrees. Therefore the conduct of a man may be observably altered without
justifying us in concluding that his character has been changed. What the
man really and in general wills, the striving of his inmost nature, and
the end he pursues in accordance with it, this we can never change by
influence upon him from without by instruction, otherwise we could
transform him. Seneca says admirably, _velle non discitur_; whereby he
preferred truth to his Stoic philosophers, who taught διδακτην ειναι την
αρετην (_doceri posse virtutem_). From without the will can only be
affected by motives. But these can never change the will itself; for they
have power over it only under the presupposition that it is precisely such
as it is. All that they can do is thus to alter the direction of its
effort, _i.e._, bring it about that it shall seek in another way than it
has hitherto done that which it invariably seeks. Therefore instruction,
improved knowledge, in other words, influence from without, may indeed
teach the will that it erred in the means it employed, and can therefore
bring it about that the end after which it strives once for all according
to its inner nature shall be pursued on an entirely different path and in
an entirely different object from what has hitherto been the case. But it
can never bring about that the will shall will something actually
different from what it has hitherto willed; this remains unchangeable, for
the will is simply this willing itself, which would have to be abolished.
The former, however, the possible modification of knowledge, and through
knowledge of conduct, extends so far that the will seeks to attain its
unalterable end, for example, Mohammed’s paradise, at one time in the real
world, at another time in a world of imagination, adapting the means to
each, and thus in the first case applying prudence, might, and fraud, and
in the second case, abstinence, justice, alms, and pilgrimages to Mecca.
But its effort itself has not therefore changed, still less the will
itself. Thus, although its action certainly shows itself very different at
different times, its willing has yet remained precisely the same. _Velle
non discitur._

For motives to act, it is necessary not only that they should be present,
but that they should be known; for, according to a very good expression of
the schoolmen, which we referred to once before, _causa finalis movet non
secundum suum esse reale; sed secundum esse cognitum_. For example, in
order that the relation may appear that exists in a given man between
egoism and sympathy, it is not sufficient that he should possess wealth
and see others in want, but he must also know what he can do with his
wealth, both for himself and for others: not only must the suffering of
others be presented to him, but he must know both what suffering and also
what pleasure is. Perhaps, on a first occasion, he did not know all this
so well as on a second; and if, on a similar occasion, he acts
differently, this arises simply from the fact that the circumstances were
really different, as regards the part of them that depends on his knowing
them, although they seem to be the same. As ignorance of actually existing
circumstances robs them of their influence, so, on the other hand,
entirely imaginary circumstances may act as if they were real, not only in
the case of a particular deception, but also in general and continuously.
For example, if a man is firmly persuaded that every good action will be
repaid him a hundredfold in a future life, such a conviction affects him
in precisely the same way as a good bill of exchange at a very long date,
and he can give from mere egoism, as from another point of view he would
take from egoism. He has not changed himself: _velle non discitur._ It is
on account of this great influence of knowledge upon action, while the
will remains unchangeable, that the character develops and its different
features appear only little by little. Therefore it shows itself different
at every period of life, and an impetuous, wild youth may be succeeded by
a staid, sober, manly age. Especially what is bad in the character will
always come out more strongly with time, yet sometimes it occurs that
passions which a man gave way to in his youth are afterwards voluntarily
restrained, simply because the motives opposed to them have only then come
into knowledge. Hence, also, we are all innocent to begin with, and this
merely means that neither we nor others know the evil of our own nature;
it only appears with the motives, and only in time do the motives appear
in knowledge. Finally we come to know ourselves as quite different from
what _a priori_ we supposed ourselves to be, and then we are often
terrified at ourselves.

Repentance never proceeds from a change of the will (which is impossible),
but from a change of knowledge. The essential and peculiar in what I have
always willed I must still continue to will; for I myself am this will
which lies outside time and change. I can therefore never repent of what I
have willed, though I can repent of what I have done; because, led by
false conceptions, I did something that was not in conformity with my
will. The discovery of this through fuller knowledge is _repentance_. This
extends not merely to worldly wisdom, to the choice of the means, and the
judgment of the appropriateness of the end to my own will, but also to
what is properly ethical. For example, I may have acted more egotistically
than is in accordance with my character, led astray by exaggerated ideas
of the need in which I myself stood, or of the craft, falseness, and
wickedness of others, or because I hurried too much, _i.e._, acted without
deliberation, determined not by motives distinctly known _in abstracto_,
but by merely perceived motives, by the present and the emotion which it
excited, and which was so strong that I had not properly the use of my
reason; but the return of reflection is thus here also merely corrected
knowledge, and from this repentance may proceed, which always proclaims
itself by making amends for the past, as far as is possible. Yet it must
be observed that, in order to deceive themselves, men prearrange what seem
to be hasty errors, but are really secretly considered actions. For we
deceive and flatter no one through such fine devices as ourselves. The
converse of the case we have given may also occur. I may be misled by too
good an opinion of others, or want of knowledge of the relative value of
the good things of life, or some abstract dogma in which I have since lost
faith, and thus I may act less egotistically than is in keeping with my
character, and lay up for myself repentance of another kind. Thus
repentance is always corrected knowledge of the relation of an act to its
special intention. When the will reveals its Ideas in space alone, _i.e._,
through mere form, the matter in which other Ideas—in this case natural
forces—already reign, resists the will, and seldom allows the form that is
striving after visibility to appear in perfect purity and distinctness,
_i.e._, in perfect beauty. And there is an analogous hindrance to the will
as it reveals itself in time alone, _i.e._, through actions, in the
knowledge which seldom gives it the data quite correctly, so that the
action which takes place does not accurately correspond to the will, and
leads to repentance. Repentance thus always proceeds from corrected
knowledge, not from the change of the will, which is impossible. Anguish
of conscience for past deeds is anything but repentance. It is pain at the
knowledge of oneself in one’s inmost nature, _i.e._, as will. It rests
precisely on the certainty that we have still the same will. If the will
were changed, and therefore the anguish of conscience mere repentance, it
would cease to exist. The past could then no longer give us pain, for it
exhibited the expressions of a will which is no longer that of him who has
repented. We shall explain the significance of anguish of conscience in
detail farther on.

The influence which knowledge, as the medium of motives, exerts, not
indeed upon the will itself, but upon its appearance in actions, is also
the source of the principal distinction between the action of men and that
of brutes, for their methods of knowledge are different. The brute has
only knowledge of perception, the man, through reason, has also abstract
ideas, conceptions. Now, although man and brute are with equal necessity
determined by their motives, yet man, as distinguished from the brute, has
a complete _choice_, which has often been regarded as a freedom of the
will in particular actions, although it is nothing but the possibility of
a thoroughly-fought-out battle between several motives, the strongest of
which then determines it with necessity. For this the motives must have
assumed the form of abstract thoughts, because it is really only by means
of these that deliberation, _i.e._, a weighing of opposite reasons for
action, is possible. In the case of the brute there can only be a choice
between perceptible motives presented to it, so that the choice is limited
to the narrow sphere of its present sensuous perception. Therefore the
necessity of the determination of the will by the motive, which is like
that of the effect by the cause, can be exhibited perceptibly and directly
only in the case of the brutes, because here the spectator has the motives
just as directly before his eyes as their effect; while in the case of man
the motives are almost always abstract ideas, which are not communicated
to the spectator, and even for the actor himself the necessity of their
effect is hidden behind their conflict. For only _in abstracto_ can
several ideas, as judgments and chains of conclusions, lie beside each
other in consciousness, and then, free from all determination of time,
work against each other till the stronger overcomes the rest and
determines the will. This is the complete _choice_ or power of
deliberation which man has as distinguished from the brutes, and on
account of which freedom of the will has been attributed to him, in the
belief that his willing is a mere result of the operations of his
intellect, without a definite tendency which serves as its basis; while,
in truth, the motives only work on the foundation and under the
presupposition of his definite tendency, which in his case is individual,
_i.e._, a character. A fuller exposition of this power of deliberation,
and the difference between human and brute choice which is introduced by
it, will be found in the “Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics” (1st
edition, p. 35, _et seq._; 2d edition, p. 34, _et seq._), to which I
therefore refer. For the rest, this power of deliberation which man
possesses is one of those things that makes his existence so much more
miserable than that of the brute. For in general our greatest sufferings
do not lie in the present as ideas of perception or as immediate feelings;
but in the reason, as abstract conceptions, painful thoughts, from which
the brute, which lives only in the present, and therefore in enviable
carelessness, is entirely free.

It seems to have been the dependence, which we have shown, of the human
power of deliberation upon the faculty of abstract thinking, and thus also
of judging and drawing conclusions also, that led both Descartes and
Spinoza to identify the decisions of the will with the faculty of
asserting and denying (the faculty of judgment). From this Descartes
deduced the doctrine that the will, which, according to him, is
indifferently free, is the source of sin, and also of all theoretical
error. And Spinoza, on the other hand, concluded that the will is
necessarily determined by the motives, as the judgment is by the
reasons.(70) The latter doctrine is in a sense true, but it appears as a
true conclusion from false premises.

The distinction we have established between the ways in which the brutes
and man are respectively moved by motives exerts a very wide influence
upon the nature of both, and has most to do with the complete and obvious
differences of their existence. While an idea of perception is in every
case the motive which determines the brute, the man strives to exclude
this kind of motivation altogether, and to determine himself entirely by
abstract ideas. Thus he uses his prerogative of reason to the greatest
possible advantage. Independent of the present, he neither chooses nor
avoids the passing pleasure or pain, but reflects on the consequences of
both. In most cases, setting aside quite insignificant actions, we are
determined by abstract, thought motives, not present impressions.
Therefore all particular privation for the moment is for us comparatively
light, but all renunciation is terribly hard; for the former only concerns
the fleeting present, but the latter concerns the future, and includes in
itself innumerable privations, of which it is the equivalent. The causes
of our pain, as of our pleasure, lie for the most part, not in the real
present, but merely in abstract thoughts. It is these which are often
unbearable to us—inflict torments in comparison with which all the
sufferings of the animal world are very small; for even our own physical
pain is not felt at all when they are present. Indeed, in the case of keen
mental suffering, we even inflict physical suffering on ourselves merely
to distract our attention from the former to the latter. This is why, in
great mental anguish, men tear their hair, beat their breasts, lacerate
their faces, or roll on the floor, for all these are in reality only
violent means of diverting the mind from an unbearable thought. Just
because mental pain, being much greater, makes us insensible to physical
pain, suicide is very easy to the person who is in despair, or who is
consumed by morbid depression, even though formerly, in comfortable
circumstances, he recoiled at the thought of it. In the same way care and
passion (thus the play of thought) wear out the body oftener and more than
physical hardships. And in accordance with this Epictetus rightly says:
Ταρασσει τους ανθρωπους ου τα πραγματα, αλλα τα περι των πραγματων δογματα
(_Perturbant homines non res ipsæ, sed de rebus decreta_) (V.); and
Seneca: _Plura sunt quæ nos terrent, quam quæ premunt, et sæpius opinione
quam re laboramus_ (Ep. 5). Eulenspiegel also admirably bantered human
nature, for going uphill he laughed, and going downhill he wept. Indeed,
children who have hurt themselves often cry, not at the pain, but at the
thought of the pain which is awakened when some one condoles with them.
Such great differences in conduct and in life arise from the diversity
between the methods of knowledge of the brutes and man. Further, the
appearance of the distinct and decided individual character, the principal
distinction between man and the brute, which has scarcely more than the
character of the species, is conditioned by the choice between several
motives, which is only possible through abstract conceptions. For only
after a choice has been made are the resolutions, which vary in different
individuals, an indication of the individual character which is different
in each; while the action of the brute depends only upon the presence or
absence of the impression, supposing this impression to be in general a
motive for its species. And, finally, in the case of man, only the
resolve, and not the mere wish, is a valid indication of his character
both for himself and for others; but the resolve becomes for himself, as
for others, a certain fact only through the deed. The wish is merely the
necessary consequence of the present impression, whether of the outward
stimulus, or the inward passing mood; and is therefore as immediately
necessary and devoid of consideration as the action of the brutes.
Therefore, like the action of the brutes, it merely expresses the
character of the species, not that of the individual, _i.e._, it indicates
merely what _man in general_, not what the individual who experiences the
wish, is capable of doing. The deed alone,—because as human action it
always requires a certain deliberation, and because as a rule a man has
command of his reason, is considerate, _i.e._, decides in accordance with
considered and abstract motives,—is the expression of the intelligible
maxims of his conduct, the result of his inmost willing, and is related as
a letter to the word that stands for his empirical character, itself
merely the temporal expression of his intelligible character. In a healthy
mind, therefore, only deeds oppress the conscience, not wishes and
thoughts; for it is only our deeds that hold up to us the mirror of our
will. The deed referred to above, that is entirely unconsidered and is
really committed in blind passion, is to a certain extent an intermediate
thing between the mere wish and the resolve.

Therefore, by true repentance, which, however, shows itself as action
also, it can be obliterated, as a falsely drawn line, from that picture of
our will which our course of life is. I may insert the remark here, as a
very good comparison, that the relation between wish and deed has a purely
accidental but accurate analogy with that between the accumulation and
discharge of electricity.

As the result of the whole of this discussion of the freedom of the will
and what relates to it, we find that although the will may, in itself and
apart from the phenomenon, be called free and even omnipotent, yet in its
particular phenomena enlightened by knowledge, as in men and brutes, it is
determined by motives to which the special character regularly and
necessarily responds, and always in the same way. We see that because of
the possession on his part of abstract or rational knowledge, man, as
distinguished from the brutes, has a _choice_, which only makes him the
scene of the conflict of his motives, without withdrawing him from their
control. This choice is therefore certainly the condition of the
possibility of the complete expression of the individual character, but is
by no means to be regarded as freedom of the particular volition, _i.e._,
independence of the law of causality, the necessity of which extends to
man as to every other phenomenon. Thus the difference between human
volition and that of the brutes, which is introduced by reason or
knowledge through concepts, extends to the point we have indicated, and no
farther. But, what is quite a different thing, there may arise a
phenomenon of the human will which is quite impossible in the brute
creation, if man altogether lays aside the knowledge of particular things
as such which is subordinate to the principle of sufficient reason, and by
means of his knowledge of the Ideas sees through the _principium
individuationis_. Then an actual appearance of the real freedom of the
will as a thing-in-itself is possible, by which the phenomenon comes into
a sort of contradiction with itself, as is indicated by the word
self-renunciation; and, finally, the “in-itself” of its nature suppresses
itself. But this, the one, real, and direct expression of the freedom of
the will in itself in the phenomenon, cannot be distinctly explained here,
but will form the subject of the concluding part of our work.

Now that we have shown clearly in these pages the unalterable nature of
the empirical character, which is just the unfolding of the intelligible
character that lies outside time, together with the necessity with which
actions follow upon its contact with motives, we hasten to anticipate an
argument which may very easily be drawn from this in the interest of bad
dispositions. Our character is to be regarded as the temporal unfolding of
an extra-temporal, and therefore indivisible and unalterable, act of will,
or an intelligible character. This necessarily determines all that is
essential in our conduct in life, _i.e._, its ethical content, which must
express itself in accordance with it in its phenomenal appearance, the
empirical character; while only what is unessential in this, the outward
form of our course of life, depends upon the forms in which the motives
present themselves. It might, therefore, be inferred that it is a waste of
trouble to endeavour to improve one’s character, and that it is wiser to
submit to the inevitable, and gratify every inclination at once, even if
it is bad. But this is precisely the same thing as the theory of an
inevitable fate which is called αργος λογος, and in more recent times
Turkish faith. Its true refutation, as it is supposed to have been given
by Chrysippus, is explained by Cicero in his book _De Fato_, ch. 12, 13.

Though everything may be regarded as irrevocably predetermined by fate,
yet it is so only through the medium of the chain of causes; therefore in
no case can it be determined that an effect shall appear without its
cause. Thus it is not simply the event that is predetermined, but the
event as the consequence of preceding causes; so that fate does not decide
the consequence alone, but also the means as the consequence of which it
is destined to appear. Accordingly, if some means is not present, it is
certain that the consequence also will not be present: each is always
present in accordance with the determination of fate, but this is never
known to us till afterwards.

As events always take place according to fate, _i.e._, according to the
infinite concatenation of causes, so our actions always take place
according to our intelligible character. But just as we do not know the
former beforehand, so no _a priori_ insight is given us into the latter,
but we only come to know ourselves as we come to know other persons _a
posteriori_ through experience. If the intelligible character involved
that we could only form a good resolution after a long conflict with a bad
disposition, this conflict would have to come first and be waited for.
Reflection on the unalterable nature of the character, on the unity of the
source from which all our actions flow, must not mislead us into claiming
the decision of the character in favour of one side or the other; it is in
the resolve that follows that we shall see what manner of men we are, and
mirror ourselves in our actions. This is the explanation of the
satisfaction or the anguish of soul with which we look back on the course
of our past life. Both are experienced, not because these past deeds have
still an existence; they are past, they have been, and now are no more;
but their great importance for us lies in their significance, lies in the
fact that these deeds are the expression of the character, the mirror of
the will, in which we look and recognise our inmost self, the kernel of
our will. Because we experience this not before, but only after, it
behoves us to strive and fight in time, in order that the picture we
produce by our deeds may be such that the contemplation of it may calm us
as much as possible, instead of harassing us. The significance of this
consolation or anguish of soul will, as we have said, be inquired into
farther on; but to this place there belongs the inquiry which follows, and
which stands by itself.

Besides the intelligible and the empirical character, we must mention a
third which is different from them both, the _acquired character_, which
one only receives in life through contact with the world, and which is
referred to when one is praised as a man of character or censured as being
without character. Certainly one might suppose that, since the empirical
character, as the phenomenon of the intelligible, is unalterable, and,
like every natural phenomenon, is consistent with itself, man would always
have to appear like himself and consistent, and would therefore have no
need to acquire a character artificially by experience and reflection. But
the case is otherwise, and although a man is always the same, yet he does
not always understand himself, but often mistakes himself, till he has in
some degree acquired real self-knowledge. The empirical character, as a
mere natural tendency, is in itself irrational; nay, more, its expressions
are disturbed by reason, all the more so the more intellect and power of
thought the man has; for these always keep before him what becomes _man in
general_ as the character of the species, and what is possible for him
both in will and in deed. This makes it the more difficult for him to see
how much his individuality enables him to will and to accomplish. He finds
in himself the germs of all the various human pursuits and powers, but the
difference of degree in which they exist in his individuality is not clear
to him in the absence of experience; and if he now applies himself to the
pursuits which alone correspond to his character, he yet feels, especially
at particular moments and in particular moods, the inclination to directly
opposite pursuits which cannot be combined with them, but must be entirely
suppressed if he desires to follow the former undisturbed. For as our
physical path upon earth is always merely a line, not an extended surface,
so in life, if we desire to grasp and possess one thing, we must renounce
and leave innumerable others on the right hand and on the left. If we
cannot make up our minds to this, but, like children at the fair, snatch
at everything that attracts us in passing, we are making the perverse
endeavour to change the line of our path into an extended surface; we run
in a zigzag, skip about like a will o’ the wisp, and attain to nothing.
Or, to use another comparison, as, according to Hobbes’ philosophy of law,
every one has an original right to everything but an exclusive right to
nothing, yet can obtain an exclusive right to particular things by
renouncing his right to all the rest, while others, on their part, do
likewise with regard to what he has chosen; so is it in life, in which
some definite pursuit, whether it be pleasure, honour, wealth, science,
art, or virtue, can only be followed with seriousness and success when all
claims that are foreign to it are given up, when everything else is
renounced. Accordingly, the mere will and the mere ability are not
sufficient, but a man must also _know_ what he wills, and _know_ what he
can do; only then will he show character, and only then can he accomplish
something right. Until he attains to that, notwithstanding the natural
consistency of the empirical character, he is without character. And
although, on the whole, he must remain true to himself, and fulfil his
course, led by his dæmon, yet his path will not be a straight line, but
wavering and uneven. He will hesitate, deviate, turn back, lay up for
himself repentance and pain. And all this is because, in great and small,
he sees before him all that is possible and attainable for man in general,
but does not know what part of all this is alone suitable for him, can be
accomplished by him, and is alone enjoyable by him. He will, therefore,
envy many men on account of a position and circumstances which are yet
only suitable to their characters and not to his, and in which he would
feel unhappy, if indeed he found them endurable at all. For as a fish is
only at home in water, a bird in the air, a mole in the earth, so every
man is only at home in the atmosphere suitable to him. For example, not
all men can breathe the air of court life. From deficiency of proper
insight into all this, many a man will make all kinds of abortive
attempts, will do violence to his character in particulars, and yet, on
the whole, will have to yield to it again; and what he thus painfully
attains will give him no pleasure; what he thus learns will remain dead;
even in an ethical regard, a deed that is too noble for his character,
that has not sprung from pure, direct impulse, but from a concept, a
dogma, will lose all merit, even in his own eyes, through subsequent
egoistical repentance. _Velle non discitur._ We only become conscious of
the inflexibility of another person’s character through experience, and
till then we childishly believe that it is possible, by means of rational
ideas, by prayers and entreaties, by example and noble-mindedness, ever to
persuade any one to leave his own way, to change his course of conduct, to
depart from his mode of thinking, or even to extend his capacities: so is
it also with ourselves. We must first learn from experience what we desire
and what we can do. Till then we know it not, we are without character,
and must often be driven back to our own way by hard blows from without.
But if we have finally learnt it, then we have attained to what in the
world is called character, the _acquired character_. This is accordingly
nothing but the most perfect knowledge possible of our own individuality.
It is the abstract, and consequently distinct, knowledge of the
unalterable qualities of our own empirical character, and of the measure
and direction of our mental and physical powers, and thus of the whole
strength and weakness of our own individuality. This places us in a
position to carry out deliberately and methodically the rôle which belongs
to our own person, and to fill up the gaps which caprices or weaknesses
produce in it, under the guidance of fixed conceptions. This rôle is in
itself unchangeably determined once for all, but hitherto we have allowed
it to follow its natural course without any rule. We have now brought to
distinct conscious maxims which are always present to us the form of
conduct which is necessarily determined by our own individual nature, and
now we conduct it in accordance with them as deliberately as if we had
learned it; without ever falling into error through the passing influence
of the mood or the impression of the present, without being checked by the
bitterness or sweetness of some particular thing we meet with on our path,
without delay, without hesitation, without inconsistency. We shall now no
longer, as novices, wait, attempt, and grope about in order to see what we
really desire and are able to do, but we know this once for all, and in
every choice we have only to apply general principles to particular cases,
and arrive at once at a decision. We know our will in general, and do not
allow ourselves to be led by the passing mood or by solicitations from
without to resolve in particular cases what is contrary to it as a whole.
We know in the same way the nature and the measure of our strength and our
weakness, and thereby are spared much suffering. For we experience no real
pleasure except in the use and feeling of our own powers, and the greatest
pain is the conscious deficiency of our powers where we need them. If,
now, we have discovered where our strength and our weakness lie, we will
endeavour to cultivate, employ, and in every way make use of those talents
which are naturally prominent in us. We will always turn to those
occupations in which they are valuable and to the purpose, and entirely
avoid, even with self-renunciation, those pursuits for which we have
naturally little aptitude; we will beware of attempting that in which we
have no chance of succeeding. Only he who has attained to this will
constantly and with full consciousness be completely himself, and will
never fail himself at the critical moment, because he will always have
known what he could expect from himself. He will often enjoy the
satisfaction of feeling his strength, and seldom experience the pain of
being reminded of his weakness. The latter is mortification, which causes
perhaps the greatest of mental sufferings; therefore it is far more
endurable to have our misfortune brought clearly before us than our
incapacity. And, further, if we are thus fully acquainted with our
strength and our weakness, we will not attempt to make a show of powers
which we do not possess; we will not play with base coin, for all such
dissimulation misses the mark in the end. For since the whole man is only
the phenomenon of his will, nothing can be more perverse than to try, by
means of reflection, to become something else than one is, for this is a
direct contradiction of the will with itself. The imitation of the
qualities and idiosyncrasies of others is much more shameful than to dress
in other people’s clothes; for it is the judgment of our own worthlessness
pronounced by ourselves. Knowledge of our own mind and its capacities of
every kind, and their unalterable limits, is in this respect the surest
way to the attainment of the greatest possible contentment with ourselves.
For it holds good of inward as of outward circumstances that there is for
us no consolation so effective as the complete certainty of unalterable
necessity. No evil that befalls us pains us so much as the thought of the
circumstances by which it might have been warded off. Therefore nothing
comforts us so effectually as the consideration of what has happened from
the standpoint of necessity, from which all accidents appear as tools in
the hand of an overruling fate, and we therefore recognise the evil that
has come to us as inevitably produced by the conflict of inner and outer
circumstances; in other words, fatalism. We really only complain and storm
so long as we hope either to affect others or to excite ourselves to
unheard-of efforts. But children and grown-up people know very well to
yield contentedly as soon as they clearly see that it absolutely cannot be
otherwise:—Θυμὸν ἐνὶ στήθεσσι φίλον δαμάσσαντες ἀνάγκη (_Animo in
pectoribus nostro domito necessitate_). We are like the entrapped
elephants, that rage and struggle for many days, till they see that it is
useless, and then suddenly offer their necks quietly to the yoke, tamed
for ever. We are like King David, who, as long as his son still lived,
unceasingly importuned Jehovah with prayers, and behaved himself as if in
despair; but as soon as his son was dead, thought no longer about it.
Hence it arises that innumerable permanent ills, such as lameness,
poverty, low estate, ugliness, a disagreeable dwelling-place, are borne
with indifference by innumerable persons, and are no longer felt, like
healed wounds, just because these persons know that inward or outward
necessity renders it impossible that any change can take place in these
things; while those who are more fortunate cannot understand how such
misfortunes can be borne. Now as with outward necessity, so also with
inward; nothing reconciles so thoroughly as a distinct knowledge of it. If
we have once for all distinctly recognised not only our good qualities and
our strength, but also our defects and weakness, established our aim
accordingly, and rest satisfied concerning what cannot be attained, we
thus escape in the surest way, as far as our individuality permits, the
bitterest of all sorrows, discontentment with ourselves, which is the
inevitable result of ignorance of our own individuality, of false conceit
and the audacity that proceeds from it. To the bitter chapter of the
self-knowledge here recommended the lines of Ovid admit of excellent
application—


    “_Optimus ille animi vindex lædentia pectus,_
    _Vincula qui rupit, dedoluitque semel._”


So much with regard to the _acquired character_, which, indeed, is not of
so much importance for ethics proper as for life in the world. But its
investigation was related as that of a third species to the investigation
of the intelligible and the empirical character, in regard to which we
were obliged to enter upon a somewhat detailed inquiry in order to bring
out clearly how in all its phenomena the will is subject to necessity,
while yet in itself it may be called free and even omnipotent.

§ 56. This freedom, this omnipotence, as the expression of which the whole
visible world exists and progressively develops in accordance with the
laws which belong to the form of knowledge, can now, at the point at which
in its most perfect manifestation it has attained to the completely
adequate knowledge of its own nature, express itself anew in two ways.
Either it wills here, at the summit of mental endowment and
self-consciousness, simply what it willed before blindly and
unconsciously, and if so, knowledge always remains its _motive_ in the
whole as in the particular case. Or, conversely, this knowledge becomes
for it a _quieter_, which appeases and suppresses all willing. This is
that assertion and denial of the will to live which was stated above in
general terms. As, in the reference of individual conduct, a general, not
a particular manifestation of will, it does not disturb and modify the
development of the character, nor does it find its expression in
particular actions; but, either by an ever more marked appearance of the
whole method of action it has followed hitherto, or conversely by the
entire suppression of it, it expresses in a living form the maxims which
the will has freely adopted in accordance with the knowledge it has now
attained to. By the explanations we have just given of freedom, necessity,
and character, we have somewhat facilitated and prepared the way for the
clearer development of all this, which is the principal subject of this
last book. But we shall have done so still more when we have turned our
attention to life itself, the willing or not willing of which is the great
question, and have endeavoured to find out generally what the will itself,
which is everywhere the inmost nature of this life, will really attain by
its assertion—in what way and to what extent this assertion satisfies or
can satisfy the will; in short, what is generally and mainly to be
regarded as its position in this its own world, which in every relation
belongs to it.

First of all, I wish the reader to recall the passage with which we closed
the Second Book,—a passage occasioned by the question, which met us then,
as to the end and aim of the will. Instead of the answer to this question,
it appeared clearly before us how, in all the grades of its manifestation,
from the lowest to the highest, the will dispenses altogether with a final
goal and aim. It always strives, for striving is its sole nature, which no
attained goal can put an end to. Therefore it is not susceptible of any
final satisfaction, but can only be restrained by hindrances, while in
itself it goes on for ever. We see this in the simplest of all natural
phenomena, gravity, which does not cease to strive and press towards a
mathematical centre to reach which would be the annihilation both of
itself and matter, and would not cease even if the whole universe were
already rolled into one ball. We see it in the other simple natural
phenomena. A solid tends towards fluidity either by melting or dissolving,
for only so will its chemical forces be free; rigidity is the imprisonment
in which it is held by cold. The fluid tends towards the gaseous state,
into which it passes at once as soon as all pressure is removed from it.
No body is without relationship, _i.e._, without tendency or without
desire and longing, as Jacob Böhme would say. Electricity transmits its
inner self-repulsion to infinity, though the mass of the earth absorbs the
effect. Galvanism is certainly, so long as the pile is working, an
aimless, unceasingly repeated act of repulsion and attraction. The
existence of the plant is just such a restless, never satisfied striving,
a ceaseless tendency through ever-ascending forms, till the end, the seed,
becomes a new starting-point; and this repeated _ad infinitum_—nowhere an
end, nowhere a final satisfaction, nowhere a resting-place. It will also
be remembered, from the Second Book, that the multitude of natural forces
and organised forms everywhere strive with each other for the matter in
which they desire to appear, for each of them only possesses what it has
wrested from the others; and thus a constant internecine war is waged,
from which, for the most part, arises the resistance through which that
striving, which constitutes the inner nature of everything, is at all
points hindered; struggles in vain, yet, from its nature, cannot leave
off; toils on laboriously till this phenomenon dies, when others eagerly
seize its place and its matter.

We have long since recognised this striving, which constitutes the kernel
and in-itself of everything, as identical with that which in us, where it
manifests itself most distinctly in the light of the fullest
consciousness, is called _will_. Its hindrance through an obstacle which
places itself between it and its temporary aim we call _suffering_, and,
on the other hand, its attainment of the end satisfaction, wellbeing,
happiness. We may also transfer this terminology to the phenomena of the
unconscious world, for though weaker in degree, they are identical in
nature. Then we see them involved in constant suffering, and without any
continuing happiness. For all effort springs from defect—from discontent
with one’s estate—is thus suffering so long as it is not satisfied; but no
satisfaction is lasting, rather it is always merely the starting-point of
a new effort. The striving we see everywhere hindered in many ways,
everywhere in conflict, and therefore always under the form of suffering.
Thus, if there is no final end of striving, there is no measure and end of
suffering.

But what we only discover in unconscious Nature by sharpened observation,
and with an effort, presents itself distinctly to us in the intelligent
world in the life of animals, whose constant suffering is easily proved.
But without lingering over these intermediate grades, we shall turn to the
life of man, in which all this appears with the greatest distinctness,
illuminated by the clearest knowledge; for as the phenomenon of will
becomes more complete, the suffering also becomes more and more apparent.
In the plant there is as yet no sensibility, and therefore no pain. A
certain very small degree of suffering is experienced by the lowest
species of animal life—infusoria and radiata; even in insects the capacity
to feel and suffer is still limited. It first appears in a high degree
with the complete nervous system of vertebrate animals, and always in a
higher degree the more intelligence develops. Thus, in proportion as
knowledge attains to distinctness, as consciousness ascends, pain also
increases, and therefore reaches its highest degree in man. And then,
again, the more distinctly a man knows, the more intelligent he is, the
more pain he has; the man who is gifted with genius suffers most of all.
In this sense, that is, with reference to the degree of knowledge in
general, not mere abstract rational knowledge, I understand and use here
that saying of the Preacher: _Qui auget scientiam, auget at dolorem._ That
philosophical painter or painting philosopher, Tischbein, has very
beautifully expressed the accurate relation between the degree of
consciousness and that of suffering by exhibiting it in a visible and
clear form in a drawing. The upper half of his drawing represents women
whose children have been stolen, and who in different groups and
attitudes, express in many ways deep maternal pain, anguish, and despair.
The lower half of the drawing represents sheep whose lambs have been taken
away. They are arranged and grouped in precisely the same way; so that
every human head, every human attitude of the upper half, has below a
brute head and attitude corresponding to it. Thus we see distinctly how
the pain which is possible in the dull brute consciousness is related to
the violent grief, which only becomes possible through distinctness of
knowledge and clearness of consciousness.

We desire to consider in this way, in _human existence_, the inner and
essential destiny of will. Every one will easily recognise that same
destiny expressed in various degrees in the life of the brutes, only more
weakly, and may also convince himself to his own satisfaction, from the
suffering animal world, _how essential to all life is suffering_.

§ 57. At every grade that is enlightened by knowledge, the will appears as
an individual. The human individual finds himself as finite in infinite
space and time, and consequently as a vanishing quantity compared with
them. He is projected into them, and, on account of their unlimited
nature, he has always a merely relative, never absolute _when_ and _where_
of his existence; for his place and duration are finite parts of what is
infinite and boundless. His real existence is only in the present, whose
unchecked flight into the past is a constant transition into death, a
constant dying. For his past life, apart from its possible consequences
for the present, and the testimony regarding the will that is expressed in
it, is now entirely done with, dead, and no longer anything; and,
therefore, it must be, as a matter of reason, indifferent to him whether
the content of that past was pain or pleasure. But the present is always
passing through his hands into the past; the future is quite uncertain and
always short. Thus his existence, even when we consider only its formal
side, is a constant hurrying of the present into the dead past, a constant
dying. But if we look at it from the physical side; it is clear that, as
our walking is admittedly merely a constantly prevented falling, the life
of our body is only a constantly prevented dying, an ever-postponed death:
finally, in the same way, the activity of our mind is a constantly
deferred ennui. Every breath we draw wards off the death that is
constantly intruding upon us. In this way we fight with it every moment,
and again, at longer intervals, through every meal we eat, every sleep we
take, every time we warm ourselves, &c. In the end, death must conquer,
for we became subject to him through birth, and he only plays for a little
while with his prey before he swallows it up. We pursue our life, however,
with great interest and much solicitude as long as possible, as we blow
out a soap-bubble as long and as large as possible, although we know
perfectly well that it will burst.

We saw that the inner being of unconscious nature is a constant striving
without end and without rest. And this appears to us much more distinctly
when we consider the nature of brutes and man. Willing and striving is its
whole being, which may be very well compared to an unquenchable thirst.
But the basis of all willing is need, deficiency, and thus pain.
Consequently, the nature of brutes and man is subject to pain originally
and through its very being. If, on the other hand, it lacks objects of
desire, because it is at once deprived of them by a too easy satisfaction,
a terrible void and ennui comes over it, _i.e._, its being and existence
itself becomes an unbearable burden to it. Thus its life swings like a
pendulum backwards and forwards between pain and ennui. This has also had
to express itself very oddly in this way; after man had transferred all
pain and torments to hell, there then remained nothing over for heaven but
ennui.

But the constant striving which constitutes the inner nature of every
manifestation of will obtains its primary and most general foundation at
the higher grades of objectification, from the fact that here the will
manifests itself as a living body, with the iron command to nourish it;
and what gives strength to this command is just that this body is nothing
but the objectified will to live itself. Man, as the most complete
objectification of that will, is in like measure also the most necessitous
of all beings: he is through and through concrete willing and needing; he
is a concretion of a thousand necessities. With these he stands upon the
earth, left to himself, uncertain about everything except his own need and
misery. Consequently the care for the maintenance of that existence under
exacting demands, which are renewed every day, occupies, as a rule, the
whole of human life. To this is directly related the second claim, that of
the propagation of the species. At the same time he is threatened from all
sides by the most different kinds of dangers, from which it requires
constant watchfulness to escape. With cautious steps and casting anxious
glances round him he pursues his path, for a thousand accidents and a
thousand enemies lie in wait for him. Thus he went while yet a savage,
thus he goes in civilised life; there is no security for him.


    “_Qualibus in tenebris vitæ, quantisque periclis_
    _Degitur hocc’ ævi, quodcunque est!_”—LUCR. ii. 15.


The life of the great majority is only a constant struggle for this
existence itself, with the certainty of losing it at last. But what
enables them to endure this wearisome battle is not so much the love of
life as the fear of death, which yet stands in the background as
inevitable, and may come upon them at any moment. Life itself is a sea,
full of rocks and whirlpools, which man avoids with the greatest care and
solicitude, although he knows that even if he succeeds in getting through
with all his efforts and skill, he yet by doing so comes nearer at every
step to the greatest, the total, inevitable, and irremediable shipwreck,
death; nay, even steers right upon it: this is the final goal of the
laborious voyage, and worse for him than all the rocks from which he has
escaped.

Now it is well worth observing that, on the one hand, the suffering and
misery of life may easily increase to such an extent that death itself, in
the flight from which the whole of life consists, becomes desirable, and
we hasten towards it voluntarily; and again, on the other hand, that as
soon as want and suffering permit rest to a man, ennui is at once so near
that he necessarily requires diversion. The striving after existence is
what occupies all living things and maintains them in motion. But when
existence is assured, then they know not what to do with it; thus the
second thing that sets them in motion is the effort to get free from the
burden of existence, to make it cease to be felt, “to kill time,” _i.e._,
to escape from ennui. Accordingly we see that almost all men who are
secure from want and care, now that at last they have thrown off all other
burdens, become a burden to themselves, and regard as a gain every hour
they succeed in getting through; and thus every diminution of the very
life which, till then, they have employed all their powers to maintain as
long as possible. Ennui is by no means an evil to be lightly esteemed; in
the end it depicts on the countenance real despair. It makes beings who
love each other so little as men do, seek each other eagerly, and thus
becomes the source of social intercourse. Moreover, even from motives of
policy, public precautions are everywhere taken against it, as against
other universal calamities. For this evil may drive men to the greatest
excesses, just as much as its opposite extreme, famine: the people require
_panem et circenses_. The strict penitentiary system of Philadelphia makes
use of ennui alone as a means of punishment, through solitary confinement
and idleness, and it is found so terrible that it has even led prisoners
to commit suicide. As want is the constant scourge of the people, so ennui
is that of the fashionable world. In middle-class life ennui is
represented by the Sunday, and want by the six week-days.

Thus between desiring and attaining all human life flows on throughout.
The wish is, in its nature, pain; the attainment soon begets satiety: the
end was only apparent; possession takes away the charm; the wish, the
need, presents itself under a new form; when it does not, then follows
desolateness, emptiness, ennui, against which the conflict is just as
painful as against want. That wish and satisfaction should follow each
other neither too quickly nor too slowly reduces the suffering, which both
occasion to the smallest amount, and constitutes the happiest life. For
that which we might otherwise call the most beautiful part of life, its
purest joy, if it were only because it lifts us out of real existence and
transforms us into disinterested spectators of it—that is, pure knowledge,
which is foreign to all willing, the pleasure of the beautiful, the true
delight in art—this is granted only to a very few, because it demands rare
talents, and to these few only as a passing dream. And then, even these
few, on account of their higher intellectual power, are made susceptible
of far greater suffering than duller minds can ever feel, and are also
placed in lonely isolation by a nature which is obviously different from
that of others; thus here also accounts are squared. But to the great
majority of men purely intellectual pleasures are not accessible. They are
almost quite incapable of the joys which lie in pure knowledge. They are
entirely given up to willing. If, therefore, anything is to win their
sympathy, to be _interesting_ to them, it must (as is implied in the
meaning of the word) in some way excite their _will_, even if it is only
through a distant and merely problematical relation to it; the will must
not be left altogether out of the question, for their existence lies far
more in willing than in knowing,—action and reaction is their one element.
We may find in trifles and everyday occurrences the naïve expressions of
this quality. Thus, for example, at any place worth seeing they may visit,
they write their names, in order thus to react, to affect the place since
it does not affect them. Again, when they see a strange rare animal, they
cannot easily confine themselves to merely observing it; they must rouse
it, tease it, play with it, merely to experience action and reaction; but
this need for excitement of the will manifests itself very specially in
the discovery and support of card-playing, which is quite peculiarly the
expression of the miserable side of humanity.

But whatever nature and fortune may have done, whoever a man be and
whatever he may possess, the pain which is essential to life cannot be
thrown off:—Πηλειδης δ᾽ ῳμωξεν, ιδων εις ουρανον ευρυν (_Pelides autem
ejulavit, intuitus in cælum latum_). And again:—Ζηνος μεν παις ηα
Κρονιονος, αυταρ οιζυν ειχον απειρεσιην (_Jovis quidem filius eram
Saturnii; verum ærumnam habebam infinitam_). The ceaseless efforts to
banish suffering accomplish no more than to make it change its form. It is
essentially deficiency, want, care for the maintenance of life. If we
succeed, which is very difficult, in removing pain in this form, it
immediately assumes a thousand others, varying according to age and
circumstances, such as lust, passionate love, jealousy, envy, hatred,
anxiety, ambition, covetousness, sickness, &c., &c. If at last it can find
entrance in no other form, it comes in the sad, grey garments of
tediousness and ennui, against which we then strive in various ways. If
finally we succeed in driving this away, we shall hardly do so without
letting pain enter in one of its earlier forms, and the dance begin again
from the beginning; for all human life is tossed backwards and forwards
between pain and ennui. Depressing as this view of life is, I will draw
attention, by the way, to an aspect of it from which consolation may be
drawn, and perhaps even a stoical indifference to one’s own present ills
may be attained. For our impatience at these arises for the most part from
the fact that we regard them as brought about by a chain of causes which
might easily be different. We do not generally grieve over ills which are
directly necessary and quite universal; for example, the necessity of age
and of death, and many daily inconveniences. It is rather the
consideration of the accidental nature of the circumstances that brought
some sorrow just to us, that gives it its sting. But if we have recognised
that pain, as such, is inevitable and essential to life, and that nothing
depends upon chance but its mere fashion, the form under which it presents
itself, that thus our present sorrow fills a place that, without it, would
at once be occupied by another which now is excluded by it, and that
therefore fate can affect us little in what is essential; such a
reflection, if it were to become a living conviction, might produce a
considerable degree of stoical equanimity, and very much lessen the
anxious care for our own well-being. But, in fact, such a powerful control
of reason over directly felt suffering seldom or never occurs.

Besides, through this view of the inevitableness of pain, of the
supplanting of one pain by another, and the introduction of a new pain
through the passing away of that which preceded it, one might be led to
the paradoxical but not absurd hypothesis, that in every individual the
measure of the pain essential to him was determined once for all by his
nature, a measure which could neither remain empty, nor be more than
filled, however much the form of the suffering might change. Thus his
suffering and well-being would by no means be determined from without, but
only through that measure, that natural disposition, which indeed might
experience certain additions and diminutions from the physical condition
at different times, but yet, on the whole, would remain the same, and
would just be what is called the temperament, or, more accurately, the
degree in which he might be ευκολος or δυσκολος, as Plato expresses it in
the First Book of the Republic, _i.e._, in an easy or difficult mood. This
hypothesis is supported not only by the well-known experience that great
suffering makes all lesser ills cease to be felt, and conversely that
freedom from great suffering makes even the most trifling inconveniences
torment us and put us out of humour; but experience also teaches that if a
great misfortune, at the mere thought of which we shuddered, actually
befalls us, as soon as we have overcome the first pain of it, our
disposition remains for the most part unchanged; and, conversely, that
after the attainment of some happiness we have long desired, we do not
feel ourselves on the whole and permanently very much better off and
agreeably situated than before. Only the moment at which these changes
occur affects us with unusual strength, as deep sorrow or exulting joy,
but both soon pass away, for they are based upon illusion. For they do not
spring from the immediately present pleasure or pain, but only from the
opening up of a new future which is anticipated in them. Only by borrowing
from the future could pain or pleasure be heightened so abnormally, and
consequently not enduringly. It would follow, from the hypothesis
advanced, that a large part of the feeling of suffering and of well-being
would be subjective and determined _a priori_, as is the case with
knowing; and we may add the following remarks as evidence in favour of it.
Human cheerfulness or dejection are manifestly not determined by external
circumstances, such as wealth and position, for we see at least as many
glad faces among the poor as among the rich. Further, the motives which
induce suicide are so very different, that we can assign no motive that is
so great as to bring it about, even with great probability, in every
character, and few that would be so small that the like of them had never
caused it. Now although the degree of our serenity or sadness is not at
all times the same, yet, in consequence of this view, we shall not
attribute it to the change of outward circumstances, but to that of the
inner condition, the physical state. For when an actual, though only
temporary, increase of our serenity, even to the extent of joyfulness,
takes place, it usually appears without any external occasion. It is true
that we often see our pain arise only from some definite external
relation, and are visibly oppressed and saddened by this only. Then we
believe that if only this were taken away, the greatest contentment would
necessarily ensue. But this is illusion. The measure of our pain and our
happiness is on the whole, according to our hypothesis, subjectively
determined for each point of time, and the motive for sadness is related
to that, just as a blister which draws to a head all the bad humours
otherwise distributed is related to the body. The pain which is at that
period of time essential to our nature, and therefore cannot be shaken
off, would, without the definite external cause of our suffering, be
divided at a hundred points, and appear in the form of a hundred little
annoyances and cares about things which we now entirely overlook, because
our capacity for pain is already filled by that chief evil which has
concentrated in a point all the suffering otherwise dispersed. This
corresponds also to the observation that if a great and pressing care is
lifted from our breast by its fortunate issue, another immediately takes
its place, the whole material of which was already there before, yet could
not come into consciousness as care because there was no capacity left for
it, and therefore this material of care remained indistinct and unobserved
in a cloudy form on the farthest horizon of consciousness. But now that
there is room, this prepared material at once comes forward and occupies
the throne of the reigning care of the day (πρυτανευουσα). And if it is
very much lighter in its matter than the material of the care which has
vanished, it knows how to blow itself out so as apparently to equal it in
size, and thus, as the chief care of the day, completely fills the throne.

Excessive joy and very keen suffering always occur in the same person, for
they condition each other reciprocally, and are also in common conditioned
by great activity of the mind. Both are produced, as we have just seen,
not by what is really present, but by the anticipation of the future. But
since pain is essential to life, and its degree is also determined by the
nature of the subject, sudden changes, because they are always external,
cannot really alter its degree. Thus an error and delusion always lies at
the foundation of immoderate joy or grief, and consequently both these
excessive strainings of the mind can be avoided by knowledge. Every
immoderate joy (_exultatio, insolens lætitia_) always rests on the
delusion that one has found in life what can never be found there—lasting
satisfaction of the harassing desires and cares, which are constantly
breeding new ones. From every particular delusion of this kind one must
inevitably be brought back later, and then when it vanishes must pay for
it with pain as bitter as the joy its entrance caused was keen. So far,
then, it is precisely like a height from which one can come down only by a
fall. Therefore one ought to avoid them; and every sudden excessive grief
is just a fall from some such height, the vanishing of such a delusion,
and so conditioned by it. Consequently we might avoid them both if we had
sufficient control over ourselves to survey things always with perfect
clearness as a whole and in their connection, and steadfastly to guard
against really lending them the colours which we wish they had. The
principal effort of the Stoical ethics was to free the mind from all such
delusion and its consequences, and to give it instead an equanimity that
could not be disturbed. It is this insight that inspires Horace in the
well-known ode—


    “_Æquam memento rebus in arduiis_
    Servare mentem, non secus in bonis
        _Ab insolenti temperatam_
          _Lætitia._”


For the most part, however, we close our minds against the knowledge,
which may be compared to a bitter medicine, that suffering is essential to
life, and therefore does not flow in upon us from without, but that every
one carries about with him its perennial source in his own heart. We
rather seek constantly for an external particular cause, as it were, a
pretext for the pain which never leaves us, just as the free man makes
himself an idol, in order to have a master. For we unweariedly strive from
wish to wish; and although every satisfaction, however much it promised,
when attained fails to satisfy us, but for the most part comes presently
to be an error of which we are ashamed, yet we do not see that we draw
water with the sieve of the Danaides, but ever hasten to new desires.


    “_Sed, dum abest quod avemus, id exsuperare videtur_
    _Cætera; post aliud, quum contigit illud, avemus;_
    _Et sitis æqua tenet vitai semper hiantes._”—LUCR. iii. 1095.


Thus it either goes on for ever, or, what is more rare and presupposes a
certain strength of character, till we reach a wish which is not satisfied
and yet cannot be given up. In that case we have, as it were, found what
we sought, something that we can always blame, instead of our own nature,
as the source of our suffering. And thus, although we are now at variance
with our fate, we are reconciled to our existence, for the knowledge is
again put far from us that suffering is essential to this existence
itself, and true satisfaction impossible. The result of this form of
development is a somewhat melancholy disposition, the constant endurance
of a single great pain, and the contempt for all lesser sorrows or joys
that proceeds from it; consequently an already nobler phenomenon than that
constant seizing upon ever-new forms of illusion, which is much more
common.

§ 58. All satisfaction, or what is commonly called happiness, is always
really and essentially only _negative_, and never positive. It is not an
original gratification coming to us of itself, but must always be the
satisfaction of a wish. The wish, _i.e._, some want, is the condition
which precedes every pleasure. But with the satisfaction the wish and
therefore the pleasure cease. Thus the satisfaction or the pleasing can
never be more than the deliverance from a pain, from a want; for such is
not only every actual, open sorrow, but every desire, the importunity of
which disturbs our peace, and, indeed, the deadening ennui also that makes
life a burden to us. It is, however, so hard to attain or achieve
anything; difficulties and troubles without end are opposed to every
purpose, and at every step hindrances accumulate. But when finally
everything is overcome and attained, nothing can ever be gained but
deliverance from some sorrow or desire, so that we find ourselves just in
the same position as we occupied before this sorrow or desire appeared.
All that is even directly given us is merely the want, _i.e._, the pain.
The satisfaction and the pleasure we can only know indirectly through the
remembrance of the preceding suffering and want, which ceases with its
appearance. Hence it arises that we are not properly conscious of the
blessings and advantages we actually possess, nor do we prize them, but
think of them merely as a matter of course, for they gratify us only
negatively by restraining suffering. Only when we have lost them do we
become sensible of their value; for the want, the privation, the sorrow,
is the positive, communicating itself directly to us. Thus also we are
pleased by the remembrance of past need, sickness, want, and such like,
because this is the only means of enjoying the present blessings. And,
further, it cannot be denied that in this respect, and from this
standpoint of egoism, which is the form of the will to live, the sight or
the description of the sufferings of others affords us satisfaction and
pleasure in precisely the way Lucretius beautifully and frankly expresses
it in the beginning of the Second Book—


    “_Suave, mari magno, turbantibus æquora ventis,_
    _E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem:_
    _Non, quia vexari quemquam est jucunda voluptas;_
    _Sed, quibus ipse malis careas, quia cernere suave est._”


Yet we shall see farther on that this kind of pleasure, through knowledge
of our own well-being obtained in this way, lies very near the source of
real, positive wickedness.

That all happiness is only of a negative not a positive nature, that just
on this account it cannot be lasting satisfaction and gratification, but
merely delivers us from some pain or want which must be followed either by
a new pain, or by languor, empty longing, and ennui; this finds support in
art, that true mirror of the world and life, and especially in poetry.
Every epic and dramatic poem can only represent a struggle, an effort, and
fight for happiness, never enduring and complete happiness itself. It
conducts its heroes through a thousand difficulties and dangers to the
goal; as soon as this is reached, it hastens to let the curtain fall; for
now there would remain nothing for it to do but to show that the
glittering goal in which the hero expected to find happiness had only
disappointed him, and that after its attainment he was no better off than
before. Because a genuine enduring happiness is not possible, it cannot be
the subject of art. Certainly the aim of the idyll is the description of
such a happiness, but one also sees that the idyll as such cannot
continue. The poet always finds that it either becomes epical in his
hands, and in this case it is a very insignificant epic, made up of
trifling sorrows, trifling delights, and trifling efforts—this is the
commonest case—or else it becomes a merely descriptive poem, describing
the beauty of nature, _i.e._, pure knowing free from will, which
certainly, as a matter of fact, is the only pure happiness, which is
neither preceded by suffering or want, nor necessarily followed by
repentance, sorrow, emptiness, or satiety; but this happiness cannot fill
the whole life, but is only possible at moments. What we see in poetry we
find again in music; in the melodies of which we have recognised the
universal expression of the inmost history of the self-conscious will, the
most secret life, longing, suffering, and delight; the ebb and flow of the
human heart. Melody is always a deviation from the keynote through a
thousand capricious wanderings, even to the most painful discord, and then
a final return to the keynote which expresses the satisfaction and
appeasing of the will, but with which nothing more can then be done, and
the continuance of which any longer would only be a wearisome and
unmeaning monotony corresponding to ennui.

All that we intend to bring out clearly through these investigations, the
impossibility of attaining lasting satisfaction and the negative nature of
all happiness, finds its explanation in what is shown at the conclusion of
the Second Book: that the will, of which human life, like every
phenomenon, is the objectification, is a striving without aim or end. We
find the stamp of this endlessness imprinted upon all the parts of its
whole manifestation, from its most universal form, endless time and space,
up to the most perfect of all phenomena, the life and efforts of man. We
may theoretically assume three extremes of human life, and treat them as
elements of actual human life. First, the powerful will, the strong
passions (Radscha-Guna). It appears in great historical characters; it is
described in the epic and the drama. But it can also show itself in the
little world, for the size of the objects is measured here by the degree
in which they influence the will, not according to their external
relations. Secondly, pure knowing, the comprehension of the Ideas,
conditioned by the freeing of knowledge from the service of will: the life
of genius (Satwa-Guna). Thirdly and lastly, the greatest lethargy of the
will, and also of the knowledge attaching to it, empty longing,
life-benumbing languor (Tama-Guna). The life of the individual, far from
becoming permanently fixed in one of these extremes, seldom touches any of
them, and is for the most part only a weak and wavering approach to one or
the other side, a needy desiring of trifling objects, constantly
recurring, and so escaping ennui. It is really incredible how meaningless
and void of significance when looked at from without, how dull and
unenlightened by intellect when felt from within, is the course of the
life of the great majority of men. It is a weary longing and complaining,
a dream-like staggering through the four ages of life to death,
accompanied by a series of trivial thoughts. Such men are like clockwork,
which is wound up, and goes it knows not why; and every time a man is
begotten and born, the clock of human life is wound up anew, to repeat the
same old piece it has played innumerable times before, passage after
passage, measure after measure, with insignificant variations. Every
individual, every human being and his course of life, is but another short
dream of the endless spirit of nature, of the persistent will to live; is
only another fleeting form, which it carelessly sketches on its infinite
page, space and time; allows to remain for a time so short that it
vanishes into nothing in comparison with these, and then obliterates to
make new room. And yet, and here lies the serious side of life, every one
of these fleeting forms, these empty fancies, must be paid for by the
whole will to live, in all its activity, with many and deep sufferings,
and finally with a bitter death, long feared and coming at last. This is
why the sight of a corpse makes us suddenly so serious.

The life of every individual, if we survey it as a whole and in general,
and only lay stress upon its most significant features, is really always a
tragedy, but gone through in detail, it has the character of a comedy. For
the deeds and vexations of the day, the restless irritation of the moment,
the desires and fears of the week, the mishaps of every hour, are all
through chance, which is ever bent upon some jest, scenes of a comedy. But
the never-satisfied wishes, the frustrated efforts, the hopes unmercifully
crushed by fate, the unfortunate errors of the whole life, with increasing
suffering and death at the end, are always a tragedy. Thus, as if fate
would add derision to the misery of our existence, our life must contain
all the woes of tragedy, and yet we cannot even assert the dignity of
tragic characters, but in the broad detail of life must inevitably be the
foolish characters of a comedy.

But however much great and small trials may fill human life, they are not
able to conceal its insufficiency to satisfy the spirit; they cannot hide
the emptiness and superficiality of existence, nor exclude ennui, which is
always ready to fill up every pause that care may allow. Hence it arises
that the human mind, not content with the cares, anxieties, and
occupations which the actual world lays upon it, creates for itself an
imaginary world also in the form of a thousand different superstitions,
then finds all manner of employment with this, and wastes time and
strength upon it, as soon as the real world is willing to grant it the
rest which it is quite incapable of enjoying. This is accordingly most
markedly the case with nations for which life is made easy by the
congenial nature of the climate and the soil, most of all with the Hindus,
then with the Greeks, the Romans, and later with the Italians, the
Spaniards, &c. Demons, gods, and saints man creates in his own image; and
to them he must then unceasingly bring offerings, prayers, temple
decorations, vows and their fulfilment, pilgrimages, salutations,
ornaments for their images, &c. Their service mingles everywhere with the
real, and, indeed, obscures it. Every event of life is regarded as the
work of these beings; the intercourse with them occupies half the time of
life, constantly sustains hope, and by the charm of illusion often becomes
more interesting than intercourse with real beings. It is the expression
and symptom of the actual need of mankind, partly for help and support,
partly for occupation and diversion; and if it often works in direct
opposition to the first need, because when accidents and dangers arise
valuable time and strength, instead of being directed to warding them off,
are uselessly wasted on prayers and offerings; it serves the second end
all the better by this imaginary converse with a visionary spirit world;
and this is the by no means contemptible gain of all superstitions.

§ 59. If we have so far convinced ourselves _a priori_, by the most
general consideration, by investigation of the primary and elemental
features of human life, that in its whole plan it is capable of no true
blessedness, but is in its very nature suffering in various forms, and
throughout a state of misery, we might now awaken this conviction much
more vividly within us if, proceeding more _a posteriori_, we were to turn
to more definite instances, call up pictures to the fancy, and illustrate
by examples the unspeakable misery which experience and history present,
wherever one may look and in whatever direction one may seek. But the
chapter would have no end, and would carry us far from the standpoint of
the universal, which is essential to philosophy; and, moreover, such a
description might easily be taken for a mere declamation on human misery,
such as has often been given, and, as such, might be charged with
one-sidedness, because it started from particular facts. From such a
reproach and suspicion our perfectly cold and philosophical investigation
of the inevitable suffering which is founded in the nature of life is
free, for it starts from the universal and is conducted _a priori_. But
confirmation _a posteriori_ is everywhere easily obtained. Every one who
has awakened from the first dream of youth, who has considered his own
experience and that of others, who has studied himself in life, in the
history of the past and of his own time, and finally in the works of the
great poets, will, if his judgment is not paralysed by some indelibly
imprinted prejudice, certainly arrive at the conclusion that this human
world is the kingdom of chance and error, which rule without mercy in
great things and in small, and along with which folly and wickedness also
wield the scourge. Hence it arises that everything better only struggles
through with difficulty; what is noble and wise seldom attains to
expression, becomes effective and claims attention, but the absurd and the
perverse in the sphere of thought, the dull and tasteless in the sphere of
art, the wicked and deceitful in the sphere of action, really assert a
supremacy, only disturbed by short interruptions. On the other hand,
everything that is excellent is always a mere exception, one case in
millions, and therefore, if it presents itself in a lasting work, this,
when it has outlived the enmity of its contemporaries, exists in
isolation, is preserved like a meteoric stone, sprung from an order of
things different from that which prevails here. But as far as the life of
the individual is concerned, every biography is the history of suffering,
for every life is, as a rule, a continual series of great and small
misfortunes, which each one conceals as much as possible, because he knows
that others can seldom feel sympathy or compassion, but almost always
satisfaction at the sight of the woes from which they are themselves for
the moment exempt. But perhaps at the end of life, if a man is sincere and
in full possession of his faculties, he will never wish to have it to live
over again, but rather than this, he will much prefer absolute
annihilation. The essential content of the famous soliloquy in “Hamlet” is
briefly this: Our state is so wretched that absolute annihilation would be
decidedly preferable. If suicide really offered us this, so that the
alternative “to be or not to be,” in the full sense of the word, was
placed before us, then it would be unconditionally to be chosen as “a
consummation devoutly to be wished.” But there is something in us which
tells us that this is not the case: suicide is not the end; death is not
absolute annihilation. In like manner, what was said by the father of
history(71) has not since him been contradicted, that no man has ever
lived who has not wished more than once that he had not to live the
following day. According to this, the brevity of life, which is so
constantly lamented, may be the best quality it possesses. If, finally, we
should bring clearly to a man’s sight the terrible sufferings and miseries
to which his life is constantly exposed, he would be seized with horror;
and if we were to conduct the confirmed optimist through the hospitals,
infirmaries, and surgical operating-rooms, through the prisons,
torture-chambers, and slave-kennels, over battle-fields and places of
execution; if we were to open to him all the dark abodes of misery, where
it hides itself from the glance of cold curiosity, and, finally, allow him
to glance into the starving dungeon of Ugolino, he, too, would understand
at last the nature of this “best of possible worlds.” For whence did Dante
take the materials for his hell but from this our actual world? And yet he
made a very proper hell of it. And when, on the other hand, he came to the
task of describing heaven and its delights, he had an insurmountable
difficulty before him, for our world affords no materials at all for this.
Therefore there remained nothing for him to do but, instead of describing
the joys of paradise, to repeat to us the instruction given him there by
his ancestor, by Beatrice, and by various saints. But from this it is
sufficiently clear what manner of world it is. Certainly human life, like
all bad ware, is covered over with a false lustre: what suffers always
conceals itself; on the other hand, whatever pomp or splendour any one can
get, he makes a show of openly, and the more inner contentment deserts
him, the more he desires to exist as fortunate in the opinion of others:
to such an extent does folly go, and the opinion of others is a chief aim
of the efforts of every one, although the utter nothingness of it is
expressed in the fact that in almost all languages vanity, _vanitas_,
originally signifies emptiness and nothingness. But under all this false
show, the miseries of life can so increase—and this happens every day—that
the death which hitherto has been feared above all things is eagerly
seized upon. Indeed, if fate will show its whole malice, even this refuge
is denied to the sufferer, and, in the hands of enraged enemies, he may
remain exposed to terrible and slow tortures without remedy. In vain the
sufferer then calls on his gods for help; he remains exposed to his fate
without grace. But this irremediableness is only the mirror of the
invincible nature of his will, of which his person is the objectivity. As
little as an external power can change or suppress this will, so little
can a foreign power deliver it from the miseries which proceed from the
life which is the phenomenal appearance of that will. In the principal
matter, as in everything else, a man is always thrown back upon himself.
In vain does he make to himself gods in order to get from them by prayers
and flattery what can only be accomplished by his own will-power. The Old
Testament made the world and man the work of a god, but the New Testament
saw that, in order to teach that holiness and salvation from the sorrows
of this world can only come from the world itself, it was necessary that
this god should become man. It is and remains the will of man upon which
everything depends for him. Fanatics, martyrs, saints of every faith and
name, have voluntarily and gladly endured every torture, because in them
the will to live had suppressed itself; and then even the slow destruction
of its phenomenon was welcome to them. But I do not wish to anticipate the
later exposition. For the rest, I cannot here avoid the statement that, to
me, _optimism_, when it is not merely the thoughtless talk of such as
harbour nothing but words under their low foreheads, appears not merely as
an absurd, but also as a really _wicked_ way of thinking, as a bitter
mockery of the unspeakable suffering of humanity. Let no one think that
Christianity is favourable to optimism; for, on the contrary, in the
Gospels world and evil are used as almost synonymous.(72)

§ 60. We have now completed the two expositions it was necessary to
insert; the exposition of the freedom of the will in itself together with
the necessity of its phenomenon, and the exposition of its lot in the
world which reflects its own nature, and upon the knowledge of which it
has to assert or deny itself. Therefore we can now proceed to bring out
more clearly the nature of this assertion and denial itself, which was
referred to and explained in a merely general way above. This we shall do
by exhibiting the conduct in which alone it finds its expression, and
considering it in its inner significance.

The _assertion of the will_ is the continuous willing itself, undisturbed
by any knowledge, as it fills the life of man in general. For even the
body of a man is the objectivity of the will, as it appears at this grade
and in this individual. And thus his willing which develops itself in time
is, as it were, a paraphrase of his body, an elucidation of the
significance of the whole and its parts; it is another way of exhibiting
the same thing-in-itself, of which the body is already the phenomenon.
Therefore, instead of saying assertion of the will, we may say assertion
of the body. The fundamental theme or subject of all the multifarious acts
of will is the satisfaction of the wants which are inseparable from the
existence of the body in health, they already have their expression in it,
and may be referred to the maintenance of the individual and the
propagation of the species. But indirectly the most different kinds of
motives obtain in this way power over the will, and bring about the most
multifarious acts of will. Each of these is only an example, an instance,
of the will which here manifests itself generally. Of what nature this
example may be, what form the motive may have and impart to it, is not
essential; the important point here is that something is willed in general
and the degree of intensity with which it is so willed. The will can only
become visible in the motives, as the eye only manifests its power of
seeing in the light. The motive in general stands before the will in
protean forms. It constantly promises complete satisfaction, the quenching
of the thirst of will. But whenever it is attained it at once appears in
another form, and thus influences the will anew, always according to the
degree of the intensity of this will, and its relation to knowledge which
are revealed as empirical character, in these very examples and instances.

From the first appearance of consciousness, a man finds himself a willing
being, and as a rule, his knowledge remains in constant relation to his
will. He first seeks to know thoroughly the objects of his desire, and
then the means of attaining them. Now he knows what he has to do, and, as
a rule, he does not strive after other knowledge. He moves and acts; his
consciousness keeps him always working directly and actively towards the
aims of his will; his thought is concerned with the choice of motives.
Such is life for almost all men; they wish, they know what they wish, and
they strive after it, with sufficient success to keep them from despair,
and sufficient failure to keep them from ennui and its consequences. From
this proceeds a certain serenity, or at least indifference, which cannot
be affected by wealth or poverty; for the rich and the poor do not enjoy
what they have, for this, as we have shown, acts in a purely negative way,
but what they hope to attain to by their efforts. They press forward with
much earnestness, and indeed with an air of importance; thus children also
pursue their play. It is always an exception if such a life suffers
interruption from the fact that either the æsthetic demand for
contemplation or the ethical demand for renunciation proceed from a
knowledge which is independent of the service of the will, and directed to
the nature of the world in general. Most men are pursued by want all
through life, without ever being allowed to come to their senses. On the
other hand, the will is often inflamed to a degree that far transcends the
assertion of the body, and then violent emotions and powerful passions
show themselves, in which the individual not only asserts his own
existence, but denies and seeks to suppress that of others when it stands
in his way.

The maintenance of the body through its own powers is so small a degree of
the assertion of will, that if it voluntarily remains at this degree, we
might assume that, with the death of this body, the will also which
appeared in it would be extinguished. But even the satisfaction of the
sexual passions goes beyond the assertion of one’s own existence, which
fills so short a time, and asserts life for an indefinite time after the
death of the individual. Nature, always true and consistent, here even
naïve, exhibits to us openly the inner significance of the act of
generation. Our own consciousness, the intensity of the impulse, teaches
us that in this act the most decided _assertion of the will to live_
expresses itself, pure and without further addition (any denial of other
individuals); and now, as the consequence of this act, a new life appears
in time and the causal series, _i.e._, in nature; the begotten appears
before the begetter, different as regards the phenomenon, but in himself,
_i.e._, according to the Idea, identical with him. Therefore it is this
act through which every species of living creature binds itself to a whole
and is perpetuated. Generation is, with reference to the begetter, only
the expression, the symptom, of his decided assertion of the will to live:
with reference to the begotten, it is not the cause of the will which
appears in him, for the will in itself knows neither cause nor effect,
but, like all causes, it is merely the occasional cause of the phenomenal
appearance of this will at this time in this place. As thing-in-itself,
the will of the begetter and that of the begotten are not different, for
only the phenomenon, not the thing-in-itself, is subordinate to the
_principim individuationis_. With that assertion beyond our own body and
extending to the production of a new body, suffering and death, as
belonging to the phenomenon of life, have also been asserted anew, and the
possibility of salvation, introduced by the completest capability of
knowledge, has for this time been shown to be fruitless. Here lies the
profound reason of the shame connected with the process of generation.
This view is mythically expressed in the dogma of Christian theology that
we are all partakers in Adam’s first transgression (which is clearly just
the satisfaction of sexual passion), and through it are guilty of
suffering and death. In this theology goes beyond the consideration of
things according to the principle of sufficient reason, and recognises the
Idea of man, the unity of which is re-established out of its dispersion
into innumerable individuals through the bond of generation which holds
them all together. Accordingly it regards every individual as on one side
identical with Adam, the representative of the assertion of life, and, so
far, as subject to sin (original sin), suffering, and death; on the other
side, the knowledge of the Idea of man enables it to regard every
individual as identical with the saviour, the representative of the denial
of the will to live, and, so far as a partaker of his sacrifice of
himself, saved through his merits, and delivered from the bands of sin and
death, _i.e._, the world (Rom. v. 12-21).

Another mythical exposition of our view of sexual pleasure as the
assertion of the will to live beyond the individual life, as an attainment
to life which is brought about for the first time by this means, or as it
were a renewed assignment of life, is the Greek myth of Proserpine, who
might return from the lower world so long as she had not tasted its fruit,
but who became subject to it altogether through eating the pomegranate.
This meaning appears very clearly in Goethe’s incomparable presentation of
this myth, especially when, as soon as she has tasted the pomegranate, the
invisible chorus of the Fates—


                    “Thou art ours!
    Fasting shouldest thou return:
    And the bite of the apple makes thee ours!”


It is worth noticing that Clement of Alexandria (Strom. iii. c. 15)
illustrates the matter with the same image and the same expression: Οἱ μεν
ευνουχισαντες ἑαυτους απο πασης ἁμαρτιας, δια την βασιλειαν, των ουρανων,
μακαριοι οὑτοι εισιν, οἱ του κοσμου νηστευοντες; (_Qui se castrarunt ab
omni peccato propter regnum cœlorum, ii sunt beati, a mundo jejunantes_).

The sexual impulse also proves itself the decided and strongest assertion
of life by the fact that to man in a state of nature, as to the brutes, it
is the final end, the highest goal of life. Self-maintenance is his first
effort, and as soon as he has made provision for that, he only strives
after the propagation of the species: as a merely natural being he can
attempt no more. Nature also, the inner being of which is the will to live
itself, impels with all her power both man and the brute towards
propagation. Then it has attained its end with the individual, and is
quite indifferent to its death, for, as the will to live, it cares only
for the preservation of the species, the individual is nothing to it.
Because the will to live expresses itself most strongly in the sexual
impulse, the inner being of nature, the old poets and philosophers—Hesiod
and Parmenides—said very significantly that Eros is the first, the
creator, the principle from which all things proceed. (Cf. Arist. Metaph.,
i. 4.) Pherecydes said: Εις ερωτα μεταβεβλησθαι τον Δια, μελλοντα
δημιουργειν (_Jovem, cum mundum fabricare vellet, in cupidinem sese
transformasse_). _Proclus ad Plat. Tim._, l. iii. A complete treatment of
this subject we have recently received from G. F. Schœmann, “_De Cupidine
Cosmogonico_,” 1852. The Mâya of the Hindus, whose work and web is the
whole world of illusion, is also symbolised by love.

The genital organs are, far more than any other external member of the
body, subject merely to the will, and not at all to knowledge. Indeed, the
will shows itself here almost as independent of knowledge, as in those
parts which, acting merely in consequence of stimuli, are subservient to
vegetative life and reproduction, in which the will works blindly as in
unconscious nature. For generation is only reproduction passing over to a
new individual, as it were reproduction at the second power, as death is
only excretion at the second power. According to all this, the genitals
are properly the _focus_ of will, and consequently the opposite pole of
the brain, the representative of knowledge, _i.e._, the other side of the
world, the world as idea. The former are the life-sustaining principle
ensuring endless life to time. In this respect they were worshipped by the
Greeks in the _phallus_, and by the Hindus in the _lingam_, which are thus
the symbol of the assertion of the will. Knowledge, on the other hand,
affords the possibility of the suppression of willing, of salvation
through freedom, of conquest and annihilation of the world.

We already considered fully at the beginning of this Fourth Book how the
will to live in its assertion must regard its relation to death. We saw
that death does not trouble it, because it exists as something included in
life itself and belonging to it. Its opposite, generation, completely
counterbalances it; and, in spite of the death of the individual, ensures
and guarantees life to the will to live through all time. To express this
the Hindus made the _lingam_ an attribute of Siva, the god of death. We
also fully explained there how he who with full consciousness occupies the
standpoint of the decided assertion of life awaits death without fear. We
shall therefore say nothing more about this here. Without clear
consciousness most men occupy this standpoint and continually assert life.
The world exists as the mirror of this assertion, with innumerable
individuals in infinite time and space, in infinite suffering, between
generation and death without end. Yet from no side is a complaint to be
further raised about this; for the will conducts the great tragedy and
comedy at its own expense, and is also its own spectator. The world is
just what it is because the will, whose manifestation it is, is what it
is, because it so wills. The justification of suffering is, that in this
phenomenon also the will asserts itself; and this assertion is justified
and balanced by the fact that the will bears the suffering. Here we get a
glimpse of _eternal justice_ in the whole: we shall recognise it later
more definitely and distinctly, and also in the particular. But first we
must consider temporal or human justice.(73)

§ 61. It may be remembered from the Second Book that in the whole of
nature, at all the grades of the objectification of will, there was a
necessary and constant conflict between the individuals of all species;
and in this way was expressed the inner contradiction of the will to live
with itself. At the highest grade of the objectification, this phenomenon,
like all others, will exhibit itself with greater distinctness, and will
therefore be more easily explained. With this aim we shall next attempt to
trace the source of _egoism_ as the starting-point of all conflict.

We have called time and space the _principium individuationis_, because
only through them and in them is multiplicity of the homogeneous possible.
They are the essential forms of natural knowledge, _i.e._, knowledge
springing from the will. Therefore the will everywhere manifests itself in
the multiplicity of individuals. But this multiplicity does not concern
the will as thing-in-itself, but only its phenomena. The will itself is
present, whole and undivided, in every one of these, and beholds around it
the innumerably repeated image of its own nature; but this nature itself,
the actually real, it finds directly only in its inner self. Therefore
every one desires everything for himself, desires to possess, or at least
to control, everything, and whatever opposes it it would like to destroy.
To this is added, in the case of such beings as have knowledge, that the
individual is the supporter of the knowing subject, and the knowing
subject is the supporter of the world, _i.e._, that the whole of Nature
outside the knowing subject, and thus also all other individuals, exist
only in its idea; it is only conscious of them as its idea, thus merely
indirectly as something which is dependent on its own nature and
existence; for with its consciousness the world necessarily disappears for
it, _i.e._, its being and non-being become synonymous and
indistinguishable. Every knowing individual is thus in truth, and finds
itself as the whole will to live, or the inner being of the world itself,
and also as the complemental condition of the world as idea, consequently
as a microcosm which is of equal value with the macrocosm. Nature itself,
which is everywhere and always truthful, gives him this knowledge,
originally and independently of all reflection, with simple and direct
certainty. Now from these two necessary properties we have given the fact
may be explained that every individual, though vanishing altogether and
diminished to nothing in the boundless world, yet makes itself the centre
of the world, has regard for its own existence and well-being before
everything else; indeed, from the natural standpoint, is ready to
sacrifice everything else for this—is ready to annihilate the world in
order to maintain its own self, this drop in the ocean, a little longer.
This disposition is _egoism_, which is essential to everything in Nature.
Yet it is just through egoism that the inner conflict of the will with
itself attains to such a terrible revelation; for this egoism has its
continuance and being in that opposition of the microcosm and macrocosm,
or in the fact that the objectification of will has the _principium
individuationis_ for its form, through which the will manifests itself in
the same way in innumerable individuals, and indeed entire and completely
in both aspects (will and idea) in each. Thus, while each individual is
given to itself directly as the whole will and the whole subject of ideas,
other individuals are only given it as ideas. Therefore its own being, and
the maintenance of it, is of more importance to it than that of all others
together. Every one looks upon his own death as upon the end of the world,
while he accepts the death of his acquaintances as a matter of comparative
indifference, if he is not in some way affected by it. In the
consciousness that has reached the highest grade, that of man, egoism, as
well as knowledge, pain and pleasure, must have reached its highest grade
also, and the conflict of individuals which is conditioned by it must
appear in its most terrible form. And indeed we see this everywhere before
our eyes, in small things as in great. Now we see its terrible side in the
lives of great tyrants and miscreants, and in world-desolating wars; now
its absurd side, in which it is the theme of comedy, and very specially
appears as self-conceit and vanity. Rochefoucault understood this better
than any one else, and presented it in the abstract. We see it both in the
history of the world and in our own experience. But it appears most
distinctly of all when any mob of men is set free from all law and order;
then there shows itself at once in the distinctest form the _bellum omnium
contra omnes_, which Hobbes has so admirably described in the first
chapter _De Cive_. We see not only how every one tries to seize from the
other what he wants himself, but how often one will destroy the whole
happiness or life of another for the sake of an insignificant addition to
his own happiness. This is the highest expression of egoism, the
manifestations of which in this regard are only surpassed by those of
actual wickedness, which seeks, quite disinterestedly, the hurt and
suffering of others, without any advantage to itself. Of this we shall
speak soon. With this exhibition of the source of egoism the reader should
compare the presentation of it in my prize-essay on the basis of morals, §
14.

A chief source of that suffering which we found above to be essential and
inevitable to all life is, when it really appears in a definite form, that
_Eris_, the conflict of all individuals, the expression of the
contradiction, with which the will to live is affected in its inner self,
and which attains a visible form through the _principium individuationis_.
Wild-beast fights are the most cruel means of showing this directly and
vividly. In this original discord lies an unquenchable source of
suffering, in spite of the precautions that have been taken against it,
and which we shall now consider more closely.

§ 62. It has already been explained that the first and simplest assertion
of the will to live is only the assertion of one’s own body, _i.e._, the
exhibition of the will through acts in time, so far as the body, in its
form and design, exhibits the same will in space, and no further. This
assertion shows itself as maintenance of the body, by means of the
application of its own powers. To it is directly related the satisfaction
of the sexual impulse; indeed this belongs to it, because the genitals
belong to the body. Therefore _voluntary_ renunciation of the satisfaction
of that impulse, based upon no _motive_, is already a denial of the will
to live, is a voluntary self-suppression of it, upon the entrance of
knowledge which acts as a _quieter_. Accordingly such denial of one’s own
body exhibits itself as a contradiction by the will of its own phenomenon.
For although here also the body objectifies in the genitals the will to
perpetuate the species, yet this is not willed. Just on this account,
because it is a denial or suppression of the will to live, such a
renunciation is a hard and painful self-conquest; but of this later. But
since the will exhibits that _self-assertion_ of one’s own body in
innumerable individuals beside each other, it very easily extends in one
individual, on account of the egoism peculiar to them all, beyond this
assertion to the _denial_ of the same will appearing in another
individual. The will of the first breaks through the limits of the
assertion of will of another, because the individual either destroys or
injures this other body itself, or else because it compels the powers of
the other body to serve _its own_ will, instead of the will which
manifests itself in that other body. Thus if, from the will manifesting
itself as another body, it withdraws the powers of this body, and so
increases the power serving its own will beyond that of its own body, it
consequently asserts its own will beyond its own body by means of the
negation of the will appearing in another body. This breaking through the
limits of the assertion of will of another has always been distinctly
recognised, and its concept denoted by the word _wrong_. For both sides
recognise the fact instantly, not, indeed, as we do here in distinct
abstraction, but as feeling. He who suffers wrong feels the transgression
into the sphere of the assertion of his own body, through the denial of it
by another individual, as a direct and mental pain which is entirely
separated and different from the accompanying physical suffering
experienced from the act or the vexation at the loss. To the doer of
wrong, on the other hand, the knowledge presents itself that he is in
himself the same will which appears in that body also, and which asserts
itself with such vehemence; the one phenomenon that, transgressing the
limits of its own body and its powers, it extends to the denial of this
very will in another phenomenon, and so, regarded as will in itself, it
strives against itself by this vehemence and rends itself. Moreover, this
knowledge presents itself to him instantly, not _in abstracto_, but as an
obscure feeling; and this is called remorse, or, more accurately in this
case, the feeling of _wrong committed_.

_Wrong_, the conception of which we have thus analysed in its most general
and abstract form, expresses itself in the concrete most completely,
peculiarly, and palpably in cannibalism. This is its most distinct and
evident type, the terrible picture of the greatest conflict of the will
with itself at the highest grade of its objectification, which is man.
Next to this, it expresses itself most distinctly in murder; and therefore
the committal of murder is followed instantly and with fearful
distinctness by remorse, the abstract and dry significance of which we
have just given, which inflicts a wound on our peace of mind that a
lifetime cannot heal. For our horror at the murder committed, as also our
shrinking from the committal of it, corresponds to that infinite clinging
to life with which everything living, as phenomenon of the will to live,
is penetrated. (We shall analyse this feeling which accompanies the doing
of wrong and evil, in other words, the pangs of conscience, more fully
later on, and raise its concept to distinctness.) Mutilation, or mere
injury of another body, indeed every blow, is to be regarded as in its
nature the same as murder, and differing from it only in degree. Further,
wrong shows itself in the subjugation of another individual, in forcing
him into slavery, and, finally, in the seizure of another’s goods, which,
so far as these goods are regarded as the fruit of his labour, is just the
same thing as making him a slave, and is related to this as mere injury is
to murder.

For _property_, which is not taken from a man without _wrong_, can,
according to our explanation of wrong, only be that which has been
produced by his own powers. Therefore by taking this we really take the
powers of his body from the will objectified in it, to make them subject
to the will objectified in another body. For only so does the wrong-doer,
by seizing, not the body of another, but a lifeless thing quite different
from it, break into the sphere of the assertion of will of another person,
because the powers, the work of this other body, are, as it were,
incorporated and identified with this thing. It follows from this that all
true, _i.e._, moral, right of property is based simply and solely on work,
as was pretty generally assumed before Kant, and is distinctly and
beautifully expressed in the oldest of all codes of law: “Wise men who
know the past explain that a cultured field is the property of him who cut
down the wood and cleared and ploughed it, as an antelope belongs to the
first hunter who mortally wounds it” (Laws of Manu, ix. 44). Kant’s
philosophy of law is an extraordinary concatenation of errors all leading
to each other, and he bases the right of property upon first occupation.
To me this is only explicable on the supposition that his powers were
failing through old age. For how should the mere avowal of my will to
exclude others from the use of a thing at once give me a _right_ to it?
Clearly such an avowal itself requires a foundation of right, instead of
being one, as Kant assumes. And how would he act unjustly _in se_, _i.e._,
morally, who does not respect that claim to the sole possession of a thing
which is based upon nothing but its own avowal? How should his conscience
trouble him about it? For it is so clear and easy to understand that there
can be absolutely no such thing as a just seizure of anything, but only a
just conversion or acquired possession of it, by spending our own original
powers upon it. When, by any foreign labour, however little, a thing has
been cultivated, improved, kept from harm or preserved, even if this
labour were only the plucking or picking up from the ground of fruit that
has grown wild; the person who forcibly seizes such a thing clearly
deprives the other of the result of his labour expended upon it, makes the
body of this other serve his will instead of its own, asserts his will
beyond its own phenomenon to the denial of that of the other, _i.e._, does
injustice or wrong.(74) On the other hand, the mere enjoyment of a thing,
without any cultivation or preservation of it from destruction, gives just
as little right to it as the mere avowal of our desire for its sole
possession. Therefore, though one family has hunted a district alone, even
for a hundred years, but has done nothing for its improvement; if a
stranger comes and desires to hunt there, it cannot prevent him from doing
so without moral injustice. Thus the so-called right of preoccupation,
according to which, for the mere past enjoyment of a thing, there is
demanded the further recompense of the exclusive right to its future
enjoyment, is morally entirely without foundation. A new-comer might with
far better right reply to him who was depending upon such a right, “Just
because you have so long enjoyed, it is right that others should now enjoy
also.” No moral right can be established to the sole possession of
anything upon which labour cannot be expended, either in improving it or
in preserving it from harm, unless it be through a voluntary surrender on
the part of others, as a reward for other services. This, however, already
presupposes a community regulated by agreement—the State. The morally
established right of property, as we have deduced it above, gives, from
its nature, to the owner of a thing, the same unlimited power over it
which he has over his own body; and hence it follows that he can part with
his possessions to others either in exchange or as a gift, and they then
possess them with the same moral right as he did.

As regards the doing of wrong generally, it occurs either through violence
or through craft; it matters not which as far as what is morally essential
is concerned. First, in the case of murder, it is a matter of indifference
whether I make use of a dagger or of poison; and the case of every bodily
injury is analogous. Other cases of wrong can all be reduced to the fact
that I, as the doer of wrong, compel another individual to serve my will
instead of his own, to act according to my will instead of according to
his own. On the path of violence I attain this end through physical
causality, but on the path of craft by means of motivation, _i.e._, by
means of causality through knowledge; for I present to his will illusive
motives, on account of which he follows my will, while he believes he is
following his own. Since the medium in which the motives lie is knowledge,
I can only accomplish this by falsifying his knowledge, and this is the
_lie_. The lie always aims at influencing another’s will, not merely his
knowledge, for itself and as such, but only as a means, so far as it
determines his will. For my lying itself, inasmuch as it proceeds from my
will, requires a motive; and only the will of another can be such a
motive, not his knowledge in and for itself; for as such it can never have
an influence upon _my_ will, therefore it can never move it, can never be
a motive of its aim. But only the willing and doing of another can be
this, and his knowledge indirectly through it. This holds good not only of
all lies that have manifestly sprung from self-interest, but also of those
which proceed from pure wickedness, which seeks enjoyment in the painful
consequences of the error into which it has led another. Indeed, mere
empty boasting aims at influencing the will and action of others more or
less, by increasing their respect or improving their opinion of the
boaster. The mere refusal of a truth, _i.e._, of an assertion generally,
is in itself no wrong, but every imposing of a lie is certainly a wrong.
He who refuses to show the strayed traveller the right road does him no
wrong, but he who directs him to a false road certainly does. It follows
from what has been said, that every _lie_, like every act of violence, is
as such _wrong_, because as such it has for its aim the extension of the
authority of my will to other individuals, and so the assertion of my will
through the denial of theirs, just as much as violence has. But the most
complete lie is the _broken contract_, because here all the conditions
mentioned are completely and distinctly present together. For when I enter
into a contract, the promised performance of the other individual is
directly and confessedly the motive for my reciprocal performance. The
promises were deliberately and formally exchanged. The fulfilment of the
declarations made is, it is assumed, in the power of each. If the other
breaks the covenant, he has deceived me, and by introducing merely
illusory motives into my knowledge, he has bent my will according to his
intention; he has extended the control of his will to another individual,
and thus has committed a distinct wrong. On this is founded the moral
lawfulness and validity of the _contract_.

Wrong through violence is not so _shameful_ to the doer of it as wrong
through craft; for the former arises from physical power, which under all
circumstances impresses mankind; while the latter, by the use of
subterfuge, betrays weakness, and lowers man at once as a physical and
moral being. This is further the case because lying and deception can only
succeed if he who employs them expresses at the same time horror and
contempt of them in order to win confidence, and his victory rests on the
fact that men credit him with honesty which he does not possess. The deep
horror which is always excited by cunning, faithlessness, and treachery
rests on the fact that good faith and honesty are the bond which
externally binds into a unity the will which has been broken up into the
multiplicity of individuals, and thereby limits the consequences of the
egoism which results from that dispersion. Faithlessness and treachery
break this outward bond asunder, and thus give boundless scope to the
consequences of egoism.

In the connection of our system we have found that the content of the
concept of _wrong_ is that quality of the conduct of an individual in
which he extends the assertion of the will appearing in his own body so
far that it becomes the denial of the will appearing in the bodies of
others. We have also laid down, by means of very general examples, the
limits at which the province of wrong begins; for we have at once defined
its gradations, from the highest degree to the lowest, by means of a few
leading conceptions. According to this, the concept of wrong is the
original and positive, and the concept of right, which is opposed to it,
is the derivative and negative; for we must keep to the concepts, and not
to the words. As a matter of fact, there would be no talk of right if
there were no such thing as wrong. The concept right contains merely the
negation of wrong, and every action is subsumed under it which does not
transgress the limit laid down above, _i.e._, is not a denial of the will
of another for the stronger assertion of our own. That limit, therefore,
divides, as regards a purely _moral_ definition, the whole province of
possible actions into such as are wrong or right. Whenever an action does
not encroach, in the way explained above, on the sphere of the assertion
of will of another, denying it, it is not wrong. Therefore, for example,
the refusal of help to another in great need, the quiet contemplation of
the death of another from starvation while we ourselves have more than
enough, is certainly cruel and fiendish, but it is not wrong; only it can
be affirmed with certainty that whoever is capable of carrying unkindness
and hardness to such a degree will certainly also commit every wrong
whenever his wishes demand it and no compulsion prevents it.

But the conception of right as the negation of wrong finds its principal
application, and no doubt its origin, in cases in which an attempted wrong
by violence is warded off. This warding off cannot itself be wrong, and
consequently is right, although the violence it requires, regarded in
itself and in isolation, would be wrong, and is here only justified by the
motive, _i.e._, becomes right. If an individual goes so far in the
assertion of his own will that he encroaches upon the assertion of will
which is essential to my person as such, and denies it, then my warding
off of that encroachment is only the denial of that denial, and thus from
my side is nothing more than the assertion of the will which essentially
and originally appears in my body, and is already implicitly expressed by
the mere appearance of this body; consequently is not wrong, but right.
That is to say: I have then a right to deny that denial of another with
the force necessary to overcome it, and it is easy to see that this may
extend to the killing of the other individual, whose encroachment as
external violence pressing upon me may be warded off by a somewhat
stronger counteraction, entirely without wrong, consequently with right.
For all that happens from my side lies always within the sphere of the
assertion of will essential to my person as such, and already expressed by
it (which is the scene of the conflict), and does not encroach on that of
the other, consequently is only negation of the negation, and thus
affirmation, not itself negation. Thus if the will of another denies my
will, as this appears in my body and the use of its powers for its
maintenance, without denial of any foreign will which observes a like
limitation, I can _without wrong_ compel it to desist from such denial,
_i.e._, I have so far a _right of compulsion_.

In all cases in which I have a right of compulsion, a complete right to
use _violence_ against another, I may, according to the circumstances,
just as well oppose the violence of the other with _craft_ without doing
any wrong, and accordingly I have an actual _right to lie precisely so far
as I have a right of compulsion_. Therefore a man acts with perfect right
who assures a highway robber who is searching him that he has nothing more
upon him; or, if a burglar has broken into his house by night, induces him
by a lie to enter a cellar and then locks him in. A man who has been
captured and carried off by robbers, for example by pirates, has the right
to kill them not only by violence but also by craft, in order to regain
his freedom. Thus, also, a promise is certainly not binding when it has
been extorted by direct bodily violence, because he who suffers such
compulsion may with full right free himself by killing, and, _a fortiori_,
by deceiving his oppressor. Whoever cannot recover through force the
property which has been stolen from him, commits no wrong if he can
accomplish it through craft. Indeed, if some one plays with me for money
he has stolen from me, I have the right to use false dice against him,
because all that I win from him already belongs to me. Whoever would deny
this must still more deny the justifiableness of stratagem in war, which
is just an acted lie, and is a proof of the saying of Queen Christina of
Sweden, “The words of men are to be esteemed as nothing; scarcely are
their deeds to be trusted.” So sharply does the limit of right border upon
that of wrong. For the rest, I regard it as superfluous to show that all
this completely agrees with what was said above about the unlawfulness of
the lie and of violence. It may also serve to explain the peculiar theory
of the lie told under pressure.(75)

In accordance with what has been said, wrong and right are merely moral
determinations, _i.e._, such as are valid with regard to the consideration
of human action as such, and in relation _to the inner significance of
this action in itself_. This asserts itself directly in consciousness
through the fact that the doing of wrong is accompanied by an inward pain,
which is the merely felt consciousness of the wrong-doer of the excessive
strength of the assertion of will in itself, which extends even to the
denial of the manifestation of the will of another, and also the
consciousness that although he is different from the person suffering
wrong as far as the manifestation is concerned, yet in himself he is
identical with him. The further explanation of this inner significance of
all pain of conscience cannot be given till later. He who suffers wrong
is, on the other hand, painfully conscious of the denial of his will, as
it is expressed through the body and its natural requirements, for the
satisfaction of which nature refers him to the powers of his body; and at
the same time he is conscious that without doing wrong he might ward off
that denial by every means unless he lacks the power. This purely moral
significance is the only one which right and wrong have for men as men,
not as members of the State, and which consequently remains even when man
is in a state of nature without any positive law. It constitutes the basis
and the content of all that has on this account been named _natural law_,
though it is better called moral law, for its validity does not extend to
suffering, to the external reality, but only to the action of man and the
self-knowledge of his individual will which grows up in him from his
action, and which is called _conscience_. It cannot, however, in a state
of nature, assert itself in all cases, and outwardly upon other
individuals, and prevent might from reigning instead of right. In a state
of nature it depends upon every one merely to see that in every case he
_does_ no wrong, but by no means to see that in every case he _suffers_ no
wrong, for this depends on the accident of his outward power. Therefore
the concepts right and wrong, even in a state of nature, are certainly
valid and by no means conventional, but there they are valid merely as
_moral_ concepts, for the self-knowledge of one’s own will in each. They
are a fixed point in the scale of the very different degrees of strength
with which the will to live asserts itself in human individuals, like the
freezing-point on the thermometer; the point at which the assertion of
one’s own will becomes the denial of the will of another, _i.e._,
specifies through wrong-doing the degree of its intensity, combined with
the degree in which knowledge is involved in the _principium
individuationis_ (which is the form of all knowledge that is subject to
the will). But whoever wants to set aside the purely moral consideration
of human action, or denies it, and wishes to regard conduct merely in its
outward effects and their consequences, may certainly, with Hobbes,
explain right and wrong as conventional definitions arbitrarily assumed,
and therefore not existing outside positive law, and we can never show him
through external experience what does not belong to such experience.
Hobbes himself characterises his completely empirical method of thought
very remarkably by the fact that in his book “_De Principiis Geometrarum_”
he denies all pure mathematics properly so called, and obstinately
maintains that the point has extension and the line has breadth, and we
can never show him a point without extension or a line without breadth.
Thus we can just as little impart to him the _a priori_ nature of
mathematics as the _a priori_ nature of right, because he shuts himself
out from all knowledge which is not empirical.

The pure doctrine of right is thus a chapter of ethics, and is directly
related only to _action_, not to _suffering_; for only the former is the
expression of will, and this alone is considered by ethics. Suffering is
mere occurrence. Ethics can only have regard to suffering indirectly,
merely to show that what takes place merely to avoid suffering wrong is
itself no infliction of wrong. The working out of this chapter of ethics
would contain the precise definition of the limits to which an individual
may go in the assertion of the will already objectified in his body
without denying the same will as it appears in another individual; and
also the actions which transgress these limits, which consequently are
wrong, and therefore in their turn may be warded off without wrong. Thus
our own _action_ always remains the point of view of the investigation.

But the _suffering of wrong_ appears as an event in outward experience,
and in it is manifested, as we have said, more distinctly than anywhere
else, the phenomenon of the conflict of the will to live with itself,
arising from the multiplicity of individuals and from egoism, both of
which are conditioned through the _principium individuationis_, which is
the form of the world as idea for the knowledge of the individual. We also
saw above that a very large part of the suffering essential to human life
has its perennial source in that conflict of individuals.

The reason, however, which is common to all these individuals, and which
enables them to know not merely the particular case, as the brutes do, but
also the whole abstractly in its connection, has also taught them to
discern the source of that suffering, and induced them to consider the
means of diminishing it, or, when possible, of suppressing it by a common
sacrifice, which is, however, more than counterbalanced by the common
advantage that proceeds from it. However agreeable it is to the egoism of
the individual to inflict wrong in particular cases, this has yet a
necessary correlative in the suffering of wrong of another individual, to
whom it is a great pain. And because the reason which surveys the whole
left the one-sided point of view of the individual to which it belongs,
and freed itself for the moment from its dependence upon it, it saw the
pleasure of an individual in inflicting wrong always outweighed by the
relatively greater pain of the other who suffered the wrong; and it found
further, that because here everything was left to chance, every one had to
fear that the pleasure of conveniently inflicting wrong would far more
rarely fall to his lot than the pain of enduring it. From this reason
recognised that both in order to diminish the suffering which is
everywhere disseminated, and as far as possible to divide it equally, the
best and only means was to spare all the pain of suffering wrong by
renouncing all the pleasure to be obtained by inflicting it. This means is
the _contract of the state_ or _law_. It is easily conceived, and little
by little carried out by the egoism, which, through the use of reason,
proceeds methodically and forsakes its one-sided point of view. This
origin of the state and of law I have indicated was already exhibited as
such by Plato in the “Republic.” In fact, it is the essential and only
origin, determined by the nature of the matter. Moreover, in no land can
the state have ever had a different origin, because it is just this mode
of originating this aim that makes it a state. But it is a matter of
indifference whether, in each particular nation, the condition which
preceded it was that of a horde of savages independent of each other
(anarchy), or that of a horde of slaves ruled at will by the stronger
(despotism). In both cases there existed as yet no state; it first arose
through that common agreement; and according as that agreement is more or
less free from anarchy or despotism, the state is more or less perfect.
Republics tend to anarchy, monarchies to despotism, and the mean of
constitutional monarchy, which was therefore devised, tends to government
by factions. In order to found a perfect state, we must begin by providing
beings whose nature allows them always to sacrifice their own to the
public good. Till then, however, something may be attained through the
existence of _one_ family whose good is quite inseparable from that of the
country; so that, at least in matters of importance, it can never advance
the one without the other. On this rests the power and the advantage of
the hereditary monarchy.

Now as ethics was concerned exclusively with right and wrong doing, and
could accurately point out the limits of his action to whoever was
resolved to do no wrong; politics, on the contrary, the theory of
legislation, is exclusively concerned with the _suffering_ of wrong, and
would never trouble itself with wrong-doing at all if it were not on
account of its ever-necessary correlative, the suffering of wrong, which
it always keeps in view as the enemy it opposes. Indeed, if it were
possible to conceive an infliction of wrong with which no suffering of
wrong on the part of another was connected, the state would, consistently,
by no means prohibit it. And because in ethics the will, the disposition,
is the object of consideration, and the only real thing, the firm will to
do wrong, which is only restrained and rendered ineffective by external
might, and the actually committed wrong, are to it quite the same, and it
condemns him who so wills as unjust at its tribunal. On the other hand,
will and disposition, merely as such, do not concern the state at all, but
only the _deed_ (whether it is merely attempted or carried out), on
account of its correlative, the _suffering_ on the part of another. Thus
for the state the deed, the event, is the only real; the disposition, the
intention, is only investigated so far as the significance of the deed
becomes known through it. Therefore the state will forbid no one to carry
about in his thought murder and poison against another, so long as it
knows certainly that the fear of the sword and the wheel will always
restrain the effects of that will. The state has also by no means to
eradicate the foolish purpose, the inclination to wrong-doing, the wicked
disposition; but merely always to place beside every possible motive for
doing a wrong a more powerful motive for leaving it undone in the
inevitable punishment that will ensue. Therefore the criminal code is as
complete a register as possible of motives against every criminal action
that can possibly be imagined—both _in abstracto_, in order to make any
case that occurs an application _in concreto_. Politics or legislation
will therefore for this end borrow from that chapter of ethics which is
the doctrine of right, and which, besides the inner significance of right
and wrong, determines the exact limits between them. Yet it will only do
so for the purpose of making use of its reverse side, and regarding all
the limits which ethics lays down as not to be transgressed, if we are to
avoid _doing_ wrong, from the other side, as the limits which we must not
allow others to transgress if we do not wish to _suffer_ wrong, and from
which we have therefore a _right_ to drive others back. Therefore these
limits are, as much as possible, from the passive side, barricaded by
laws. It is evident that as an historian has very wittily been called an
inverted prophet, the professor of law is an inverted moralist, and
therefore law itself, in its proper sense, _i.e._, the doctrine of the
_right_, which we ought to maintain, is inverted ethics in that chapter of
it in which the rights are laid down which we ought not to violate. The
concept of wrong and its negation, that of right, which is originally
_ethical_, becomes _juridical_ by the transference of the starting-point
from the active to the passive side, and thus by inversion. This, as well
as Kant’s theory of law, which very falsely deduces the institution of the
state as a moral duty from his categorical imperative, has, even in the
most recent times, repeatedly occasioned the very extraordinary error that
the state is an institution for furthering morality; that it arises from
the endeavour after this, and is, consequently, directed against egoism.
As if the inward disposition, to which alone morality or immorality
belongs, the externally free will, would allow itself to be modified from
without and changed by influences exerted upon it! Still more perverse is
the theory that the state is the condition of freedom in the moral sense,
and in this way the condition of morality; for freedom lies beyond the
phenomenon, and indeed beyond human arrangements. The state is, as we have
said, so little directed against egoism in general and as such, that, on
the contrary, it has sprung from egoism and exists only in its service—an
egoism that well understands itself, proceeds methodically and forsakes
the one-sided for the universal point of view, and so by addition is the
common egoism of all. The state is thus instituted under the correct
presupposition that pure morality, _i.e._, right action from moral
grounds, is not to be expected; if this were not the case, it would itself
be superfluous. Thus the state, which aims at well-being, is by no means
directed against egoism, but only against the disadvantageous consequences
which arise from the multiplicity of egoistic individuals, and
reciprocally affect them all and disturb their well-being. Therefore it
was already said by Aristotle (De. Rep. iii.): Τελος μεν ουν πολεως το ευ
ζην; τουτο δε εστιν το ζῃν ευδαιμονως και καλως (_Finis civitatis est bene
vivere, hoc autem est beate et pulchre vivere_). Hobbes also has
accurately and excellently expounded this origin and end of the state; and
that old first principle of all state policy, _salus publica prima lex
esto_, indicates the same thing. If the state completely attains its end,
it will produce the same outward result as if perfect justice of
disposition prevailed everywhere. But the inner nature and origin of both
phenomena will be the converse. Thus in the second case it would be that
no one wished to _do_ wrong, and in the first that no one wished to
_suffer_ wrong, and the means appropriate to this end had been fully
employed. Thus the same line may be drawn from opposite directions, and a
beast of prey with a muzzle is as harmless as a graminivorous animal. But
beyond this point the state cannot go. It cannot exhibit a phenomenon such
as would spring from universal mutual well-wishing and love. For just as
we found that from its nature it would not forbid the doing of a wrong
which involved no corresponding suffering of wrong on the part of another,
and prohibits all wrong-doing only because this is impossible; so
conversely, in accordance with its tendency towards the well-being of all,
it would very gladly take care that every benevolent action and work of
human love should be _experienced_, if it were not that these also have an
inevitable correlative in the _performance_ of acts of benevolence and
works of love, and every member of the state would wish to assume the
passive and none the active rôle, and there would be no reason for
exacting the latter from one member of the state rather than from another.
Accordingly only the negative, which is just the _right_, not the
positive, which has been comprehended under the name of obligations of
love, or, less completely, duties, _can be exacted by force_.

Legislation, as we have said, borrows the pure philosophy of right, or the
doctrine of the nature and limits of right and wrong, from ethics, in
order to apply it from the reverse side to its own ends, which are
different from those of ethics, and to institute positive legislation and
the means of supporting it, _i.e._, the state, in accordance with it.
Positive legislation is thus the inverted application of the purely moral
doctrine of right. This application may be made with reference to the
peculiar relations and circumstances of a particular people. But only if
the positive legislation is, in essential matters, throughout determined
in accordance with the guidance of the pure theory of right, and for each
of its propositions a ground can be established in the pure theory of
right, is the legislation which has arisen a _positive right_ and the
state a community _based upon right_, a _state_ in the proper meaning of
the word, a morally permissible, not immoral institution. Otherwise the
positive legislation is, on the contrary, the establishment of a _positive
wrong_; it is itself an openly avowed enforced wrong. Such is every
despotism, the constitution of most Mohammedan kingdoms; and indeed
various parts of many constitutions are also of this kind; for example,
serfdom, vassalage, and many such institutions. The pure theory of right
or natural right—better, moral right—though always reversed, lies at the
foundation of every just positive legislation, as pure mathematics lies at
the foundation of every branch of applied mathematics. The most important
points of the doctrine of right, as philosophy has to supply it for that
end to legislation, are the following: 1. The explanation of the inner and
real significance both of the origin of the conceptions of wrong and
right, and of their application and position in ethics. 2. The deduction
of the law of property. 3. The deduction of the moral validity of
contracts; for this is the moral basis of the contract of the state. 4.
The explanation of the origin and the aim of the state, of the relation of
this aim to ethics, and of the intentional transference of the ethical
doctrine of right, by reversing it, to legislation, in consequence of this
relation. 5. The deduction of the right of punishment. The remaining
content of the doctrine of right is mere application of these principles,
mere accurate definition of the limits of right and wrong for all possible
relations of life, which are consequently united and distributed under
certain points of view and titles. In these special doctrines the books
which treat of pure law are fairly at one; it is only in the principles
that they differ much, for these are always connected with some
philosophical system. In connection with our system, we have explained the
first four of these principal points shortly and generally, yet definitely
and distinctly, and it remains for us to speak in the same way of the
right of punishment.

Kant makes the fundamentally false assertion that apart from the state
there would be no complete right of property. It follows from our
deduction, as given above, that even in a state of nature there is
property with complete natural, _i.e._, moral right, which cannot be
injured without wrong, but may without wrong be defended to the uttermost.
On the other hand, it is certain that apart from the state there is no
right of punishment. All right to punish is based upon the positive law
alone, which _before_ the offence has determined a punishment for it, the
threat of which, as a counter-motive, is intended to outweigh all possible
motives for the offence. This positive law is to be regarded as sanctioned
and recognised by all the members of the state. It is thus based upon a
common contract which the members of the state are in duty bound to
fulfil, and thus, on the one hand, to inflict the punishment, and, on the
other hand, to endure it; thus the endurance of the punishment may with
right be enforced. Consequently the immediate _end of punishment_ is, in
the particular case, _the fulfilment of the law as a contract_. But the
one end of the _law_ is _deterrence_ from the infringement of the rights
of others. For, in order that every one may be protected from suffering
wrong, men have combined to form a state, have renounced the doing of
wrong, and assumed the task of maintaining the state. Thus the law and the
fulfilment of it, the punishment, are essentially directed to the
_future_, not to the _past_. This distinguishes _punishment_ from
_revenge_; for the motives which instigate the latter are solely concerned
with what has happened, and thus with the past as such. All requital of
wrong by the infliction of pain, without any aim for the future, is
revenge, and can have no other end than consolation for the suffering one
has borne by the sight of the suffering one has inflicted upon another.
This is wickedness and cruelty, and cannot be morally justified. Wrong
which some one has inflicted upon me by no means entitles me to inflict
wrong upon him. The requital of evil with evil without further intention
is neither morally nor otherwise through any rational ground to be
justified, and the _jus talionis_ set up as the absolute, final principle
of the right of punishment, is meaningless. Therefore Kant’s theory of
punishment as mere requital for requital’s sake is a completely groundless
and perverse view. Yet it is always appearing in the writings of many
jurists, under all kinds of lofty phrases, which amount to nothing but
empty words, as: Through the punishment the crime is expiated or
neutralised and abolished, and many such. But no man has the right to set
himself up as a purely moral judge and requiter, and punish the misdeeds
of another with pains which he inflicts upon him, and so to impose penance
upon him for his sins. Nay, this would rather be the most presumptuous
arrogance; and therefore the Bible says, “Vengeance is mine; I will repay,
saith the Lord.” But man has the right to care for the safety of society;
and this can only be done by interdicting all actions which are denoted by
the word “criminal,” in order to prevent them by means of counter-motives,
which are the threatened punishments. And this threat can only be made
effective by carrying it out when a case occurs in spite of it.
Accordingly that the end of punishment, or more accurately of penal law,
is the deterrence from crime, is a truth so generally recognised and
indeed self-evident, that in England it is expressed in the very old form
of indictment which is still served by the counsel for the Crown in
criminal actions, for it concludes with the words, “If this be proved,
you, the said N. N., ought to be punished with pains of law, to deter
others from the like crimes in all time coming.” If a prince desires to
extend mercy to a criminal who has justly been condemned, his Ministers
will represent to him that, if he does, this crime will soon be repeated.
An end for the future distinguishes punishment from revenge, and
punishment only has this end when it is inflicted _in fulfilment of a
law_. It thus announces itself as inevitable in every future case, and
thus the law obtains the power to deter, in which its end really consists.
Now here a Kantian would inevitably reply that certainly according to this
view the punished criminal would be used “merely as a means.” This
proposition, so unweariedly repeated by all the Kantians, “Man must always
be treated as an end, never as a means,” certainly sounds significant, and
is therefore a very suitable proposition for those who like to have a
formula which saves them all further thought; but looked at in the light,
it is an exceedingly vague, indefinite assertion, which reaches its aim
quite indirectly, requires to be explained, defined, and modified in every
case of its application, and, if taken generally, is insufficient, meagre,
and moreover problematical. The murderer who has been condemned to the
punishment of death according to law must now, at any rate, and with
complete right, be used as a mere means. For public security, the chief
end of the state, is disturbed by him; indeed it is abolished if the law
is not carried out. The murderer, his life, his person, must now be the
means of fulfilling the law, and thereby of re-establishing the public
security. And he is made such a means with perfect right, in fulfilment of
the contract of the state, which was entered into by him because he was a
citizen, and in accordance with which, in order to enjoy security for his
life, freedom, and property, he has pledged his life, his freedom, and his
property for the security of all, which pledge has now been forfeited.

This theory of punishment which we have established, the theory which is
directly supported by sound reason, is certainly in the main no new
thought; but it is a thought which was almost supplanted by new errors,
and therefore it was necessary to exhibit it as distinctly as possible.
The same thing is in its essence contained in what Puffendorf says on the
subject, “_De Officio Hominis et Civis_” (Bk. ii. chap. 12). Hobbes also
agrees with it, “Leviathan” (chaps. 15-28). In our own day Feurbach is
well known to have maintained it. Indeed, it occurs even in the utterances
of the ancient philosophers. Plato expresses it clearly in the
“Protagoras” (p. 114, edit. Bip.), also in the “Gorgias” (p. 168), and
lastly in the eleventh book of the “Laws” (p. 165). Seneca expresses
Plato’s opinion and the theory of all punishment in the short sentence,
“_Nemo prudens punit, quia peccatum est; sed ne peccetur_” (De Ira, i.
16).

Thus we have come to recognise in the state the means by which egoism
endowed with reason seeks to escape from its own evil consequences which
turn against itself, and now each promotes the well-being of all because
he sees that his own well-being is involved in it. If the state attained
its end completely, then to a certain extent something approaching to an
Utopia might finally, by the removal of all kinds of evil, be brought
about. For by the human powers united in it, it is able to make the rest
of nature more and more serviceable. But as yet the state has always
remained very far from this goal. And even if it attained to it,
innumerable evils essential to all life would still keep it in suffering;
and finally, if they were all removed, ennui would at once occupy every
place they left. And besides, the strife of individuals is never
completely abolished by the state, for it vexes in trifles when it is
prohibited in greater things. Finally, Eris, happily expelled from within,
turns to what is without; as the conflict of individuals, she is banished
by the institution of the state; but she reappears from without as the war
of nations, and now demands in bulk and at once, as an accumulated debt,
the bloody sacrifice which by wise precautions has been denied her in the
particular. And even supposing that all this were finally overcome and
removed, by wisdom founded on the experience of thousands of years, at the
end the result would be the actual over-population of the whole planet,
the terrible evil of which only a bold imagination can now realise.(76)

§ 63. We have recognised _temporal justice_, which has its seat in the
state, as requiting and punishing, and have seen that this only becomes
justice through a reference to the _future_. For without this reference
all punishing and requiting would be an outrage without justification, and
indeed merely the addition of another evil to that which has already
occurred, without meaning or significance. But it is quite otherwise with
_eternal justice_, which was referred to before, and which rules not the
state but the world, is not dependent upon human institutions, is not
subject to chance and deception, is not uncertain, wavering, and erring,
but infallible, fixed, and sure. The conception of requital implies that
of time; therefore _eternal justice_ cannot be requital. Thus it cannot,
like temporal justice, admit of respite and delay, and require time in
order to triumph, equalising the evil deed by the evil consequences only
by means of time. The punishment must here be so bound up with the offence
that both are one.


    Δοκειτε πηδᾳν τ᾽ αδικηματ᾽ εις θεους
    Πτεροισι, κἀπειτ᾽ εν Διος δελτου πτυχαις
    Γραφειν τιν᾽ αυτα, Ζηνα δ᾽ εισορωντα νιν
    Θνητοις δικαζειν? Ουδ᾽ ὁ παρ ουρανος,
    Διος γραφοντος ταρ βροτων ἁμαρτιας,
    Εξαρκεσειεν, ουδ᾽ εκεινος αν σκοπων
    Πεμπειν ἑκαστῳ ζημιαν; αλλ᾽ ἡ Δικη
    Ενταυθα που εστιν εγγυς, ει βουλεσθ᾽ ὁρᾳν.

    Eurip. ap. Stob. Ecl., i. c. 4.

    (“Volare pennis scelera ad ætherias domus
    Putatis, illic in Jovis tabularia
    Scripto referri; tum Jovem lectis super
    Sententiam proferre?—sed mortalium
    Facinora cœli, quantaquanta est, regia
    Nequit tenere: nec legendis Juppiter
    Et puniendis par est. Est tamen ultio,
    Et, si intuemur, illa nos habitat prope.”)


Now that such an eternal justice really lies in the nature of the world
will soon become completely evident to whoever has grasped the whole of
the thought which we have hitherto been developing.

The world, in all the multiplicity of its parts and forms, is the
manifestation, the objectivity, of the one will to live. Existence itself,
and the kind of existence, both as a collective whole and in every part,
proceeds from the will alone. The will is free, the will is almighty. The
will appears in everything, just as it determines itself in itself and
outside time. The world is only the mirror of this willing; and all
finitude, all suffering, all miseries, which it contains, belong to the
expression of that which the will wills, are as they are because the will
so wills. Accordingly with perfect right every being supports existence in
general, and also the existence of its species and its peculiar
individuality, entirely as it is and in circumstances as they are, in a
world such as it is, swayed by chance and error, transient, ephemeral, and
constantly suffering; and in all that it experiences, or indeed can
experience, it always gets its due. For the will belongs to it; and as the
will is, so is the world. Only this world itself can bear the
responsibility of its own existence and nature—no other; for by what means
could another have assumed it? Do we desire to know what men, morally
considered, are worth as a whole and in general, we have only to consider
their fate as a whole and in general. This is want, wretchedness,
affliction, misery, and death. Eternal justice reigns; if they were not,
as a whole, worthless, their fate, as a whole, would not be so sad. In
this sense we may say, the world itself is the judgment of the world. If
we could lay all the misery of the world in one scale of the balance, and
all the guilt of the world in the other, the needle would certainly point
to the centre.

Certainly, however, the world does not exhibit itself to the knowledge of
the individual as such, developed for the service of the will, as it
finally reveals itself to the inquirer as the objectivity of the one and
only will to live, which he himself is. But the sight of the uncultured
individual is clouded, as the Hindus say, by the veil of Mâyâ. He sees not
the thing-in-itself but the phenomenon in time and space, the _principium
individuationis_, and in the other forms of the principle of sufficient
reason. And in this form of his limited knowledge he sees not the inner
nature of things, which is one, but its phenomena as separated, disunited,
innumerable, very different, and indeed opposed. For to him pleasure
appears as one thing and pain as quite another thing: one man as a
tormentor and a murderer, another as a martyr and a victim; wickedness as
one thing and evil as another. He sees one man live in joy, abundance, and
pleasure, and even at his door another die miserably of want and cold.
Then he asks, Where is the retribution? And he himself, in the vehement,
pressure of will which is his origin and his nature, seizes upon the
pleasures and enjoyments of life, firmly embraces them, and knows not that
by this very act of his will he seizes and hugs all those pains and
sorrows at the sight of which he shudders. He sees the ills and he sees
the wickedness in the world, but far from knowing that both of these are
but different sides of the manifestation of the one will to live, he
regards them as very different, and indeed quite opposed, and often seeks
to escape by wickedness, _i.e._, by causing the suffering of another, from
ills, from the suffering of his own individuality, for he is involved in
the _principium individuationis_, deluded by the veil of Mâyâ. Just as a
sailor sits in a boat trusting to his frail barque in a stormy sea,
unbounded in every direction, rising and falling with the howling
mountainous waves; so in the midst of a world of sorrows the individual
man sits quietly, supported by and trusting to the _principium
individuationis_, or the way in which the individual knows things as
phenomena. The boundless world, everywhere full of suffering in the
infinite past, in the infinite future, is strange to him, indeed is to him
but a fable; his ephemeral person, his extensionless present, his
momentary satisfaction, this alone has reality for him; and he does all to
maintain this, so long as his eyes are not opened by a better knowledge.
Till then, there lives only in the inmost depths of his consciousness a
very obscure presentiment that all that is after all not really so strange
to him, but has a connection with him, from which the _principium
individuationis_ cannot protect him. From this presentiment arises that
ineradicable _awe_ common to all men (and indeed perhaps even to the most
sensible of the brutes) which suddenly seizes them if by any chance they
become puzzled about the _principium individuationis_, because the
principle of sufficient reason in some one of its forms seems to admit of
an exception. For example, if it seems as if some change took place
without a cause, or some one who is dead appears again, or if in any other
way the past or the future becomes present or the distant becomes near.
The fearful terror at anything of the kind is founded on the fact that
they suddenly become puzzled about the forms of knowledge of the
phenomenon, which alone separate their own individuality from the rest of
the world. But even this separation lies only in the phenomenon, and not
in the thing-in-itself; and on this rests eternal justice. In fact, all
temporal happiness stands, and all prudence proceeds, upon ground that is
undermined. They defend the person from accidents and supply its
pleasures; but the person is merely phenomenon, and its difference from
other individuals, and exemption from the sufferings which they endure,
rests merely in the form of the phenomenon, the _principium
individuationis_. According to the true nature of things, every one has
all the suffering of the world as his own, and indeed has to regard all
merely possible suffering as for him actual, so long as he is the fixed
will to live, _i.e._, asserts life with all his power. For the knowledge
that sees through the _principium individuationis_, a happy life in time,
the gift of chance or won by prudence, amid the sorrows of innumerable
others, is only the dream of a beggar in which he is a king, but from
which he must awake and learn from experience that only a fleeting
illusion had separated him from the suffering of his life.

Eternal justice withdraws itself from the vision that is involved in the
knowledge which follows the principle of sufficient reason in the
_principium individuationis_; such vision misses it altogether unless it
vindicates it in some way by fictions. It sees the bad, after misdeeds and
cruelties of every kind, live in happiness and leave the world unpunished.
It sees the oppressed drag out a life full of suffering to the end without
an avenger, a requiter appearing. But that man only will grasp and
comprehend eternal justice who raises himself above the knowledge that
proceeds under the guidance of the principle of sufficient reason, bound
to the particular thing, and recognises the Ideas, sees through the
_principium individuationis_, and becomes conscious that the forms of the
phenomenon do not apply to the thing-in-itself. Moreover, he alone, by
virtue of the same knowledge, can understand the true nature of virtue, as
it will soon disclose itself to us in connection with the present inquiry,
although for the practice of virtue this knowledge in the abstract is by
no means demanded. Thus it becomes clear to whoever has attained to the
knowledge referred to, that because the will is the in-itself of all
phenomena, the misery which is awarded to others and that which he
experiences himself, the bad and the evil, always concerns only that one
inner being which is everywhere the same, although the phenomena in which
the one and the other exhibits itself exist as quite different
individuals, and are widely separated by time and space. He sees that the
difference between him who inflicts the suffering and him who must bear it
is only the phenomenon, and does not concern the thing-in-itself, for this
is the will living in both, which here, deceived by the knowledge which is
bound to its service, does not recognise itself, and seeking an increased
happiness in _one_ of its phenomena, produces great suffering in
_another_, and thus, in the pressure of excitement, buries its teeth in
its own flesh, not knowing that it always injures only itself, revealing
in this form, through the medium of individuality, the conflict with
itself which it bears in its inner nature. The inflicter of suffering and
the sufferer are one. The former errs in that he believes he is not a
partaker in the suffering; the latter, in that he believes he is not a
partaker in the guilt. If the eyes of both were opened, the inflicter of
suffering would see that he lives in all that suffers pain in the wide
world, and which, if endowed with reason, in vain asks why it was called
into existence for such great suffering, its desert of which it does not
understand. And the sufferer would see that all the wickedness which is or
ever was committed in the world proceeds from that will which constitutes
_his_ own nature also, appears also in _him_, and that through this
phenomenon and its assertion he has taken upon himself all the sufferings
which proceed from such a will and bears them as his due, so long as he is
this will. From this knowledge speaks the profound poet Calderon in “Life
a Dream”—


    “Pues el delito mayor
    Del hombre es haber nacido.”

    (“For the greatest crime of man
    Is that he ever was born.”)


Why should it not be a crime, since, according to an eternal law, death
follows upon it? Calderon has merely expressed in these lines the
Christian dogma of original sin.

The living knowledge of eternal justice, of the balance that inseparably
binds together the _malum culpæ_ with the _malum pœnæ_, demands the
complete transcending of individuality and the principle of its
possibility. Therefore it will always remain unattainable to the majority
of men, as will also be the case with the pure and distinct knowledge of
the nature of all virtue, which is akin to it, and which we are about to
explain. Accordingly the wise ancestors of the Hindu people have directly
expressed it in the Vedas, which are only allowed to the three regenerate
castes, or in their esoteric teaching, so far at any rate as conception
and language comprehend it, and their method of exposition, which always
remains pictorial and even rhapsodical, admits; but in the religion of the
people, or exoteric teaching, they only communicate it by means of myths.
The direct exposition we find in the Vedas, the fruit of the highest human
knowledge and wisdom, the kernel of which has at last reached us in the
Upanishads as the greatest gift of this century. It is expressed in
various ways, but especially by making all the beings in the world, living
and lifeless, pass successively before the view of the student, and
pronouncing over every one of them that word which has become a formula,
and as such has been called the Mahavakya: Tatoumes,—more correctly, Tat
twam asi,—which means, “This thou art.”(77) But for the people, that great
truth, so far as in their limited condition they could comprehend it, was
translated into the form of knowledge which follows the principle of
sufficient reason. This form of knowledge is indeed, from its nature,
quite incapable of apprehending that truth pure and in itself, and even
stands in contradiction to it, yet in the form of a myth it received a
substitute for it which was sufficient as a guide for conduct. For the
myth enables the method of knowledge, in accordance with the principle of
sufficient reason, to comprehend by figurative representation the ethical
significance of conduct, which itself is ever foreign to it. This is the
aim of all systems of religion, for as a whole they are the mythical
clothing of the truth which is unattainable to the uncultured human
intellect. In this sense this myth might, in Kant’s language, be called a
postulate of the practical reason; but regarded as such, it has the great
advantage that it contains absolutely no elements but such as lie before
our eyes in the course of actual experience, and can therefore support all
its conceptions with perceptions. What is here referred to is the myth of
the transmigration of souls. It teaches that all sufferings which in life
one inflicts upon other beings must be expiated in a subsequent life in
this world, through precisely the same sufferings; and this extends so
far, that he who only kills a brute must, some time in endless time, be
born as the same kind of brute and suffer the same death. It teaches that
wicked conduct involves a future life in this world in suffering and
despised creatures, and, accordingly, that one will then be born again in
lower castes, or as a woman, or as a brute, as Pariah or Tschandala, as a
leper, or as a crocodile, and so forth. All the pains which the myth
threatens it supports with perceptions from actual life, through suffering
creatures which do not know how they have merited their misery, and it
does not require to call in the assistance of any other hell. As a reward,
on the other hand, it promises re-birth in better, nobler forms, as
Brahmans, wise men, or saints. The highest reward, which awaits the
noblest deeds and the completest resignation, which is also given to the
woman who in seven successive lives has voluntarily died on the funeral
pile of her husband, and not less to the man whose pure mouth has never
uttered a single lie,—this reward the myth can only express negatively in
the language of this world by the promise, which is so often repeated,
that they shall never be born again, _Non adsumes iterum existentiam
apparentem_; or, as the Buddhists, who recognise neither Vedas nor castes,
express it, “Thou shalt attain to Nirvâna,” _i.e._, to a state in which
four things no longer exist—birth, age, sickness, and death.

Never has a myth entered, and never will one enter, more closely into the
philosophical truth which is attainable to so few than this primitive
doctrine of the noblest and most ancient nation. Broken up as this nation
now is into many parts, this myth yet reigns as the universal belief of
the people, and has the most decided influence upon life to-day, as four
thousand years ago. Therefore Pythagoras and Plato have seized with
admiration on that _ne plus ultra_ of mythical representation, received it
from India or Egypt, honoured it, made use of it, and, we know not how
far, even believed it. We, on the contrary, now send the Brahmans English
clergymen and evangelical linen-weavers to set them right out of sympathy,
and to show them that they are created out of nothing, and ought
thankfully to rejoice in the fact. But it is just the same as if we fired
a bullet against a cliff. In India our religions will never take root. The
ancient wisdom of the human race will not be displaced by what happened in
Galilee. On the contrary, Indian philosophy streams back to Europe, and
will produce a fundamental change in our knowledge and thought.

§ 64. From our exposition of eternal justice, which is not mythical but
philosophical, we will now proceed to the kindred investigation of the
ethical significance of conduct and of conscience, which is the merely
felt knowledge of that significance. But first I wish at this point to
draw attention to two peculiarities of human nature, that might help to
make clear how the nature of that eternal justice, and the unity and
identity of the will in all its phenomena upon which it rests, is known to
every one, at least as an obscure feeling.

When a bad deed has been done, it affords satisfaction not only to the
sufferer, who for the most part feels the desire of revenge, but also to
the perfectly indifferent spectator, to see that he who caused another
pain suffers himself a like measure of pain; and this quite independently
of the end which we have shown the state has in view in punishment, and
which is the foundation of penal law. It seems to me that what expresses
itself here is nothing but the consciousness of that eternal justice,
which is, nevertheless, at once misunderstood and falsified by the
unenlightened mind, for, involved in the _principium individuationis_, it
produces an amphiboly of the concepts and demands from the phenomenon what
only belongs to the thing in itself. It does not see how far in themselves
the offender and the offended are one, and that it is the same being
which, not recognising itself in its own manifestation, bears both the
pain and the guilt, but it desires rather to see the pain also in the
particular individual to whom the guilt belongs. Therefore, most persons
would demand that a man who had a very high degree of wickedness which
might yet occur in many others, only not matched with other qualities such
as are found in him, a man who also far surpassed others by extraordinary
intellectual powers, and who inflicted unspeakable sufferings upon
millions of others—for example, as a conqueror,—most persons, I say, would
demand that such a man should at some time and in some place expiate all
these sufferings by a like amount of pain; for they do not recognise how
in themselves the inflicter of suffering and the sufferers are one, and
that it is the same will through which the latter exist and live which
also appears in the former, and just through him attains to a distinct
revelation of its nature, and which likewise suffers both in the oppressed
and the oppressor; and indeed in the latter in a greater measure, as the
consciousness has attained a higher degree of clearness and distinctness
and the will has greater vehemence. But that the deeper knowledge, which
is no longer involved in the _principium individuationis_, from which all
virtue and nobleness proceed, no longer retains the disposition which
demands requital, is shown by the Christian ethics, which absolutely
forbids all requital of evil with evil, and allows eternal justice to
proceed in the sphere of the thing-in-itself, which is different from that
of the phenomenon. (“Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the
Lord,”—Rom. xii. 19.)

A much more striking, but also a much rarer, characteristic of human
nature, which expresses that desire to draw eternal justice into the
province of experience, _i.e._, of individuality, and at the same time
indicates a felt consciousness that, as I have expressed it above, the
will to live conducts at its own cost the great tragedy and comedy, and
that the same one will lives in all manifestations,—such a characteristic,
I say, is the following. We sometimes see a man so deeply moved by a great
injury which he has experienced, or, it may be, only witnessed, that he
deliberately and irretrievably stakes his own life in order to take
vengeance on the perpetrator of that wrong. We see him seek for some
mighty oppressor through long years, murder him at last, and then himself
die on the scaffold, as he had foreseen, and often, it may be, did not
seek to avoid, for his life had value for him only as a means of
vengeance. We find examples of this especially among the Spaniards.(78)
If, now, we consider the spirit of that desire for retribution carefully,
we find that it is very different from common revenge, which seeks to
mitigate the suffering, endured by the sight of the suffering inflicted;
indeed, we find that what it aims at deserves to be called, not so much
revenge as punishment. For in it there really lies the intention of an
effect upon the future through the example, and that without any selfish
aim, either for the avenging person, for it costs him his life, or for a
society which secures its own safety by laws. For that punishment is
carried out by individuals, not by the state, nor is it in fulfilment of a
law, but, on the contrary, always concerns a deed which the state either
would not or could not punish, and the punishment of which it condemns. It
seems to me that the indignation which carries such a man so far beyond
the limits of all self-love springs from the deepest consciousness that he
himself is the whole will to live, which appears in all beings through all
time, and that therefore the most distant future belongs to him just as
the present, and cannot be indifferent to him. Asserting this will, he yet
desires that in the drama which represents its nature no such fearful
wrong shall ever appear again, and wishes to frighten ever future
wrong-doer by the example of a vengeance against which there is no means
of defence, since the avenger is not deterred by the fear of death. The
will to live, though still asserting itself, does not here depend any
longer upon the particular phenomenon, the individual, but comprehends the
Idea of man, and wishes to keep its manifestation pure from such a fearful
and shocking wrong. It is a rare, very significant, and even sublime trait
of character through which the individual sacrifices himself by striving
to make himself the arm of eternal justice, of the true nature of which he
is yet ignorant.

§ 65. In all the preceding investigations of human action, we have been
leading up to the final investigation, and have to a considerable extent
lightened the task of raising to abstract and philosophical clearness, and
exhibiting as a branch of our central thought that special ethical
significance of action which in life is with perfect understanding denoted
by the words _good_ and _bad_.

First, however, I wish to trace back to their real meaning those
conceptions of _good_ and _bad_ which have been treated by the
philosophical writers of the day, very extraordinarily, as simple
conceptions, and thus incapable of analysis; so that the reader may not
remain involved in the senseless delusion that they contain more than is
actually the case, and express in and for themselves all that is here
necessary. I am in a position to do this because in ethics I am no more
disposed to take refuge behind the word _good_ than formerly behind the
words _beautiful_ and _true_, in order that by the adding a “ness,” which
at the present day is supposed to have a special σεμνοτης, and therefore
to be of assistance in various cases, and by assuming an air of solemnity,
I might induce the belief that by uttering three such words I had done
more than denote three very wide and abstract, and consequently empty
conceptions, of very different origin and significance. Who is there,
indeed, who has made himself acquainted with the books of our own day to
whom these three words, admirable as are the things to which they
originally refer, have not become an aversion after he has seen for the
thousandth time how those who are least capable of thinking believe that
they have only to utter these three words with open mouth and the air of
an intelligent sheep, in order to have spoken the greatest wisdom?

The explanation of the concept _true_ has already been given in the essay
on the principle of sufficient reason, chap. v. § 29 _et seq._ The content
of the concept _beautiful_ found for the first time its proper explanation
through the whole of the Third Book of the present work. We now wish to
discover the significance of the concept _good_, which can be done with
very little trouble. This concept is essentially relative, and signifies
_the conformity of an object to any definite effort of the will_.
Accordingly everything that corresponds to the will in any of its
expressions and fulfils its end is thought through the concept _good_,
however different such things may be in other respects. Thus we speak of
good eating, good roads, good weather, good weapons, good omens, and so
on; in short, we call everything good that is just as we wish it to be;
and therefore that may be good in the eyes of one man which is just the
reverse in those of another. The conception of the good divides itself
into two sub-species—that of the direct and present satisfaction of any
volition, and that of its indirect satisfaction which has reference to the
future, _i.e._, the agreeable and the useful. The conception of the
opposite, so long as we are speaking of unconscious existence, is
expressed by the word _bad_, more rarely and abstractly by the word
_evil_, which thus denotes everything that does not correspond to any
effort of the will. Like all other things that can come into relation to
the will, men who are favourable to the ends which happen to be desired,
who further and befriend them, are called good, in the same sense, and
always with that relative limitation, which shows itself, for example, in
the expression, “I find this good, but you don’t.” Those, however, who are
naturally disposed not to hinder the endeavours of others, but rather to
assist them, and who are thus consistently helpful, benevolent, friendly,
and charitable, are called _good_ men, on account of this relation of
their conduct to the will of others in general. In the case of conscious
beings (brutes and men) the contrary conception is denoted in German, and,
within the last hundred years or so, in French also, by a different word
from that which is used in speaking of unconscious existence; in German,
_böse_; in French, _méchant_; while in almost all other languages this
distinction does not exist; and κακος, _malus_, _cattivo_, _bad_, are used
of men, as of lifeless things, which are opposed to the ends of a definite
individual will. Thus, having started entirely from the passive element in
the good, the inquiry could only proceed later to the active element, and
investigate the conduct of the man who is called good, no longer with
reference to others, but to himself; specially setting itself the task of
explaining both the purely objective respect which such conduct produces
in others, and the peculiar contentment with himself which it clearly
produces in the man himself, since he purchases it with sacrifices of
another kind; and also, on the other hand, the inner pain which
accompanies the bad disposition, whatever outward advantages it brings to
him who entertains it. It was from this source that the ethical systems,
both the philosophical and those which are supported by systems of
religion, took their rise. Both seek constantly in some way or other to
connect happiness with virtue, the former either by means of the principle
of contradiction or that of sufficient reason, and thus to make happiness
either identical with or the consequence of virtue, always sophistically;
the latter, by asserting the existence of other worlds than that which
alone can be known to experience.(79) In our system, on the contrary,
virtue will show itself, not as a striving after happiness, that is,
well-being and life, but as an effort in quite an opposite direction.

It follows from what has been said above, that the _good_ is, according to
its concept, των πρως τι; thus every good is essentially relative, for its
being consists in its relation to a desiring will. _Absolute good_ is,
therefore, a contradiction in terms; highest good, _summum bonum_, really
signifies the same thing—a final satisfaction of the will, after which no
new desire could arise,—a last motive, the attainment of which would
afford enduring satisfaction of the will. But, according to the
investigations which have already been conducted in this Fourth Book, such
a consummation is not even thinkable. The will can just as little cease
from willing altogether on account of some particular satisfaction, as
time can end or begin; for it there is no such thing as a permanent
fulfilment which shall completely and for ever satisfy its craving. It is
the vessel of the Danaides; for it there is no highest good, no absolute
good, but always a merely temporary good. If, however, we wish to give an
honorary position, as it were emeritus, to an old expression, which from
custom we do not like to discard altogether, we may, metaphorically and
figuratively, call the complete self-effacement and denial of the will,
the true absence of will, which alone for ever stills and silences its
struggle, alone gives that contentment which can never again be disturbed,
alone redeems the world, and which we shall now soon consider at the close
of our whole investigation—the absolute good, the _summum bonum_—and
regard it as the only radical cure of the disease of which all other means
are only palliations or anodynes. In this sense the Greek τελος and also
_finis bonorum_ correspond to the thing still better. So much for the
words _good_ and _bad_; now for the thing itself.

If a man is always disposed to do _wrong_ whenever the opportunity
presents itself, and there is no external power to restrain him, we call
him _bad_. According to our doctrine of wrong, this means that such a man
does not merely assert the will to live as it appears in his own body, but
in this assertion goes so far that he denies the will which appears in
other individuals. This is shown by the fact that he desires their powers
for the service of his own will, and seeks to destroy their existence when
they stand in the way of its efforts. The ultimate source of this is a
high degree of egoism, the nature of which has been already explained. Two
things are here apparent. In the first place, that in such a man an
excessively vehement will to live expresses itself, extending far beyond
the assertion of his own body; and, in the second place, that his
knowledge, entirely given up to the principle of sufficient reason and
involved in the _principium individuationis_, cannot get beyond the
difference which this latter principle establishes between his own person
and every one else. Therefore he seeks his own well-being alone,
completely indifferent to that of all others, whose existence is to him
altogether foreign and divided from his own by a wide gulf, and who are
indeed regarded by him as mere masks with no reality behind them. And
these two qualities are the constituent elements of the bad character.

This great intensity of will is in itself and directly a constant source
of suffering. In the first place, because all volition as such arises from
want; that is, suffering. (Therefore, as will be remembered, from the
Third Book, the momentary cessation of all volition, which takes place
whenever we give ourselves up to æsthetic contemplation, as pure will-less
subject of knowledge, the correlative of the Idea, is one of the principal
elements in our pleasure in the beautiful.) Secondly, because, through the
causal connection of things, most of our desires must remain unfulfilled,
and the will is oftener crossed than satisfied, and therefore much intense
volition carries with it much intense suffering. For all suffering is
simply unfulfilled and crossed volition; and even the pain of the body
when it is injured or destroyed is as such only possible through the fact
that the body is nothing but the will itself become object. Now on this
account, because much intense suffering is inseparable from much intense
volition, very bad men bear the stamp of inward suffering in the very
expression of the countenance; even when they have attained every external
happiness, they always look unhappy so long as they are not transported by
some momentary ecstasy and are not dissembling. From this inward torment,
which is absolutely and directly essential to them, there finally proceeds
that delight in the suffering of others which does not spring from mere
egoism, but is disinterested, and which constitutes _wickedness_ proper,
rising to the pitch of _cruelty_. For this the suffering of others is not
a means for the attainment of the ends of its own will, but an end in
itself. The more definite explanation of this phenomenon is as
follows:—Since man is a manifestation of will illuminated by the clearest
knowledge, he is always contrasting the actual and felt satisfaction of
his will with the merely possible satisfaction of it which knowledge
presents to him. Hence arises envy: every privation is infinitely
increased by the enjoyment of others, and relieved by the knowledge that
others also suffer the same privation. Those ills which are common to all
and inseparable from human life trouble us little, just as those which
belong to the climate, to the whole country. The recollection of greater
sufferings than our own stills our pain; the sight of the sufferings of
others soothes our own. If, now, a man is filled with an exceptionally
intense pressure of will,—if with burning eagerness he seeks to accumulate
everything to slake the thirst of his egoism, and thus experiences, as he
inevitably must, that all satisfaction is merely apparent, that the
attained end never fulfils the promise of the desired object, the final
appeasing of the fierce pressure of will, but that when fulfilled the wish
only changes its form, and now torments him in a new one; and indeed that
if at last all wishes are exhausted, the pressure of will itself remains
without any conscious motive, and makes itself known to him with fearful
pain as a feeling of terrible desolation and emptiness; if from all this,
which in the case of the ordinary degrees of volition is only felt in a
small measure, and only produces the ordinary degree of melancholy, in the
case of him who is a manifestation of will reaching the point of
extraordinary wickedness, there necessarily springs an excessive inward
misery, an eternal unrest, an incurable pain; he seeks indirectly the
alleviation which directly is denied him,—seeks to mitigate his own
suffering by the sight of the suffering of others, which at the same time
he recognises as an expression of his power. The suffering of others now
becomes for him an end in itself, and is a spectacle in which he delights;
and thus arises the phenomenon of pure cruelty, blood-thirstiness, which
history exhibits so often in the Neros and Domitians, in the African Deis,
in Robespierre, and the like.

The desire of revenge is closely related to wickedness. It recompenses
evil with evil, not with reference to the future, which is the character
of punishment, but merely on account of what has happened, what is past,
as such, thus disinterestedly, not as a means, but as an end, in order to
revel in the torment which the avenger himself has inflicted on the
offender. What distinguishes revenge from pure wickedness, and to some
extent excuses it, is an appearance of justice. For if the same act, which
is now revenge, were to be done legally, that is, according to a
previously determined and known rule, and in a society which had
sanctioned this rule, it would be punishment, and thus justice.

Besides the suffering which has been described, and which is inseparable
from wickedness, because it springs from the same root, excessive
vehemence of will, another specific pain quite different from this is
connected with wickedness, which is felt in the case of every bad action,
whether it be merely injustice proceeding from egoism or pure wickedness,
and according to the length of its duration is called _the sting of
conscience_ or _remorse_. Now, whoever remembers and has present in his
mind the content of the preceding portion of this Fourth Book, and
especially the truth explained at the beginning of it, that life itself is
always assured to the will to live, as its mere copy or mirror, and also
the exposition of eternal justice, will find that the sting of conscience
can have no other meaning than the following, _i.e._, its content,
abstractly expressed, is what follows, in which two parts are
distinguished, which again, however, entirely coincide, and must be
thought as completely united.

However closely the veil of Mâyâ may envelop the mind of the bad man,
_i.e._, however firmly he may be involved in the _principium
individuationis_, according to which he regards his person as absolutely
different and separated by a wide gulf from all others, a knowledge to
which he clings with all his might, as it alone suits and supports his
egoism, so that knowledge is almost always corrupted by will, yet there
arises in the inmost depths of his consciousness the secret presentiment
that such an order of things is only phenomenal, and that their real
constitution is quite different. He has a dim foreboding that, however
much time and space may separate him from other individuals and the
innumerable miseries which they suffer, and even suffer through him, and
may represent them as quite foreign to him, yet in themselves, and apart
from the idea and its forms, it is the one will to live appearing in them
all, which here failing to recognise itself, turns its weapons against
itself, and, by seeking increased happiness in one of its phenomena,
imposes the greatest suffering upon another. He dimly sees that he, the
bad man, is himself this whole will; that consequently he is not only the
inflicter of pain but also the endurer of it, from whose suffering he is
only separated and exempted by an illusive dream, the form of which is
space and time, which, however, vanishes away; that he must in reality pay
for the pleasure with the pain, and that all suffering which he only knows
as possible really concerns him as the will to live, inasmuch as the
possible and actual, the near and the distant in time and space, are only
different for the knowledge of the individual, only by means of the
_principium individuationis_, not in themselves. This is the truth which
mythically, _i.e._, adapted to the principle of sufficient reason, and so
translated into the form of the phenomenal, is expressed in the
transmigration of souls. Yet it has its purest expression, free from all
foreign admixture, in that obscurely felt yet inconsolable misery called
remorse. But this springs also from a second immediate knowledge, which is
closely bound to the first—the knowledge of the strength with which the
will to live asserts itself in the wicked individual, which extends far
beyond his own individual phenomenon, to the absolute denial of the same
will appearing in other individuals. Consequently the inward horror of the
wicked man at his own deed, which he himself tries to conceal, contains,
besides that presentment of the nothingness, the mere illusiveness of the
_principium individuationis_, and of the distinction established by it
between him and others; also the knowledge of the vehemence of his own
will, the intensity with which he has seized upon life and attached
himself closely to it, even that life whose terrible side he sees before
him in the misery of those who are oppressed by him, and with which he is
yet so firmly united, that just on this account the greatest atrocity
proceeds from him himself, as a means for the fuller assertion of his own
will. He recognises himself as the concentrated manifestation of the will
to live, feels to what degree he is given up to life, and with it also to
innumerable sufferings which are essential to it, for it has infinite time
and infinite space to abolish the distinction between the possible and the
actual, and to change all the sufferings which as yet are merely _known_
to him into sufferings he has _experienced_. The millions of years of
constant rebirth certainly exist, like the whole past and future, only in
conception; occupied time, the form of the phenomenon of the will, is only
the present, and for the individual time is ever new: it seems to him
always as if he had newly come into being. For life is inseparable from
the will to live, and the only form of life is the present. Death (the
repetition of the comparison must be excused) is like the setting of the
sun, which is only apparently swallowed up by the night, but in reality,
itself the source of all light, burns without intermission, brings new
days to new worlds, is always rising and always setting. Beginning and end
only concern the individual through time, the form of the phenomenon for
the idea. Outside time lies only the will, Kant’s thing-in-itself, and its
adequate objectification, the Idea of Plato. Therefore suicide affords no
escape; what every one in his inmost consciousness _wills_, that must he
_be_; and what every one _is_, that he _wills_. Thus, besides the merely
felt knowledge of the illusiveness and nothingness of the forms of the
idea which separate individuals, it is the self-knowledge of one’s own
will and its degree that gives the sting to conscience. The course of life
draws the image of the empirical character, whose original is the
intelligible character, and horrifies the wicked man by this image. He is
horrified all the same whether the image is depicted in large characters,
so that the world shares his horror, or in such small ones that he alone
sees it, for it only concerns him directly. The past would be a matter of
indifference, and could not pain the conscience if the character did not
feel itself free from all time and unalterable by it, so long as it does
not deny itself. Therefore things which are long past still weigh on the
conscience. The prayer, “Lead me not into temptation,” means, “Let me not
see what manner of person I am.” In the might with which the bad man
asserts life, and which exhibits itself to him in the sufferings which he
inflicts on others, he measures how far he is from the surrender and
denial of that will, the only possible deliverance from the world and its
miseries. He sees how far he belongs to it, and how firmly he is bound to
it; the _known_ suffering of others has no power to move him; he is given
up to life and _felt_ suffering. It remains hidden whether this will ever
break and overcome the vehemence of his will.

This exposition of the significance and inner nature of the _bad_, which
as mere feeling, _i.e._, not as distinct, abstract knowledge, is the
content of _remorse_, will gain distinctness and completeness by the
similar consideration of the _good_ as a quality of human will, and
finally of absolute resignation and holiness, which proceeds from it when
it has attained its highest grade. For opposites always throw light upon
each other, and the day at once reveals both itself and the night, as
Spinoza admirably remarks.

§ 66. A theory of morals without proof, that is, mere moralising, can
effect nothing, because it does not act as a motive. A theory of morals
which does act as a motive can do so only by working on self-love. But
what springs from this source has no moral worth. It follows from this
that no genuine virtue can be produced through moral theory or abstract
knowledge in general, but that such virtue must spring from that intuitive
knowledge which recognises in the individuality of others the same nature
as in our own.

For virtue certainly proceeds from knowledge, but not from the abstract
knowledge that can be communicated through words. If it were so, virtue
could be taught, and by here expressing in abstract language its nature
and the knowledge which lies at its foundation, we should make every one
who comprehends this even ethically better. But this is by no means the
case. On the contrary, ethical discourses and preaching will just as
little produce a virtuous man as all the systems of æsthetics from
Aristotle downwards have succeeded in producing a poet. For the real inner
nature of virtue the concept is unfruitful, just as it is in art, and it
is only in a completely subordinate position that it can be of use as a
tool in the elaboration and preserving of what has been ascertained and
inferred by other means. _Velle non discitur._ Abstract dogmas are, in
fact, without influence upon virtue, _i.e._, upon the goodness of the
disposition. False dogmas do not disturb it; true ones will scarcely
assist it. It would, in fact, be a bad look-out if the cardinal fact in
the life of man, his ethical worth, that worth which counts for eternity,
were dependent upon anything the attainment of which is so much a matter
of chance as is the case with dogmas, religious doctrines, and
philosophical theories. For morality dogmas have this value only: The man
who has become virtuous from knowledge of another kind, which is presently
to be considered, possesses in them a scheme or formula according to which
he accounts to his own reason, for the most part fictitiously, for his
non-egoistical action, the nature of which it, _i.e._, he himself, does
not comprehend, and with which account he has accustomed it to be content.

Upon conduct, outward action, dogmas may certainly exercise a powerful
influence, as also custom and example (the last because the ordinary man
does not trust his judgment, of the weakness of which he is conscious, but
only follows his own or some one else’s experience), but the disposition
is not altered in this way.(80) All abstract knowledge gives only motives;
but, as was shown above, motives can only alter the direction of the will,
not the will itself. All communicable knowledge, however, can only affect
the will as a motive. Thus when dogmas lead it, what the man really and in
general wills remains still the same. He has only received different
thoughts as to the ways in which it is to be attained, and imaginary
motives guide him just like real ones. Therefore, for example, it is all
one, as regards his ethical worth, whether he gives large gifts to the
poor, firmly persuaded that he will receive everything tenfold in a future
life, or expends the same sum on the improvement of an estate which will
yield interest, certainly late, but all the more surely and largely. And
he who for the sake of orthodoxy commits the heretic to the flames is as
much a murderer as the bandit who does it for gain; and indeed, as regards
inward circumstances, so also was he who slaughtered the Turks in the Holy
Land, if, like the burner of heretics, he really did so because he thought
that he would thereby gain a place in heaven. For these are careful only
for themselves, for their own egoism, just like the bandit, from whom they
are only distinguished by the absurdity of their means. From without, as
has been said, the will can only be reached through motives, and these
only alter the way in which it expresses itself, never the will itself.
_Velle non discitur._

In the case of good deeds, however, the doer of which appeals to dogmas,
we must always distinguish whether these dogmas really are the motives
which lead to the good deeds, or whether, as was said above, they are
merely the illusive account of them with which he seeks to satisfy his own
reason with regard to a good deed which really flows from quite a
different source, a deed which he does because he is good, though he does
not understand how to explain it rightly, and yet wishes to think
something with regard to it. But this distinction is very hard to make,
because it lies in the heart of a man. Therefore we can scarcely ever pass
a correct moral judgment on the action of others, and very seldom on our
own. The deeds and conduct of an individual and of a nation may be very
much modified through dogmas, example, and custom. But in themselves all
deeds (_opera operata_) are merely empty forms, and only the disposition
which leads to them gives them moral significance. This disposition,
however, may be quite the same when its outward manifestation is very
different. With an equal degree of wickedness, one man may die on the
wheel, and another in the bosom of his family. It may be the same grade of
wickedness which expresses itself in one nation in the coarse
characteristics of murder and cannibalism, and in another finely and
softly in miniature, in court intrigues, oppressions, and delicate plots
of every kind; the inner nature remains the same. It is conceivable that a
perfect state, or perhaps indeed a complete and firmly believed doctrine
of rewards and punishments after death, might prevent every crime;
politically much would be gained thereby; morally, nothing; only the
expression of the will in life would be restricted.

Thus genuine goodness of disposition, disinterested virtue, and pure
nobility do not proceed from abstract knowledge. Yet they do proceed from
knowledge; but it is a direct intuitive knowledge, which can neither be
reasoned away, nor arrived at by reasoning, a knowledge which, just
because it is not abstract, cannot be communicated, but must arise in each
for himself, which therefore finds its real and adequate expression not in
words, but only in deeds, in conduct, in the course of the life of man. We
who here seek the theory of virtue, and have therefore also to express
abstractly the nature of the knowledge which lies at its foundation, will
yet be unable to convey that knowledge itself in this expression. We can
only give the concept of this knowledge, and thus always start from action
in which alone it becomes visible, and refer to action as its only
adequate expression. We can only explain and interpret action, _i.e._,
express abstractly what really takes place in it.

Before we speak of the _good_ proper, in opposition to the _bad_, which
has been explained, we must touch on an intermediate grade, the mere
negation of the bad: this is _justice_. The nature of right and wrong has
been fully explained above; therefore we may briefly say here, that he who
voluntarily recognises and observes those merely moral limits between
wrong and right, even where this is not secured by the state or any other
external power, thus he who, according to our explanation, never carries
the assertion of his own will so far as to deny the will appearing in
another individual, is _just_. Thus, in order to increase his own
well-being, he will not inflict suffering upon others, _i.e._, he will
commit no crime, he will respect the rights and the property of others. We
see that for such a just man the _principium individuationis_ is no
longer, as in the case of the bad man, an absolute wall of partition. We
see that he does not, like the bad man, merely assert his own
manifestation of will and deny all others; that other persons are not for
him mere masks, whose nature is quite different from his own; but he shows
in his conduct that he also recognises his own nature—the will to live as
a thing-in-itself, in the foreign manifestation which is only given to him
as idea. Thus he finds himself again in that other manifestation, up to a
certain point, that of doing no wrong, _i.e._, abstaining from injury. To
this extent, therefore, he sees through the _principium individuationis_,
the veil of Mâyâ; so far he sets the being external to him on a level with
his own—he does it no injury.

If we examine the inmost nature of this justice, there already lies in it
the resolution not to go so far in the assertion of one’s own will as to
deny the manifestations of will of others, by compelling them to serve
one’s own. One will therefore wish to render to others as much as one
receives from them. The highest degree of this justice of disposition,
which is, however, always united with goodness proper, whose character is
no longer merely negative, extends so far that a man doubts his right to
inherited property, wishes to support his body only by his own powers,
mental and physical, feels every service of others and every luxury a
reproach, and finally embraces voluntary poverty. Thus we see how Pascal,
when he became an ascetic, would no longer permit any services to be
rendered him, although he had servants enough; in spite of his constant
bad health he made his bed himself, brought his own food from the kitchen,
&c. (“Vie de Pascal, par sa Sœur,” p. 19). Quite in keeping with this, it
is reported that many Hindus, even Rajas with great wealth, expend it
merely on the maintenance of their position, their court and attendants,
and themselves observe with the greatest scrupulousness the maxim that a
man should eat nothing that he has not himself both sowed and reaped. Yet
a certain misunderstanding lies at the bottom of this; for one man, just
because he is rich and powerful, can render such signal services to the
whole of human society that they counterbalance the wealth he has
inherited, for the secure possession of which he is indebted to society.
In reality that excessive justice of such Hindus is already more than
justice; it is actual renunciation, denial of the will to
live,—asceticism, of which we shall speak last. On the other hand, pure
idleness and living through the exertions of others, in the case of
inherited wealth, without accomplishing anything, may be regarded as
morally wrong, even if it must remain right according to positive laws.

We have found that voluntary justice has its inmost source in a certain
degree of penetration of the _principium individuationis_, while the
unjust remain entirely involved in this principle. This penetration may
exist not only in the degree which is required for justice, but also in
the higher degree which leads to benevolence and well-doing, to love of
mankind. And this may take place however strong and energetic in itself
the will which appears in such an individual may be. Knowledge can always
counterbalance it in him, teach him to resist the tendency to wrong, and
even produce in him every degree of goodness, and indeed of resignation.
Thus the good man is by no means to be regarded as originally a weaker
manifestation of will than the bad man, but it is knowledge which in him
masters the blind striving of will. There are certainly individuals who
merely seem to have a good disposition on account of the weakness of the
will appearing in them, but what they are soon appears from the fact that
they are not capable of any remarkable self-conquest in order to perform a
just or good deed.

If, however, as a rare exception, we meet a man who possesses a
considerable income, but uses very little of it for himself and gives all
the rest to the poor, while he denies himself many pleasures and comforts,
and we seek to explain the action of this man, we shall find, apart
altogether from the dogmas through which he tries to make his action
intelligible to his reason, that the simplest general expression and the
essential character of his conduct is that _he makes less distinction than
is usually made between himself and others_. This distinction is so great
in the eyes of many that the suffering of others is a direct pleasure to
the wicked and a welcome means of happiness to the unjust. The merely just
man is content not to cause it; and, in general, most men know and are
acquainted with innumerable sufferings of others in their vicinity, but do
not determine to mitigate them, because to do so would involve some
self-denial on their part. Thus, in each of all these a strong distinction
seems to prevail between his own ego and that of others; on the other
hand, to the noble man we have imagined, this distinction is not so
significant. The _principium individuationis_, the form of the phenomenon,
no longer holds him so tightly in its grasp, but the suffering which he
sees in others touches him almost as closely as his own. He therefore
tries to strike a balance between them, denies himself pleasures,
practises renunciation, in order to mitigate the sufferings of others. He
sees that the distinction between himself and others, which to the bad man
is so great a gulf, only belongs to a fleeting and illusive phenomenon. He
recognises directly and without reasoning that the in-itself of his own
manifestation is also that of others, the will to live, which constitutes
the inner nature of everything and lives in all; indeed, that this applies
also to the brutes and the whole of nature, and therefore he will not
cause suffering even to a brute.(81)

He is now just as little likely to allow others to starve, while he
himself has enough and to spare, as any one would be to suffer hunger one
day in order to have more the next day than he could enjoy. For to him who
does works of love the veil of Mâyâ has become transparent, the illusion
of the _principium individuationis_ has left him. He recognises himself,
his will, in every being, and consequently also in the sufferer. He is now
free from the perversity with which the will to live, not recognising
itself, here in one individual enjoys a fleeting and precarious pleasure,
and there in another pays for it with suffering and starvation, and thus
both inflicts and endures misery, not knowing that, like Thyestes, it
eagerly devours its own flesh; and then, on the one hand, laments its
undeserved suffering, and on the other hand transgresses without fear of
Nemesis, always merely because, involved in the _principium
individuationis_, thus generally in the kind of knowledge which is
governed by the principle of sufficient reason, it does not recognise
itself in the foreign phenomenon, and therefore does not perceive eternal
justice. To be cured of this illusion and deception of Mâyâ, and to do
works of love, are one and the same. But the latter is the necessary and
inevitable symptom of that knowledge.

The opposite of the sting of conscience, the origin and significance of
which is explained above, is the _good conscience_, the satisfaction which
we experience after every disinterested deed. It arises from the fact that
such a deed, as it proceeds from the direct recognition of our own inner
being in the phenomenon of another, affords us also the verification of
this knowledge, the knowledge that our true self exists not only in our
own person, this particular manifestation, but in everything that lives.
By this the heart feels itself enlarged, as by egoism it is contracted.
For as the latter concentrates our interest upon the particular
manifestation of our own individuality, upon which knowledge always
presents to us the innumerable dangers which constantly threaten this
manifestation, and anxiety and care becomes the key-note of our
disposition; the knowledge that everything living is just as much our own
inner nature, as is our own person, extends our interest to everything
living; and in this way the heart is enlarged. Thus through the diminished
interest in our own self, the anxious care for the self is attacked at its
very root and limited; hence the peace, the unbroken serenity, which a
virtuous disposition and a good conscience affords, and the more distinct
appearance of this with every good deed, for it proves to ourselves the
depth of that disposition. The egoist feels himself surrounded by strange
and hostile individuals, and all his hope is centred in his own good. The
good man lives in a world of friendly individuals, the well-being of any
of whom he regards as his own. Therefore, although the knowledge of the
lot of mankind generally does not make his disposition a joyful one, yet
the permanent knowledge of his own nature in all living beings, gives him
a certain evenness, and even serenity of disposition. For the interest
which is extended to innumerable manifestations cannot cause such anxiety
as that which is concentrated upon one. The accidents which concern
individuals collectively, equalise themselves, while those which happen to
the particular individual constitute good or bad fortune.

Thus, though others have set up moral principles which they give out as
prescriptions for virtue, and laws which it was necessary to follow, I, as
has already been said, cannot do this because I have no “ought” or law to
prescribe to the eternally free-will. Yet on the other hand, in the
connection of my system, what to a certain extent corresponds and is
analogous to that undertaking is the purely theoretical truth, of which my
whole exposition may be regarded as merely an elaboration, that the will
is the in-itself of every phenomenon but itself, as such, is free from the
forms of the phenomenal, and consequently from multiplicity; a truth,
which, with reference to action, I do not know how to express better than
by the formula of the Vedas already quoted: “Tat twam asi!” (This thou
art!) Whoever is able to say this to himself, with regard to every being
with whom he comes in contact, with clear knowledge and firm inward
conviction, is certain of all virtue and blessedness, and is on the direct
road to salvation.

But before I go further, and, as the conclusion of my exposition, show how
love, the origin and nature of which we recognised as the penetration of
the _principium individuationis_, leads to salvation, to the entire
surrender of the will to live, _i.e._, of all volition, and also how
another path, less soft but more frequented, leads men to the same goal, a
paradoxical proposition must first be stated and explained; not because it
is paradoxical, but because it is true, and is necessary to the
completeness of the thought I have present. It is this: “All love (αγαπη,
_caritas_) is sympathy.”

§ 67. We have seen how justice proceeds from the penetration of the
_principium individuationis_ in a less degree, and how from its
penetration in a higher degree there arises goodness of disposition
proper, which shows itself as pure, _i.e._, disinterested love towards
others. When now the latter becomes perfect, it places other individuals
and their fate completely on a level with itself and its own fate. Further
than this it cannot go, for there exists no reason for preferring the
individuality of another to its own. Yet the number of other individuals
whose whole happiness or life is in danger may outweigh the regard for
one’s own particular well-being. In such a case, the character that has
attained to the highest goodness and perfect nobility will entirely
sacrifice its own well-being, and even its life, for the well-being of
many others. So died Codrus, and Leonidas, and Regulus, and Decius Mus,
and Arnold von Winkelried; so dies every one who voluntarily and
consciously faces certain death for his friends or his country. And they
also stand on the same level who voluntarily submit to suffering and death
for maintaining what conduces and rightly belongs to the welfare of all
mankind; that is, for maintaining universal and important truths and
destroying great errors. So died Socrates and Giordano Bruno, and so many
a hero of the truth suffered death at the stake at the hands of the
priests.

Now, however, I must remind the reader, with reference to the paradox
stated above, that we found before that suffering is essential to life as
a whole, and inseparable from it. And that we saw that every wish proceeds
from a need, from a want, from suffering, and that therefore every
satisfaction is only the removal of a pain, and brings no positive
happiness; that the joys certainly lie to the wish, presenting themselves
as a positive good, but in truth they have only a negative nature, and are
only the end of an evil. Therefore what goodness, love, and nobleness do
for others, is always merely an alleviation of their suffering, and
consequently all that can influence them to good deeds and works of love,
is simply the _knowledge of the suffering of others_, which is directly
understood from their own suffering and placed on a level with it. But it
follows from this that pure love (αγαπη, _caritas_) is in its nature
sympathy; whether the suffering it mitigates, to which every unsatisfied
wish belongs, be great or small. Therefore we shall have no hesitation, in
direct contradiction to Kant, who will only recognise all true goodness
and all virtue to be such, if it has proceeded from abstract reflection,
and indeed from the conception of duty and of the categorical imperative,
and explains felt sympathy as weakness, and by no means virtue, we shall
have no hesitation, I say, in direct contradiction to Kant, in saying: the
mere concept is for genuine virtue just as unfruitful as it is for genuine
art: all true and pure love is sympathy, and all love which is not
sympathy is selfishness. Ερος is selfishness, αγαπη is sympathy.
Combinations of the two frequently occur. Indeed genuine friendship is
always a mixture of selfishness and sympathy; the former lies in the
pleasure experienced in the presence of the friend, whose individuality
corresponds to our own, and this almost always constitutes the greatest
part; sympathy shows itself in the sincere participation in his joy and
grief, and the disinterested sacrifices made in respect of the latter.
Thus Spinoza says: _Benevolentia nihil aliud est, quam cupiditas ex
commiseratione orta_ (Eth. iii. pr. 27, cor. 3, schol.) As a confirmation
of our paradoxical proposition it may be observed that the tone and words
of the language and caresses of pure love, entirely coincide with the
tones of sympathy; and we may also remark in passing that in Italian
sympathy and true love are denoted by the same word _pietà_.

This is also the place to explain one of the most striking peculiarities
of human nature, _weeping_, which, like laughter, belongs to those
qualities which distinguish man from the brutes. Weeping is by no means a
direct expression of pain, for it occurs where there is very little pain.
In my opinion, indeed, we never weep directly on account of the pain we
experience, but always merely on account of its repetition in reflection.
We pass from the felt pain, even when it is physical, to a mere idea of
it, and then find our own state so deserving of sympathy that we are
firmly and sincerely convinced that if another were the sufferer, we would
be full of sympathy, and love to relieve him. But now we ourselves are the
object of our own sympathy; with the most benevolent disposition we are
ourselves most in need of help; we feel that we suffer more than we could
see another suffer; and in this very complex frame of mind, in which the
directly felt suffering only comes to perception by a doubly circuitous
route, imagined as the suffering of another, sympathised with as such, and
then suddenly perceived again as directly our own,—in this complex frame
of mind, I say, Nature relieves itself through that remarkable physical
conflict. _Weeping_ is accordingly _sympathy with our own selves_, or
sympathy directed back on its source. It is therefore conditional upon the
capacity for love and sympathy, and also upon imagination. Therefore men
who are either hard-hearted or unimaginative do not weep easily, and
weeping is even always regarded as a sign of a certain degree of goodness
of character, and disarms anger, because it is felt that whoever can still
weep, must necessarily always be capable of love, _i.e._, sympathy towards
others, for this enters in the manner described into the disposition that
leads to weeping. The description which Petrarch gives of the rising of
his own tears, naïvely and truly expressing his feeling, entirely agrees
with the explanation we have given—


    “I vo pensando: e nel pensar m’ assale
    _Una pietà si forte di me stesso_,
    Che mi conduce spesso,
    Ad alto lagrimar, ch’i non soleva.”(82)


What has been said is also confirmed by the fact that children who have
been hurt generally do not cry till some one commiserates them; thus not
on account of the pain, but on account of the idea of it. When we are
moved to tears, not through our own suffering but through that of another,
this happens as follows. Either we vividly put ourselves in the place of
the sufferer by imagination, or see in his fate the lot of humanity as a
whole, and consequently, first of all, our own lot; and thus, in a very
roundabout way, it is yet always about ourselves that we weep, sympathy
with ourselves which we feel. This seems to be the principal reason of the
universal, and thus natural, weeping in the case of death. The mourner
does not weep for his loss; he would be ashamed of such egotistical tears,
instead of which he is sometimes ashamed of not weeping. First of all he
certainly weeps for the fate of the dead, but he also weeps when, after
long, heavy, and incurable suffering, death was to this man a wished-for
deliverance. Thus, principally, he is seized with sympathy for the lot of
all mankind, which is necessarily finite, so that every life, however
aspiring, and often rich in deeds, must be extinguished and become
nothing. But in this lot of mankind the mourner sees first of all his own,
and this all the more, the more closely he is related to him who has died,
thus most of all if it is his father. Although to his father his life was
misery through age and sickness, and though his helplessness was a heavy
burden to his son, yet that son weeps bitterly over the death of his
father for the reason which has been given.(83)

§ 68. After this digression about the identity of pure love and sympathy,
the final return of which upon our own individuality has, as its symptom,
the phenomenon of weeping, I now take up the thread of our discussion of
the ethical significance of action, in order to show how, from the same
source from which all goodness, love, virtue, and nobility of character
spring, there finally arises that which I call the denial of the will to
live.

We saw before that hatred and wickedness are conditioned by egoism, and
egoism rests on the entanglement of knowledge in the _principium
individuationis_. Thus we found that the penetration of that _principium
individuationis_ is the source and the nature of justice, and when it is
carried further, even to its fullest extent, it is the source and nature
of love and nobility of character. For this penetration alone, by
abolishing the distinction between our own individuality and that of
others, renders possible and explains perfect goodness of disposition,
extending to disinterested love and the most generous self-sacrifice for
others.

If, however, this penetration of the _principium individuationis_, this
direct knowledge of the identity of will in all its manifestations, is
present in a high degree of distinctness, it will at once show an
influence upon the will which extends still further. If that veil of Mâyâ,
the _principium individuationis_, is lifted from the eyes of a man to such
an extent that he no longer makes the egotistical distinction between his
person and that of others, but takes as much interest in the sufferings of
other individuals as in his own, and therefore is not only benevolent in
the highest degree, but even ready to sacrifice his own individuality
whenever such a sacrifice will save a number of other persons, then it
clearly follows that such a man, who recognises in all beings his own
inmost and true self, must also regard the infinite suffering of all
suffering beings as his own, and take on himself the pain of the whole
world. No suffering is any longer strange to him. All the miseries of
others which he sees and is so seldom able to alleviate, all the miseries
he knows directly, and even those which he only knows as possible, work
upon his mind like his own. It is no longer the changing joy and sorrow of
his own person that he has in view, as is the case with him who is still
involved in egoism; but, since he sees through the _principium
individuationis_, all lies equally near him. He knows the whole,
comprehends its nature, and finds that it consists in a constant passing
away, vain striving, inward conflict, and continual suffering. He sees
wherever he looks suffering humanity, the suffering brute creation, and a
world that passes away. But all this now lies as near him as his own
person lies to the egoist. Why should he now, with such knowledge of the
world, assert this very life through constant acts of will, and thereby
bind himself ever more closely to it, press it ever more firmly to
himself? Thus he who is still involved in the _principium
individuationis_, in egoism, only knows particular things and their
relation to his own person, and these constantly become new _motives_ of
his volition. But, on the other hand, that knowledge of the whole, of the
nature of the thing-in-itself which has been described, becomes a
_quieter_ of all and every volition. The will now turns away from life; it
now shudders at the pleasures in which it recognises the assertion of
life. Man now attains to the state of voluntary renunciation, resignation,
true indifference, and perfect will-lessness. If at times, in the hard
experience of our own suffering, or in the vivid recognition of that of
others, the knowledge of the vanity and bitterness of life draws nigh to
us also who are still wrapt in the veil of Mâyâ, and we would like to
destroy the sting of the desires, close the entrance against all
suffering, and purify and sanctify ourselves by complete and final
renunciation; yet the illusion of the phenomenon soon entangles us again,
and its motives influence the will anew; we cannot tear ourselves free.
The allurement of hope, the flattery of the present, the sweetness of
pleasure, the well-being which falls to our lot, amid the lamentations of
a suffering world governed by chance and error, draws us back to it and
rivets our bonds anew. Therefore Jesus says: “It is easier for a camel to
go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God.”

If we compare life to a course or path through which we must unceasingly
run—a path of red-hot coals, with a few cool places here and there; then
he who is entangled in delusion is consoled by the cool places, on which
he now stands, or which he sees near him, and sets out to run through the
course. But he who sees through the _principium individuationis_, and
recognises the real nature of the thing-in-itself, and thus the whole, is
no longer susceptible of such consolation; he sees himself in all places
at once, and withdraws. His will turns round, no longer asserts its own
nature, which is reflected in the phenomenon, but denies it. The
phenomenon by which this change is marked, is the transition from virtue
to asceticism. That is to say, it no longer suffices for such a man to
love others as himself, and to do as much for them as for himself; but
there arises within him a horror of the nature of which his own phenomenal
existence is an expression, the will to live, the kernel and inner nature
of that world which is recognised as full of misery. He therefore disowns
this nature which appears in him, and is already expressed through his
body, and his action gives the lie to his phenomenal existence, and
appears in open contradiction to it. Essentially nothing else but a
manifestation of will, he ceases to will anything, guards against
attaching his will to anything, and seeks to confirm in himself the
greatest indifference to everything. His body, healthy and strong,
expresses through the genitals, the sexual impulse; but he denies the will
and gives the lie to the body; he desires no sensual gratification under
any condition. Voluntary and complete chastity is the first step in
asceticism or the denial of the will to live. It thereby denies the
assertion of the will which extends beyond the individual life, and gives
the assurance that with the life of this body, the will, whose
manifestation it is, ceases. Nature, always true and naïve, declares that
if this maxim became universal, the human race would die out; and I think
I may assume, in accordance with what was said in the Second Book about
the connection of all manifestations of will, that with its highest
manifestation, the weaker reflection of it would also pass away, as the
twilight vanishes along with the full light. With the entire abolition of
knowledge, the rest of the world would of itself vanish into nothing; for
without a subject there is no object. I should like here to refer to a
passage in the Vedas, where it is said: “As in this world hungry infants
press round their mother; so do all beings await the holy oblation.”
(Asiatic Researches, vol. viii.; Colebrooke, On the Vedas, Abstract of the
Sama-Veda; also in Colebrooke’s Miscellaneous Essays, vol. i. p. 79.)
Sacrifice means resignation generally, and the rest of nature must look
for its salvation to man who is at once the priest and the sacrifice.
Indeed it deserves to be noticed as very remarkable, that this thought has
also been expressed by the admirable and unfathomably profound Angelus
Silesius, in the little poem entitled, “Man brings all to God;” it runs,
“Man! all loves thee; around thee great is the throng. All things flee to
thee that they may attain to God.” But a yet greater mystic, Meister
Eckhard, whose wonderful writings are at last accessible (1857) through
the edition of Franz Pfeiffer, says the same thing (p. 459) quite in the
sense explained here: “I bear witness to the saying of Christ. I, if I be
lifted up from the earth, will draw all things unto me (John xii. 32). So
shall the good man draw all things up to God, to the source whence they
first came. The Masters certify to us that all creatures are made for the
sake of man. This is proved in all created things, by the fact that the
one makes the use of the other; the ox makes use of the grass, the fish of
the water, the bird of the air, the wild beast of the forest. Thus, all
created things become of use to the good man. A good man brings to God the
one created thing in the other.” He means to say, that man makes use of
the brutes in this life because, in and with himself, he saves them also.
It also seems to me that that difficult passage in the Bible, Rom. viii.
21-24, must be interpreted in this sense.

In Buddhism also, there is no lack of expressions of this truth. For
example, when Buddha, still as Bodisatwa, has his horse saddled for the
last time, for his flight into the wilderness from his father’s house, he
says these lines to the horse: “Long hast thou existed in life and in
death, but now thou shalt cease from carrying and drawing. Bear me but
this once more, O Kantakana, away from here, and when I have attained to
the Law (have become Buddha) I will not forget thee” (Foe Koue Ki, trad.
p. Abel Rémusat, p. 233).

Asceticism then shows itself further in voluntary and intentional poverty,
which not only arises _per accidens_, because the possessions are given
away to mitigate the sufferings of others, but is here an end in itself,
is meant to serve as a constant mortification of will, so that the
satisfaction of the wishes, the sweet of life, shall not again arouse the
will, against which self-knowledge has conceived a horror. He who has
attained to this point, still always feels, as a living body, as concrete
manifestation of will, the natural disposition for every kind of volition;
but he intentionally suppresses it, for he compels himself to refrain from
doing all that he would like to do, and to do all that he would like not
to do, even if this has no further end than that of serving as a
mortification of will. Since he himself denies the will which appears in
his own person, he will not resist if another does the same, _i.e._,
inflicts wrongs upon him. Therefore every suffering coming to him from
without, through chance or the wickedness of others, is welcome to him,
every injury, ignominy, and insult; he receives them gladly as the
opportunity of learning with certainty that he no longer asserts the will,
but gladly sides with every enemy of the manifestation of will which is
his own person. Therefore he bears such ignominy and suffering with
inexhaustible patience and meekness, returns good for evil without
ostentation, and allows the fire of anger to rise within him just as
little as that of the desires. And he mortifies not only the will itself,
but also its visible form, its objectivity, the body. He nourishes it
sparingly, lest its excessive vigour and prosperity should animate and
excite more strongly the will, of which it is merely the expression and
the mirror. So he practises fasting, and even resorts to chastisement and
self-inflicted torture, in order that, by constant privation and
suffering, he may more and more break down and destroy the will, which he
recognises and abhors as the source of his own suffering existence and
that of the world. If at last death comes, which puts an end to this
manifestation of that will, whose existence here has long since perished
through free-denial of itself, with the exception of the weak residue of
it which appears as the life of this body; it is most welcome, and is
gladly received as a longed-for deliverance. Here it is not, as in the
case of others, merely the manifestation which ends with death; but the
inner nature itself is abolished, which here existed only in the
manifestation, and that in a very weak degree;(84) this last slight bond
is now broken. For him who thus ends, the world has ended also.

And what I have here described with feeble tongue and only in general
terms, is no philosophical fable, invented by myself, and only of to-day;
no, it was the enviable life of so many saints and beautiful souls among
Christians, and still more among Hindus and Buddhists, and also among the
believers of other religions. However different were the dogmas impressed
on their reason, the same inward, direct, intuitive knowledge, from which
alone all virtue and holiness proceed, expressed itself in precisely the
same way in the conduct of life. For here also the great distinction
between intuitive and abstract knowledge shows itself; a distinction which
is of such importance and universal application in our whole
investigation, and which has hitherto been too little attended to. There
is a wide gulf between the two, which can only be crossed by the aid of
philosophy, as regards the knowledge of the nature of the world.
Intuitively or _in concreto_, every man is really conscious of all
philosophical truths, but to bring them to abstract knowledge, to
reflection, is the work of philosophy, which neither ought nor is able to
do more than this.

Thus it may be that the inner nature of holiness, self-renunciation,
mortification of our own will, asceticism, is here for the first time
expressed abstractly, and free from all mythical elements, as _denial of
the will to live_, appearing after the complete knowledge of its own
nature has become a quieter of all volition. On the other hand, it has
been known directly and realised in practice by saints and ascetics, who
had all the same inward knowledge, though they used very different
language with regard to it, according to the dogmas which their reason had
accepted, and in consequence of which an Indian, a Christian, or a Lama
saint must each give a very different account of his conduct, which is,
however, of no importance as regards the fact. A saint may be full of the
absurdest superstition, or, on the contrary, he may be a philosopher, it
is all the same. His conduct alone certifies that he is a saint, for, in a
moral regard, it proceeds from knowledge of the world and its nature,
which is not abstractly but intuitively and directly apprehended, and is
only expressed by him in any dogma for the satisfaction of his reason. It
is therefore just as little needful that a saint should be a philosopher
as that a philosopher should be a saint; just as it is not necessary that
a perfectly beautiful man should be a great sculptor, or that a great
sculptor should himself be a beautiful man. In general, it is a strange
demand upon a moralist that he should teach no other virtue than that
which he himself possesses. To repeat the whole nature of the world
abstractly, universally, and distinctly in concepts, and thus to store up,
as it were, a reflected image of it in permanent concepts always at the
command of the reason; this and nothing else is philosophy. I refer the
reader to the passage quoted from Bacon in the First Book.

But the description I have given above of the denial of the will to live,
of the conduct of a beautiful soul, of a resigned and voluntarily
expiating saint, is merely abstract and general, and therefore cold. As
the knowledge from which the denial of the will proceeds is intuitive and
not abstract, it finds its most perfect expression, not in abstract
conceptions, but in deeds and conduct. Therefore, in order to understand
fully what we philosophically express as denial of the will to live, one
must come to know examples of it in experience and actual life. Certainly
they are not to be met with in daily experience: _Nam omnia præclara tam
difficilia quam rara sunt_, Spinoza admirably says. Therefore, unless by a
specially happy fate we are made eye-witnesses, we have to content
ourselves with descriptions of the lives of such men. Indian literature,
as we see from the little that we as yet know through translations, is
very rich in descriptions of the lives of saints, penitents, Samanas or
ascetics, Sannyâsis or mendicants, and whatever else they may be called.
Even the well-known “Mythologie des Indous, par Mad. de Polier,” though by
no means to be commended in every respect, contains many excellent
examples of this kind (especially in ch. 13, vol. ii.) Among Christians
also there is no lack of examples which afford us the illustrations we
desire. See the biographies, for the most part badly written, of those
persons who are sometimes called saintly souls, sometimes pietists,
quietists, devout enthusiasts, and so forth. Collections of such
biographies have been made at various times, such as Tersteegen’s “Leben
heiliger Seelen,” Reiz’s “Geschichte der Wiedergeborennen,” in our own
day, a collection by Kanne, which, with much that is bad, yet contains
some good, and especially the “Leben der Beata Sturmin.” To this category
very properly belongs the life of St. Francis of Assisi, that true
personification of the ascetic, and prototype of all mendicant friars. His
life, described by his younger contemporary, St. Bonaventura, also famous
as a scholastic, has recently been republished. “Vita S. Francisci a S.
Bonaventura concinnata” (Soest, 1847), though shortly before a painstaking
and detailed biography, making use of all sources of information, appeared
in France, “Histoire de S. François d’Assise, par Chavin de Mallan”
(1845). As an Oriental parallel of these monastic writings we have the
very valuable work of Spence Hardy, “Eastern Monachism; an Account of the
Order of Mendicants founded by Gotama Budha” (1850). It shows us the same
thing in another dress. We also see what a matter of indifference it is
whether it proceeds from a theistical or an atheistical religion. But as a
special and exceedingly full example and practical illustration of the
conceptions I have established, I can thoroughly recommend the
“Autobiography of Madame de Guion.” To become acquainted with this great
and beautiful soul, the very thought of whom always fills me with
reverence, and to do justice to the excellence of her disposition while
making allowance for the superstition of her reason, must be just as
delightful to every man of the better sort as with vulgar thinkers,
_i.e._, the majority, that book will always stand in bad repute. For it is
the case with regard to everything, that each man can only prize that
which to a certain extent is analogous to him and for which he has at
least a slight inclination. This holds good of ethical concerns as well as
of intellectual. We might to a certain extent regard the well-known French
biography of Spinoza as a case in point, if we used as a key to it that
noble introduction to his very insufficient essay, “De Emendatione
Intellectus,” a passage which I can also recommend as the most effectual
means I know of stilling the storm of the passions. Finally, even the
great Goethe, Greek as he is, did not think it below his dignity to show
us this most beautiful side of humanity in the magic mirror of poetic art,
for he represented the life of Fräulein Klettenberg in an idealised form
in his “Confessions of a Beautiful Soul,” and later, in his own biography,
gave us also an historical account of it. Besides this, he twice told the
story of the life of St. Philippo Neri. The history of the world, will,
and indeed must, keep silence about the men whose conduct is the best and
only adequate illustration of this important point of our investigation,
for the material of the history of the world is quite different, and
indeed opposed to this. It is not the denial of the will to live, but its
assertion and its manifestation in innumerable individuals in which its
conflict with itself at the highest grade of its objectification appears
with perfect distinctness, and brings before our eyes, now the ascendancy
of the individual through prudence, now the might of the many through
their mass, now the might of chance personified as fate, always the vanity
and emptiness of the whole effort. We, however, do not follow here the
course of phenomena in time, but, as philosophers, we seek to investigate
the ethical significance of action, and take this as the only criterion of
what for us is significant and important. Thus we will not be withheld by
any fear of the constant numerical superiority of vulgarity and dulness
from acknowledging that the greatest, most important, and most significant
phenomenon that the world can show is not the conqueror of the world, but
the subduer of it; is nothing but the quiet, unobserved life of a man who
has attained to the knowledge in consequence of which he surrenders and
denies that will to live which fills everything and strives and strains in
all, and which first gains freedom here in him alone, so that his conduct
becomes the exact opposite of that of other men. In this respect,
therefore, for the philosopher, these accounts of the lives of holy,
self-denying men, badly as they are generally written, and mixed as they
are with superstition and nonsense, are, because of the significance of
the material, immeasurably more instructive and important than even
Plutarch and Livy.

It will further assist us much in obtaining a more definite and full
knowledge of what we have expressed abstractly and generally, according to
our method of exposition, as the denial of the will to live, if we
consider the moral teaching that has been imparted with this intention,
and by men who were full of this spirit; and this will also show how old
our view is, though the pure philosophical expression of it may be quite
new. The teaching of this kind which lies nearest to hand is Christianity,
the ethics of which are entirely in the spirit indicated, and lead not
only to the highest degrees of human love, but also to renunciation. The
germ of this last side of it is certainly distinctly present in the
writings of the Apostles, but it was only fully developed and expressed
later. We find the Apostles enjoining the love of our neighbour as
ourselves, benevolence, the requital of hatred with love and well-doing,
patience, meekness, the endurance of all possible injuries without
resistance, abstemiousness in nourishment to keep down lust, resistance to
sensual desire, if possible, altogether. We already see here the first
degrees of asceticism, or denial of the will proper. This last expression
denotes that which in the Gospels is called denying ourselves and taking
up the cross (Matt. xvi. 24, 25; Mark viii. 34, 35; Luke ix. 23, 24, xiv.
26, 27, 33). This tendency soon developed itself more and more, and was
the origin of hermits, anchorites, and monasticism—an origin which in
itself was pure and holy, but for that very reason unsuitable for the
great majority of men; therefore what developed out of it could only be
hypocrisy and wickedness, for _abusus optimi pessimus_. In more developed
Christianity, we see that seed of asceticism unfold into the full flower
in the writings of the Christian saints and mystics. These preach, besides
the purest love, complete resignation, voluntary and absolute poverty,
genuine calmness, perfect indifference to all worldly things, dying to our
own will and being born again in God, entire forgetting of our own person,
and sinking ourselves in the contemplation of God. A full exposition of
this will be found in Fénélon’s “Explication des Maximes des Saints sur la
Vie Interieure.” But the spirit of this development of Christianity is
certainly nowhere so fully and powerfully expressed as in the writings of
the German mystics, in the works of Meister Eckhard, and in that justly
famous book “Die Deutsche Theologie,” of which Luther says in the
introduction to it which he wrote, that with the exception of the Bible
and St. Augustine, he had learnt more from it of what God, Christ, and man
are than from any other book. Yet we only got the genuine and correct text
of it in the year 1851, in the Stuttgart edition by Pfeiffer. The precepts
and doctrines which are laid down there are the most perfect exposition,
sprung from deep inward conviction of what I have presented as the denial
of the will. It should therefore be studied more closely in that form
before it is dogmatised about with Jewish-Protestant assurance. Tauler’s
“Nachfolgung des armen Leben Christi,” and also his “Medulla Animæ,” are
written in the same admirable spirit, though not quite equal in value to
that work. In my opinion the teaching of these genuine Christian mystics,
when compared with the teaching of the New Testament, is as alcohol to
wine, or what becomes visible in the New Testament as through a veil and
mist appears to us in the works of the mystics without cloak or disguise,
in full clearness and distinctness. Finally, the New Testament might be
regarded as the first initiation, the mystics as the second,—σμικρα και
μεγαλα μυστηρια.

We find, however, that which we have called the denial of the will to live
more fully developed, more variously expressed, and more vividly
represented in the ancient Sanscrit writings than could be the case in the
Christian Church and the Western world. That this important ethical view
of life could here attain to a fuller development and a more distinct
expression is perhaps principally to be ascribed to the fact that it was
not confined by an element quite foreign to it, as Christianity is by the
Jewish theology, to which its sublime author had necessarily to adopt and
accommodate it, partly consciously, partly, it may be, unconsciously. Thus
Christianity is made up of two very different constituent parts, and I
should like to call the purely ethical part especially and indeed
exclusively Christian, and distinguish it from the Jewish dogmatism with
which it is combined. If, as has often been feared, and especially at the
present time, that excellent and salutary religion should altogether
decline, I should look for the reason of this simply in the fact that it
does not consist of one single element, but of two originally different
elements, which have only been combined through the accident of history.
In such a case dissolution had to follow through the separation of these
elements, arising from their different relationship to and reaction
against the progressive spirit of the age. But even after this dissolution
the purely ethical part must always remain uninjured, because it is
indestructible. Our knowledge of Hindu literature is still very imperfect.
Yet, as we find their ethical teaching variously and powerfully expressed
in the Vedas, Puranas, poems, myths, legends of their saints, maxims and
precepts,(85) we see that it inculcates love of our neighbour with
complete renunciation of self-love; love generally, not confined to
mankind, but including all living creatures; benevolence, even to the
giving away of the hard-won wages of daily toil; unlimited patience
towards all who injure us; the requital of all wickedness, however base,
with goodness and love; voluntary and glad endurance of all ignominy;
abstinence from all animal food; perfect chastity and renunciation of all
sensual pleasure for him who strives after true holiness; the surrender of
all possessions, the forsaking of every dwelling-place and of all
relatives; deep unbroken solitude, spent in silent contemplation, with
voluntary penance and terrible slow self-torture for the absolute
mortification of the will, torture which extends to voluntary death by
starvation, or by men giving themselves up to crocodiles, or flinging
themselves over the sacred precipice in the Himalayas, or being buried
alive, or, finally, by flinging themselves under the wheels of the huge
car of an idol drawn along amid the singing, shouting, and dancing of
bayaderes. And even yet these precepts, whose origin reaches back more
than four thousand years, are carried out in practice, in some cases even
to the utmost extreme,(86) and this notwithstanding the fact that the
Hindu nation has been broken up into so many parts. A religion which
demands the greatest sacrifices, and which has yet remained so long in
practice in a nation that embraces so many millions of persons, cannot be
an arbitrarily invented superstition, but must have its foundation in the
nature of man. But besides this, if we read the life of a Christian
penitent or saint, and also that of a Hindu saint, we cannot sufficiently
wonder at the harmony we find between them. In the case of such radically
different dogmas, customs, and circumstances, the inward life and effort
of both is the same. And the same harmony prevails in the maxims
prescribed for both of them. For example, Tauler speaks of the absolute
poverty which one ought to seek, and which consists in giving away and
divesting oneself completely of everything from which one might draw
comfort or worldly pleasure, clearly because all this constantly affords
new nourishment to the will, which it is intended to destroy entirely. And
as an Indian counterpart of this, we find in the precepts of Fo that the
Saniassi, who ought to be without a dwelling and entirely without
property, is further finally enjoined not to lay himself down often under
the same tree, lest he should acquire a preference or inclination for it
above other trees. The Christian mystic and the teacher of the Vedanta
philosophy agree in this respect also, they both regard all outward works
and religious exercises as superfluous for him who has attained to
perfection. So much agreement in the case of such different ages and
nations is a practical proof that what is expressed here is not, as
optimistic dulness likes to assert, an eccentricity and perversity of the
mind, but an essential side of human nature, which only appears so rarely
because of its excellence.

I have now indicated the sources from which there may be obtained a direct
knowledge, drawn from life itself, of the phenomena in which the denial of
the will to live exhibits itself. In some respects this is the most
important point of our whole work; yet I have only explained it quite
generally, for it is better to refer to those who speak from direct
experience, than to increase the size of this book unduly by weak
repetitions of what is said by them.

I only wish to add a little to the general indication of the nature of
this state. We saw above that the wicked man, by the vehemence of his
volition, suffers constant, consuming, inward pain, and finally, if all
objects of volition are exhausted, quenches the fiery thirst of his
self-will by the sight of the suffering of others. He, on the contrary,
who has attained to the denial of the will to live, however poor, joyless,
and full of privation his condition may appear when looked at externally,
is yet filled with inward joy and the true peace of heaven. It is not the
restless strain of life, the jubilant delight which has keen suffering as
its preceding or succeeding condition, in the experience of the man who
loves life; but it is a peace that cannot be shaken, a deep rest and
inward serenity, a state which we cannot behold without the greatest
longing when it is brought before our eyes or our imagination, because we
at once recognise it as that which alone is right, infinitely surpassing
everything else, upon which our better self cries within us the great
_sapere aude_. Then we feel that every gratification of our wishes won
from the world is merely like the alms which the beggar receives from life
to-day that he may hunger again on the morrow; resignation, on the
contrary, is like an inherited estate, it frees the owner for ever from
all care.

It will be remembered from the Third Book that the æsthetic pleasure in
the beautiful consists in great measure in the fact that in entering the
state of pure contemplation we are lifted for the moment above all
willing, _i.e._, all wishes and cares; we become, as it were, freed from
ourselves. We are no longer the individual whose knowledge is subordinated
to the service of its constant willing, the correlative of the particular
thing to which objects are motives, but the eternal subject of knowing
purified from will, the correlative of the Platonic Idea. And we know that
these moments in which, delivered from the ardent strain of will, we seem
to rise out of the heavy atmosphere of earth, are the happiest which we
experience. From this we can understand how blessed the life of a man must
be whose will is silenced, not merely for a moment, as in the enjoyment of
the beautiful, but for ever, indeed altogether extinguished, except as
regards the last glimmering spark that retains the body in life, and will
be extinguished with its death. Such a man, who, after many bitter
struggles with his own nature, has finally conquered entirely, continues
to exist only as a pure, knowing being, the undimmed mirror of the world.
Nothing can trouble him more, nothing can move him, for he has cut all the
thousand cords of will which hold us bound to the world, and, as desire,
fear, envy, anger, drag us hither and thither in constant pain. He now
looks back smiling and at rest on the delusions of this world, which once
were able to move and agonise his spirit also, but which now stand before
him as utterly indifferent to him, as the chess-men when the game is
ended, or as, in the morning, the cast-off masquerading dress which
worried and disquieted us in a night in Carnival. Life and its forms now
pass before him as a fleeting illusion, as a light morning dream before
half-waking eyes, the real world already shining through it so that it can
no longer deceive; and like this morning dream, they finally vanish
altogether without any violent transition. From this we can understand the
meaning of Madame Guion when towards the end of her autobiography she
often expresses herself thus: “Everything is alike to me; I _cannot_ will
anything more: often I know not whether I exist or not.” In order to
express how, after the extinction of the will, the death of the body
(which is indeed only the manifestation of the will, and therefore loses
all significance when the will is abolished) can no longer have any
bitterness, but is very welcome, I may be allowed to quote the words of
that holy penitent, although they are not very elegantly turned: “_Midi de
la gloire; jour où il n’y a plus de nuit; vie qui ne craint plus la mort,
dans la mort même: parceque la mort a vaincu la mort, et que celui qui a
souffert la première mort, ne goutera plus la seconde mort_” (Vie de Mad.
de Guion, vol. ii. p. 13).

We must not, however, suppose that when, by means of the knowledge which
acts as a quieter of will, the denial of the will to live has once
appeared, it never wavers or vacillates, and that we can rest upon it as
on an assured possession. Rather, it must ever anew be attained by a
constant battle. For since the body is the will itself only in the form of
objectivity or as manifestation in the world as idea, so long as the body
lives, the whole will to live exists potentially, and constantly strives
to become actual, and to burn again with all its ardour. Therefore that
peace and blessedness in the life of holy men which we have described is
only found as the flower which proceeds from the constant victory over the
will, and the ground in which it grows is the constant battle with the
will to live, for no one can have lasting peace upon earth. We therefore
see the histories of the inner life of saints full of spiritual conflicts,
temptations, and absence of grace, _i.e._, the kind of knowledge which
makes all motives ineffectual, and as an universal quieter silences all
volition, gives the deepest peace and opens the door of freedom. Therefore
also we see those who have once attained to the denial of the will to live
strive with all their might to keep upon this path, by enforced
renunciation of every kind, by penance and severity of life, and by
selecting whatever is disagreeable to them, all in order to suppress the
will, which is constantly springing up anew. Hence, finally, because they
already know the value of salvation, their anxious carefulness to retain
the hard-won blessing, their scruples of conscience about every innocent
pleasure, or about every little excitement of their vanity, which here
also dies last, the most immovable, the most active, and the most foolish
of all the inclinations of man. By the term _asceticism_, which I have
used so often, I mean in its narrower sense this _intentional_ breaking of
the will by the refusal of what is agreeable and the selection of what is
disagreeable, the voluntarily chosen life of penance and self-chastisement
for the continual mortification of the will.

We see this practised by him who has attained to the denial of the will in
order to enable him to persist in it; but suffering in general, as it is
inflicted by fate, is a second way (δευτερος πλους(87)) of attaining to
that denial. Indeed, we may assume that most men only attain to it in this
way, and that it is the suffering which is personally experienced, not
that which is merely known, which most frequently produces complete
resignation, often only at the approach of death. For only in the case of
a few is the mere knowledge which, seeing through the _principium
individuationis_, first produces perfect goodness of disposition and
universal love of humanity, and finally enables them to regard all the
suffering of the world as their own; only in the case of a few, I say, is
this knowledge sufficient to bring about the denial of the will. Even with
him who approaches this point, it is almost invariably the case that the
tolerable condition of his own body, the flattery of the moment, the
delusion of hope, and the satisfaction of the will, which is ever
presenting itself anew, _i.e._, lust, is a constant hindrance to the
denial of the will, and a constant temptation to the renewed assertion of
it. Therefore in this respect all these illusions have been personified as
the devil. Thus in most cases the will must be broken by great personal
suffering before its self-conquest appears. Then we see the man who has
passed through all the increasing degrees of affliction with the most
vehement resistance, and is finally brought to the verge of despair,
suddenly retire into himself, know himself and the world, change his whole
nature, rise above himself and all suffering, as if purified and
sanctified by it, in inviolable peace, blessedness, and sublimity,
willingly renounce everything he previously desired with all his might,
and joyfully embrace death. It is the refined silver of the denial of the
will to live that suddenly comes forth from the purifying flame of
suffering. It is salvation. Sometimes we see even those who were very
wicked purified to this degree by great grief; they have become new beings
and are completely changed. Therefore their former misdeeds trouble their
consciences no more, yet they willingly atone for them by death, and
gladly see the end of the manifestation of that will which is now foreign
to them and abhorred by them. The great Goethe has given us a distinct and
visible representation of this denial of the will, brought about by great
misfortunes and despair of all deliverance, in his immortal masterpiece
“Faust,” in the story of the sufferings of Gretchen. I know no parallel to
this in poetry. It is a perfect example of the second path that leads to
the denial of the will, not, as the first, through the mere knowledge of
the sufferings of a whole world which one has voluntarily acquired, but
through excessive suffering experienced in one’s own person. Many
tragedies certainly end by conducting their strong-willed heroes to the
point of entire resignation, and then generally the will to live and its
manifestation end together, but no representation that is known to me
brings what is essential to that change so distinctly before us, free from
all that is extraneous, as the part of “Faust” I have referred to.

In actual life we see that those unfortunate persons who have to drink to
the dregs the greatest cup of suffering, since when all hope is taken from
them they have to face with full consciousness a shameful, violent, and
often painful death on the scaffold, are very frequently changed in this
way. We must not indeed assume that there is so great a difference between
their character and that of most men as their fate would seem to indicate,
but must attribute the latter for the most part to circumstances; yet they
are guilty and to a considerable degree bad. We see, however, many of
them, when they have entirely lost hope, changed in the way referred to.
They now show actual goodness and purity of disposition, true abhorrence
of doing any act in the least degree bad or unkind. They forgive their
enemies, even if it is through them that they innocently suffer; and not
with words merely and a sort of hypocritical fear of the judges of the
lower world, but in reality and with inward earnestness and no desire for
revenge. Indeed, their sufferings and death at last becomes dear to them,
for the denial of the will to live has appeared; they often decline the
deliverance when it is offered, and die gladly, peacefully, and happily.
To them the last secret of life has revealed itself in their excessive
pain; the secret that misery and wickedness, sorrow and hate, the sufferer
and the inflicter of suffering, however different they may appear to the
knowledge which follows the principle of sufficient reason, are in
themselves one, the manifestation of that one will to live which
objectifies its conflict with itself by means of the _principium
individuationis_. They have learned to know both sides in full measure,
the badness and the misery; and since at last they see the identity of the
two, they reject them both at once; they deny the will to live. In what
myths and dogmas they account to their reason for this intuitive and
direct knowledge and for their own change is, as has been said, a matter
of no importance.

Matthias Claudius must without doubt have witnessed a change of mind of
this description when he wrote the remarkable essay in the “Wandsbecker
Boten” (pt. i. p. 115) with the title “Bekehrungsgeschichte des ***”
(“History of the Conversion of ***”), which concludes thus: “Man’s way of
thinking may pass from one point of the periphery to the opposite point,
and again back to the former point, if circumstances mark out for him the
path. And these changes in a man are really nothing great or interesting,
but that _remarkable, catholic, transcendental change_ in which the whole
circle is irreparably broken up and all the laws of psychology become vain
and empty when the coat is stripped from the shoulders, or at least turned
outside in, and as it were scales fall from a man’s eyes, is such that
every one who has breath in his nostrils forsakes father and mother if he
can hear or experience something certain about it.”

The approach of death and hopelessness are in other respects not
absolutely necessary for such a purification through suffering. Even
without them the knowledge of the contradiction of the will to live with
itself can, through great misfortune and pain, force an entrance, and the
vanity of all striving become recognised. Hence it has often happened that
men who have led a very restless life in the full strain of the passions,
kings, heroes, and adventurers, suddenly change, betake themselves to
resignation and penance, become hermits or monks. To this class belong all
true accounts of conversions; for example, that of Raymond Lully, who had
long wooed a fair lady, and was at last admitted to her chamber,
anticipating the fulfilment of all his wishes, when she, opening her
bodice, showed him her bosom frightfully eaten with cancer. From that
moment, as if he had looked into hell, he was changed; he forsook the
court of the king of Majorca, and went into the desert to do penance.(88)
This conversion is very like that of the Abbé Rancé, which I have briefly
related in the 48th chapter of the Supplement. If we consider how in both
cases the transition from the pleasure to the horror of life was the
occasion of it, this throws some light upon the remarkable fact that it is
among the French, the most cheerful, gay, sensuous, and frivolous nation
in Europe, that by far the strictest of all monastic orders, the
Trappists, arose, was re-established by Rancé after its fall, and has
maintained itself to the present day in all its purity and strictness, in
spite of revolutions, Church reformations, and encroachments of
infidelity.

But a knowledge such as that referred to above of the nature of this
existence may leave us again along with the occasion of it and the will to
live, and with it the previous character may reappear. Thus we see that
the passionate Benvenuto Cellini was changed in this way, once when he was
in prison, and again when very ill; but when the suffering passed over, he
fell back again into his old state. In general, the denial of the will to
live by no means proceeds from suffering with the necessity of an effect
from its cause, but the will remains free; for this is indeed the one
point at which its freedom appears directly in the phenomenon; hence the
astonishment which Asmus expresses so strongly at the “transcendental
change.” In the case of every suffering, it is always possible to conceive
a will which exceeds it in intensity and is therefore unconquered by it.
Thus Plato speaks in the “Phædon” of men who up to the moment of their
execution feast, drink, and indulge in sensuous pleasure, asserting life
even to the death. Shakespeare shows us in Cardinal Beaufort the fearful
end of a profligate, who dies full of despair, for no suffering or death
can break his will, which is vehement to the extreme of wickedness.(89)

The more intense the will is, the more glaring is the conflict of its
manifestation, and thus the greater is the suffering. A world which was
the manifestation of a far more intense will to live than this world
manifests would produce so much the greater suffering; would thus be a
hell.

All suffering, since it is a mortification and a call to resignation, has
potentially a sanctifying power. This is the explanation of the fact that
every great misfortune or deep pain inspires a certain awe. But the
sufferer only really becomes an object of reverence when, surveying the
course of his life as a chain of sorrows, or mourning some great and
incurable misfortune, he does not really look at the special combination
of circumstances which has plunged his own life into suffering, nor stops
at the single great misfortune that has befallen him; for in so doing his
knowledge still follows the principle of sufficient reason, and clings to
the particular phenomenon; he still wills life only not under the
conditions which have happened to him; but only then, I say, he is truly
worthy of reverence when he raises his glance from the particular to the
universal, when he regards his suffering as merely an example of the
whole, and for him, since in a moral regard he partakes of genius, one
case stands for a thousand, so that the whole of life conceived as
essentially suffering brings him to resignation. Therefore it inspires
reverence when in Goethe’s “Torquato Tasso” the princess speaks of how her
own life and that of her relations has always been sad and joyless, and
yet regards the matter from an entirely universal point of view.

A very noble character we always imagine with a certain trace of quiet
sadness, which is anything but a constant fretfulness at daily annoyances
(this would be an ignoble trait, and lead us to fear a bad disposition),
but is a consciousness derived from knowledge of the vanity of all
possessions, of the suffering of all life, not merely of his own. But such
knowledge may primarily be awakened by the personal experience of
suffering, especially some one great sorrow, as a single unfulfilled wish
brought Petrarch to that state of resigned sadness concerning the whole of
life which appeals to us so pathetically in his works; for the Daphne he
pursued had to flee from his hands in order to leave him, instead of
herself, the immortal laurel. When through some such great and irrevocable
denial of fate the will is to some extent broken, almost nothing else is
desired, and the character shows itself mild, just, noble, and resigned.
When, finally, grief has no definite object, but extends itself over the
whole of life, then it is to a certain extent a going into itself, a
withdrawal, a gradual disappearance of the will, whose visible
manifestation, the body, it imperceptibly but surely undermines, so that a
man feels a certain loosening of his bonds, a mild foretaste of that death
which promises to be the abolition at once of the body and of the will.
Therefore a secret pleasure accompanies this grief, and it is this, as I
believe, which the most melancholy of all nations has called “the joy of
grief.” But here also lies the danger of _sentimentality_, both in life
itself and in the representation of it in poetry; when a man is always
mourning and lamenting without courageously rising to resignation. In this
way we lose both earth and heaven, and retain merely a watery
sentimentality. Only if suffering assumes the form of pure knowledge, and
this, acting as a _quieter of the will_, brings about resignation, is it
worthy of reverence. In this regard, however, we feel a certain respect at
the sight of every great sufferer which is akin to the feeling excited by
virtue and nobility of character, and also seems like a reproach of our
own happy condition. We cannot help regarding every sorrow, both our own
and those of others, as at least a potential advance towards virtue and
holiness, and, on the contrary, pleasures and worldly satisfactions as a
retrogression from them. This goes so far, that every man who endures a
great bodily or mental suffering, indeed every one who merely performs
some physical labour which demands the greatest exertion, in the sweat of
his brow and with evident exhaustion, yet with patience and without
murmuring, every such man, I say, if we consider him with close attention,
appears to us like a sick man who tries a painful cure, and who willingly,
and even with satisfaction, endures the suffering it causes him, because
he knows that the more he suffers the more the cause of his disease is
affected, and that therefore the present suffering is the measure of his
cure.

According to what has been said, the denial of the will to live, which is
just what is called absolute, entire resignation, or holiness, always
proceeds from that quieter of the will which the knowledge of its inner
conflict and essential vanity, expressing themselves in the suffering of
all living things, becomes. The difference, which we have represented as
two paths, consists in whether that knowledge is called up by suffering
which is merely and purely _known_, and is freely appropriated by means of
the penetration of the _principium individuationis_, or by suffering which
is directly _felt_ by a man himself. True salvation, deliverance from life
and suffering, cannot even be imagined without complete denial of the
will. Till then, every one is simply this will itself, whose manifestation
is an ephemeral existence, a constantly vain and empty striving, and the
world full of suffering we have represented, to which all irrevocably and
in like manner belong. For we found above that life is always assured to
the will to live, and its one real form is the present, from which they
can never escape, since birth and death reign in the phenomenal world. The
Indian mythus expresses this by saying “they are born again.” The great
ethical difference of character means this, that the bad man is infinitely
far from the attainment of the knowledge from which the denial of the will
proceeds, and therefore he is in truth _actually_ exposed to all the
miseries which appear in life as _possible_; for even the present
fortunate condition of his personality is merely a phenomenon produced by
the _principium individuationis_, and a delusion of Mâyâ, the happy dream
of a beggar. The sufferings which in the vehemence and ardour of his will
he inflicts upon others are the measure of the suffering, the experience
of which in his own person cannot break his will, and plainly lead it to
the denial of itself. All true and pure love, on the other hand, and even
all free justice, proceed from the penetration of the _principium
individuationis_, which, if it appears with its full power, results in
perfect sanctification and salvation, the phenomenon of which is the state
of resignation described above, the unbroken peace which accompanies it,
and the greatest delight in death.(90)

§ 69. Suicide, the actual doing away with the individual manifestation of
will, differs most widely from the denial of the will to live, which is
the single outstanding act of free-will in the manifestation, and is
therefore, as Asmus calls it, the transcendental change. This last has
been fully considered in the course of our work. Far from being denial of
the will, suicide is a phenomenon of strong assertion of will; for the
essence of negation lies in this, that the joys of life are shunned, not
its sorrows. The suicide wills life, and is only dissatisfied with the
conditions under which it has presented itself to him. He therefore by no
means surrenders the will to live, but only life, in that he destroys the
individual manifestation. He wills life—wills the unrestricted existence
and assertion of the body; but the complication of circumstances does not
allow this, and there results for him great suffering. The very will to
live finds itself so much hampered in this particular manifestation that
it cannot put forth its energies. It therefore comes to such a
determination as is in conformity with its own nature, which lies outside
the conditions of the principle of sufficient reason, and to which,
therefore, all particular manifestations are alike indifferent, inasmuch
as it itself remains unaffected by all appearing and passing away, and is
the inner life of all things; for that firm inward assurance by reason of
which we all live free from the constant dread of death, the assurance
that a phenomenal existence can never be wanting to the will, supports our
action even in the case of suicide. Thus the will to live appears just as
much in suicide (Siva) as in the satisfaction of self-preservation
(Vishnu) and in the sensual pleasure of procreation (Brahma). This is the
inner meaning of the unity of the Trimurtis, which is embodied in its
entirety in every human being, though in time it raises now one, now
another, of its three heads. Suicide stands in the same relation to the
denial of the will as the individual thing does to the Idea. The suicide
denies only the individual, not the species. We have already seen that as
life is always assured to the will to live, and as sorrow is inseparable
from life, suicide, the wilful destruction of the single phenomenal
existence, is a vain and foolish act; for the thing-in-itself remains
unaffected by it, even as the rainbow endures however fast the drops which
support it for the moment may change. But, more than this, it is also the
masterpiece of Mâyâ, as the most flagrant example of the contradiction of
the will to live with itself. As we found this contradiction in the case
of the lowest manifestations of will, in the permanent struggle of all the
forces of nature, and of all organic individuals for matter and time and
space; and as we saw this antagonism come ever more to the front with
terrible distinctness in the ascending grades of the objectification of
the will, so at last in the highest grade, the Idea of man, it reaches the
point at which, not only the individuals which express the same Idea
extirpate each other, but even the same individual declares war against
itself. The vehemence with which it wills life, and revolts against what
hinders it, namely, suffering, brings it to the point of destroying
itself; so that the individual will, by its own act, puts an end to that
body which is merely its particular visible expression, rather than permit
suffering to break the will. Just because the suicide cannot give up
willing, he gives up living. The will asserts itself here even in putting
an end to its own manifestation, because it can no longer assert itself
otherwise. As, however, it was just the suffering which it so shuns that
was able, as mortification of the will, to bring it to the denial of
itself, and hence to freedom, so in this respect the suicide is like a
sick man, who, after a painful operation which would entirely cure him has
been begun, will not allow it to be completed, but prefers to retain his
disease. Suffering approaches and reveals itself as the possibility of the
denial of will; but the will rejects it, in that it destroys the body, the
manifestation of itself, in order that it may remain unbroken. This is the
reason why almost all ethical teachers, whether philosophical or
religious, condemn suicide, although they themselves can only give
far-fetched sophistical reasons for their opinion. But if a human being
was ever restrained from committing suicide by purely moral motives, the
inmost meaning of this self-conquest (in whatever ideas his reason may
have clothed it) was this: “I will not shun suffering, in order that it
may help to put an end to the will to live, whose manifestation is so
wretched, by so strengthening the knowledge of the real nature of the
world which is already beginning to dawn upon me, that it may become the
final quieter of my will, and may free me for ever.”

It is well known that from time to time cases occur in which the act of
suicide extends to the children. The father first kills the children he
loves, and then himself. Now, if we consider that conscience, religion,
and all influencing ideas teach him to look upon murder as the greatest of
crimes, and that, in spite of this, he yet commits it, in the hour of his
own death, and when he is altogether uninfluenced by any egotistical
motive, such a deed can only be explained in the following manner: in this
case, the will of the individual, the father, recognises itself
immediately in the children, though involved in the delusion of mistaking
the appearance for the true nature; and as he is at the same time deeply
impressed with the knowledge of the misery of all life, he now thinks to
put an end to the inner nature itself, along with the appearance, and thus
seeks to deliver from existence and its misery both himself and his
children, in whom he discerns himself as living again. It would be an
error precisely analogous to this to suppose that one may reach the same
end as is attained through voluntary chastity by frustrating the aim of
nature in fecundation; or indeed if, in consideration of the unendurable
suffering of life, parents were to use means for the destruction of their
new-born children, instead of doing everything possible to ensure life to
that which is struggling into it. For if the will to live is there, as it
is the only metaphysical reality, or the thing-in-itself, no physical
force can break it, but can only destroy its manifestation at this place
and time. It itself can never be transcended except through knowledge.
Thus the only way of salvation is, that the will shall manifest itself
unrestrictedly, in order that in this individual manifestation it may come
to apprehend its own nature. Only as the result of this knowledge can the
will transcend itself, and thereby end the suffering which is inseparable
from its manifestation. It is quite impossible to accomplish this end by
physical force, as by destroying the germ, or by killing the new-born
child, or by committing suicide. Nature guides the will to the light, just
because it is only in the light that it can work out its salvation.
Therefore the aims of Nature are to be promoted in every way as soon as
the will to live, which is its inner being, has determined itself.

There is a species of suicide which seems to be quite distinct from the
common kind, though its occurrence has perhaps not yet been fully
established. It is starvation, voluntarily chosen on the ground of extreme
asceticism. All instances of it, however, have been accompanied and
obscured by much religious fanaticism, and even superstition. Yet it seems
that the absolute denial of will may reach the point at which the will
shall be wanting to take the necessary nourishment for the support of the
natural life. This kind of suicide is so far from being the result of the
will to live, that such a completely resigned ascetic only ceases to live
because he has already altogether ceased to will. No other death than that
by starvation is in this case conceivable (unless it were the result of
some special superstition); for the intention to cut short the torment
would itself be a stage in the assertion of will. The dogmas which satisfy
the reason of such a penitent delude him with the idea that a being of a
higher nature has inculcated the fasting to which his own inner tendency
drives him. Old examples of this may be found in the “Breslauer Sammlung
von Natur- und Medicin-Geschichten,” September 1799, p. 363; in Bayle’s
“Nouvelles de la République des Lettres,” February 1685, p. 189; in
Zimmermann, “Ueber die Einsamkeit,” vol. i. p. 182; in the “Histoire de
l’Académie des Sciences” for 1764, an account by Houttuyn, which is quoted
in the “Sammlung für praktische Aerzte,” vol. i. p. 69. More recent
accounts may be found in Hufeland’s “Journal für praktische Heilkunde,”
vol. x. p. 181, and vol. xlviii. p. 95; also in Nasse’s “Zeitschrift für
psychische Aerzte,” 1819, part iii. p. 460; and in the “Edinburgh Medical
and Surgical Journal,” 1809, vol. v. p. 319. In the year 1833 all the
papers announced that the English historian, Dr. Lingard, had died in
January at Dover of voluntary starvation; according to later accounts, it
was not he himself, but a relation of his who died. Still in these
accounts the persons were generally described as insane, and it is no
longer possible to find out how far this was the case. But I will give
here a more recent case of this kind, if it were only to ensure the
preservation of one of the rare instances of this striking and
extraordinary phenomenon of human nature, which, to all appearance at any
rate, belongs to the category to which I wish to assign it and could
hardly be explained in any other way. This case is reported in the
“Nürnberger Correspondenten” of the 29th July 1813, in these words:—“We
hear from Bern that in a thick wood near Thurnen a hut has been discovered
in which was lying the body of a man who had been dead about a month. His
clothes gave little or no clue to his social position. Two very fine
shirts lay beside him. The most important article, however, was a Bible
interleaved with white paper, part of which had been written upon by the
deceased. In this writing he gives the date of his departure from home
(but does not mention where his home was). He then says that he was driven
by the Spirit of God into the wilderness to pray and fast. During his
journey he had fasted seven days and then he had again taken food. After
this he had begun again to fast, and continued to do so for the same
number of days as before. From this point we find each day marked with a
stroke, and of these there are five, at the expiration of which the
pilgrim presumably died. There was further found a letter to a clergyman
about a sermon which the deceased heard him preach, but the letter was not
addressed.” Between this voluntary death arising from extreme asceticism
and the common suicide resulting from despair there may be various
intermediate species and combinations, though this is hard to find out.
But human nature has depths, obscurities, and perplexities, the analysis
and elucidation of which is a matter of the very greatest difficulty.

§ 70. It might be supposed that the entire exposition (now terminated) of
that which I call the denial of the will is irreconcilable with the
earlier explanation of necessity, which belongs just as much to motivation
as to every other form of the principle of sufficient reason, and
according to which, motives, like all causes, are only occasional causes,
upon which the character unfolds its nature and reveals it with the
necessity of a natural law, on account of which we absolutely denied
freedom as _liberum arbitrium indifferentiæ_. But far from suppressing
this here, I would call it to mind. In truth, real freedom, _i.e._,
independence of the principle of sufficient reason, belongs to the will
only as a thing-in-itself, not to its manifestation, whose essential form
is everywhere the principle of sufficient reason, the element or sphere of
necessity. But the one case in which that freedom can become directly
visible in the manifestation is that in which it makes an end of what
manifests itself, and because the mere manifestation, as a link in the
chain of causes, the living body in time, which contains only phenomena,
still continues to exist, the will which manifests itself through this
phenomenon then stands in contradiction to it, for it denies what the
phenomenon expresses. In such a case the organs of generation, for
example, as the visible form of the sexual impulse, are there and in
health; but yet, in the inmost consciousness, no sensual gratification is
desired; and although the whole body is only the visible expression of the
will to live, yet the motives which correspond to this will no longer act;
indeed, the dissolution of the body, the end of the individual, and in
this way the greatest check to the natural will, is welcome and desired.
Now, the contradiction between our assertions of the necessity of the
determination of the will by motives, in accordance with the character, on
the one hand, and of the possibility of the entire suppression of the will
whereby the motives become powerless, on the other hand, is only the
repetition in the reflection of philosophy of this _real_ contradiction
which arises from the direct encroachment of the freedom of the
will-in-itself, which knows no necessity, into the sphere of the necessity
of its manifestation. But the key to the solution of these contradictions
lies in the fact that the state in which the character is withdrawn from
the power of motives does not proceed directly from the will, but from a
changed form of knowledge. So long as the knowledge is merely that which
is involved in the _principium individuationis_ and exclusively follows
the principle of sufficient reason, the strength of the motives is
irresistible. But when the _principium individuationis_ is seen through,
when the Ideas, and indeed the inner nature of the thing-in-itself, as the
same will in all, are directly recognised, and from this knowledge an
universal quieter of volition arises, then the particular motives become
ineffective, because the kind of knowledge which corresponds to them is
obscured and thrown into the background by quite another kind. Therefore
the character can never partially change, but must, with the consistency
of a law of Nature, carry out in the particular the will which it
manifests as a whole. But this whole, the character itself, may be
completely suppressed or abolished through the change of knowledge
referred to above. It is this suppression or abolition which Asmus, as
quoted above, marvels at and denotes the “catholic, transcendental
change;” and in the Christian Church it has very aptly been called the
_new birth_, and the knowledge from which it springs, the _work of grace_.
Therefore it is not a question of a change, but of an entire suppression
of the character; and hence it arises that, however different the
characters which experience the suppression may have been before it, after
it they show a great similarity in their conduct, though every one still
speaks very differently according to his conceptions and dogmas.

In this sense, then, the old philosophical doctrine of the freedom of the
will, which has constantly been contested and constantly maintained, is
not without ground, and the dogma of the Church of the work of grace and
the new birth is not without meaning and significance. But we now
unexpectedly see both united in one, and we can also now understand in
what sense the excellent Malebranche could say, “_La liberté est un
mystère_,” and was right. For precisely what the Christian mystics call
_the work of grace_ and _the new birth_, is for us the single direct
expression of _the freedom of the will_. It only appears if the will,
having attained to a knowledge of its own real nature, receives from this
a _quieter_, by means of which the motives are deprived of their effect,
which belongs to the province of another kind of knowledge, the objects of
which are merely phenomena. The possibility of the freedom which thus
expresses itself is the greatest prerogative of man, which is for ever
wanting to the brute, because the condition of it is the deliberation of
reason, which enables him to survey the whole of life independent of the
impression of the present. The brute is entirely without the possibility
of freedom, as, indeed, it is without the possibility of a proper or
deliberate choice following upon a completed conflict of motives, which
for this purpose would have to be abstract ideas. Therefore with the same
necessity with which the stone falls to the earth, the hungry wolf buries
its fangs in the flesh of its prey, without the possibility of the
knowledge that it is itself the destroyed as well as the destroyer.
_Necessity is the kingdom of nature; freedom is the kingdom of grace._

Now because, as we have seen, that _self-suppression of the will_ proceeds
from knowledge, and all knowledge is involuntary, that denial of will
also, that entrance into freedom, cannot be forcibly attained to by
intention or design, but proceeds from the inmost relation of knowing and
volition in the man, and therefore comes suddenly, as if spontaneously
from without. This is why the Church has called it _the work of grace_;
and that it still regards it as independent of the acceptance of grace
corresponds to the fact that the effect of the quieter is finally a free
act of will. And because, in consequence of such a work of grace, the
whole nature of man is changed and reversed from its foundation, so that
he no longer wills anything of all that he previously willed so intensely,
so that it is as if a new man actually took the place of the old, the
Church has called this consequence of the work of grace the _new birth_.
For what it calls the _natural man_, to which it denies all capacity for
good, is just the will to live, which must be denied if deliverance from
an existence such as ours is to be attained. Behind our existence lies
something else, which is only accessible to us if we have shaken off this
world.

Having regard, not to the individuals according to the principle of
sufficient reason, but to the Idea of man in its unity, Christian theology
symbolises _nature_, the _assertion of the will to live_ in Adam, whose
sin, inherited by us, _i.e._, our unity with him in the Idea, which is
represented in time by the bond of procreation, makes us all partakers of
suffering and eternal death. On the other hand, it symbolises _grace_, the
_denial of the will_, _salvation_, in the incarnate God, who, as free from
all sin, that is, from all willing of life, cannot, like us, have
proceeded from the most pronounced assertion of the will, nor can he, like
us, have a body which is through and through simply concrete will,
manifestation of the will; but born of a pure virgin, he has only a
phantom body. This last is the doctrine of the Docetæ, _i.e._, certain
Church Fathers, who in this respect are very consistent. It is especially
taught by Apelles, against whom and his followers Tertullian wrote. But
even Augustine comments thus on the passage, Rom. viii. 3, “God sent his
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh:” “_Non enim caro peccati erat, quæ
non de carnali delectatione nata erat: sed tamen inerat ei similitudo
carnis peccati, quia mortalis caro erat_” (Liber 83, _quæst. qu._ 66). He
also teaches in his work entitled “_Opus Imperfectum_,” i. 47, that
inherited sin is both sin and punishment at once. It is already present in
new-born children, but only shows itself if they grow up. Yet the origin
of this sin is to be referred to the will of the sinner. This sinner was
Adam, but we all existed in him; Adam became miserable, and in him we have
all become miserable. Certainly the doctrine of original sin (assertion of
the will) and of salvation (denial of the will) is the great truth which
constitutes the essence of Christianity, while most of what remains is
only the clothing of it, the husk or accessories. Therefore Jesus Christ
ought always to be conceived in the universal, as the symbol or
personification of the denial of the will to live, but never as an
individual, whether according to his mythical history given in the
Gospels, or according to the probably true history which lies at the
foundation of this. For neither the one nor the other will easily satisfy
us entirely. It is merely the vehicle of that conception for the people,
who always demand something actual. That in recent times Christianity has
forgotten its true significance, and degenerated into dull optimism, does
not concern us here.

It is further an original and evangelical doctrine of Christianity—which
Augustine, with the consent of the leaders of the Church, defended against
the platitudes of the Pelagians, and which it was the principal aim of
Luther’s endeavour to purify from error and re-establish, as he expressly
declares in his book, “_De Servo Arbitrio_,”—the doctrine that _the will
is not free_, but originally subject to the inclination to evil. Therefore
according to this doctrine the deeds of the will are always sinful and
imperfect, and can never fully satisfy justice; and, finally, these works
can never save us, but faith alone, a faith which itself does not spring
from resolution and free will, but from the work of grace, without our
co-operation, comes to us as from without.

Not only the dogmas referred to before, but also this last genuine
evangelical dogma belongs to those which at the present day an ignorant
and dull opinion rejects as absurd or hides. For, in spite of Augustine
and Luther, it adheres to the vulgar Pelagianism, which the rationalism of
the day really is, and treats as antiquated those deeply significant
dogmas which are peculiar and essential to Christianity in the strictest
sense; while, on the other hand, it holds fast and regards as the
principal matter only the dogma that originates in Judaism, and has been
retained from it, and is merely historically connected with
Christianity.(91) We, however, recognise in the doctrine referred to above
the truth completely agreeing with the result of our own investigations.
We see that true virtue and holiness of disposition have their origin not
in deliberate choice (works), but in knowledge (faith); just as we have in
like manner developed it from our leading thought. If it were works, which
spring from motives and deliberate intention, that led to salvation, then,
however one may turn it, virtue would always be a prudent, methodical,
far-seeing egoism. But the faith to which the Christian Church promises
salvation is this: that as through the fall of the first man we are all
partakers of sin and subject to death and perdition, through the divine
substitute, through grace and the taking upon himself of our fearful
guilt, we are all saved, without any merit of our own (of the person);
since that which can proceed from the intentional (determined by motives)
action of the person, works, can never justify us, from its very nature,
just because it is _intentional_, action induced by motives, _opus
operatum_. Thus in this faith there is implied, first of all, that our
condition is originally and essentially an incurable one, from which we
need _salvation_; then, that we ourselves essentially belong to evil, and
are so firmly bound to it that our works according to law and precept,
_i.e._, according to motives, can never satisfy justice nor save us; but
salvation is only obtained through faith, _i.e._, through a changed mode
of knowing, and this faith can only come through grace, thus as from
without. This means that the salvation is one which is quite foreign to
our person, and points to a denial and surrender of this person necessary
to salvation. Works, the result of the law as such, can never justify,
because they are always action following upon motives. Luther demands (in
his book “_De Libertate Christiana_”) that after the entrance of faith the
good works shall proceed from it entirely of themselves, as symptoms, as
fruits of it; yet by no means as constituting in themselves a claim to
merit, justification, or reward, but taking place quite voluntarily and
gratuitously. So we also hold that from the ever-clearer penetration of
the _principium individuationis_ proceeds, first, merely free justice,
then love, extending to the complete abolition of egoism, and finally
resignation or denial of the will.

I have here introduced these dogmas of Christian theology, which in
themselves are foreign to philosophy, merely for the purpose of showing
that the ethical doctrine which proceeds from our whole investigation, and
is in complete agreement and connection with all its parts, although new
and unprecedented in its expression, is by no means so in its real nature,
but fully agrees with the Christian dogmas properly so called, and indeed,
as regards its essence, was contained and present in them. It also agrees
quite as accurately with the doctrines and ethical teachings of the sacred
books of India, which in their turn are presented in quite different
forms. At the same time the calling to mind of the dogmas of the Christian
Church serves to explain and illustrate the apparent contradiction between
the necessity of all expressions of character when motives are presented
(the kingdom of Nature) on the one hand, and the freedom of the will in
itself, to deny itself, and abolish the character with all the necessity
of the motives based upon it (the kingdom of grace) on the other hand.

§ 71. I now end the general account of ethics, and with it the whole
development of that one thought which it has been my object to impart; and
I by no means desire to conceal here an objection which concerns this last
part of my exposition, but rather to point out that it lies in the nature
of the question, and that it is quite impossible to remove it. It is this,
that after our investigation has brought us to the point at which we have
before our eyes perfect holiness, the denial and surrender of all
volition, and thus the deliverance from a world whose whole existence we
have found to be suffering, this appears to us as a passing away into
empty nothingness.

On this I must first remark, that the conception of nothing is essentially
relative, and always refers to a definite something which it negatives.
This quality has been attributed (by Kant) merely to the _nihil
privativum_, which is indicated by - as opposed to +, which -, from an
opposite point of view, might become +, and in opposition to this _nihil
privativum_ the _nihil negativum_ has been set up, which would in every
reference be nothing, and as an example of this the logical contradiction
which does away with itself has been given. But more closely considered,
no absolute nothing, no proper _nihil negativum_ is even thinkable; but
everything of this kind, when considered from a higher standpoint or
subsumed under a wider concept, is always merely a _nihil privativum_.
Every nothing is thought as such only in relation to something, and
presupposes this relation, and thus also this something. Even a logical
contradiction is only a relative nothing. It is no thought of the reason,
but it is not on that account an absolute nothing; for it is a combination
of words; it is an example of the unthinkable, which is necessary in logic
in order to prove the laws of thought. Therefore if for this end such an
example is sought, we will stick to the nonsense as the positive which we
are in search of, and pass over the sense as the negative. Thus every
_nihil negativum_, if subordinated to a higher concept, will appear as a
mere _nihil privativum_ or relative nothing, which can, moreover, always
exchange signs with what it negatives, so that that would then be thought
as negation, and it itself as assertion. This also agrees with the result
of the difficult dialectical investigation of the meaning of nothing which
Plato gives in the “Sophist” (pp. 277-287): Την του ἑτερου φυσιν
αποδειξαντες ουσαν τε, και κατακεκερματισμενην επι παντα τα οντα προς
αλληλα, το προς το ον ἑκαστου μοριου αυτης αντιτιθεμενον, ετολμησαμεν
ειπειν, ὡς αυτο τουτο εστιν οντως το μη ον (_Cum enim ostenderemus,
alterius ipsius naturam esse perque omnia entia divisam atque dispersam in
vicem; tunc partem ejus oppositam ei, quod cujusque ens est, esse ipsum
revera non ens asseruimus_).

That which is generally received as positive, which we call the real, and
the negation of which the concept nothing in its most general significance
expresses, is just the world as idea, which I have shown to be the
objectivity and mirror of the will. Moreover, we ourselves are just this
will and this world, and to them belongs the idea in general, as one
aspect of them. The form of the idea is space and time, therefore for this
point of view all that is real must be in some place and at some time.
Denial, abolition, conversion of the will, is also the abolition and the
vanishing of the world, its mirror. If we no longer perceive it in this
mirror, we ask in vain where it has gone, and then, because it has no
longer any where and when, complain that it has vanished into nothing.

A reversed point of view, if it were possible for us, would reverse the
signs and show the real for us as nothing, and that nothing as the real.
But as long as we ourselves are the will to live, this last—nothing as the
real—can only be known and signified by us negatively, because the old
saying of Empedocles, that like can only be known by like, deprives us
here of all knowledge, as, conversely, upon it finally rests the
possibility of all our actual knowledge, _i.e._, the world as idea; for
the world is the self-knowledge of the will.

If, however, it should be absolutely insisted upon that in some way or
other a positive knowledge should be attained of that which philosophy can
only express negatively as the denial of the will, there would be nothing
for it but to refer to that state which all those who have attained to
complete denial of the will have experienced, and which has been variously
denoted by the names ecstasy, rapture, illumination, union with God, and
so forth; a state, however, which cannot properly be called knowledge,
because it has not the form of subject and object, and is, moreover, only
attainable in one’s own experience and cannot be further communicated.

We, however, who consistently occupy the standpoint of philosophy, must be
satisfied here with negative knowledge, content to have reached the utmost
limit of the positive. We have recognised the inmost nature of the world
as will, and all its phenomena as only the objectivity of will; and we
have followed this objectivity from the unconscious working of obscure
forces of Nature up to the completely conscious action of man. Therefore
we shall by no means evade the consequence, that with the free denial, the
surrender of the will, all those phenomena are also abolished; that
constant strain and effort without end and without rest at all the grades
of objectivity, in which and through which the world consists; the
multifarious forms succeeding each other in gradation; the whole
manifestation of the will; and, finally, also the universal forms of this
manifestation, time and space, and also its last fundamental form, subject
and object; all are abolished. No will: no idea, no world.

Before us there is certainly only nothingness. But that which resists this
passing into nothing, our nature, is indeed just the will to live, which
we ourselves are as it is our world. That we abhor annihilation so
greatly, is simply another expression of the fact that we so strenuously
will life, and are nothing but this will, and know nothing besides it. But
if we turn our glance from our own needy and embarrassed condition to
those who have overcome the world, in whom the will, having attained to
perfect self-knowledge, found itself again in all, and then freely denied
itself, and who then merely wait to see the last trace of it vanish with
the body which it animates; then, instead of the restless striving and
effort, instead of the constant transition from wish to fruition, and from
joy to sorrow, instead of the never-satisfied and never-dying hope which
constitutes the life of the man who wills, we shall see that peace which
is above all reason, that perfect calm of the spirit, that deep rest, that
inviolable confidence and serenity, the mere reflection of which in the
countenance, as Raphael and Correggio have represented it, is an entire
and certain gospel; only knowledge remains, the will has vanished. We look
with deep and painful longing upon this state, beside which the misery and
wretchedness of our own is brought out clearly by the contrast. Yet this
is the only consideration which can afford us lasting consolation, when,
on the one hand, we have recognised incurable suffering and endless misery
as essential to the manifestation of will, the world; and, on the other
hand, see the world pass away with the abolition of will, and retain
before us only empty nothingness. Thus, in this way, by contemplation of
the life and conduct of saints, whom it is certainly rarely granted us to
meet with in our own experience, but who are brought before our eyes by
their written history, and, with the stamp of inner truth, by art, we must
banish the dark impression of that nothingness which we discern behind all
virtue and holiness as their final goal, and which we fear as children
fear the dark; we must not even evade it like the Indians, through myths
and meaningless words, such as reabsorption in Brahma or the Nirvana of
the Buddhists. Rather do we freely acknowledge that what remains after the
entire abolition of will is for all those who are still full of will
certainly nothing; but, conversely, to those in whom the will has turned
and has denied itself, this our world, which is so real, with all its suns
and milky-ways—is nothing.(92)






FOOTNOTES


    1 F. H. Jacobi.

    2 The Hegelian Philosophy.

    3 Fichte and Schelling.

    4 Hegel.

    5 Kant is the only writer who has confused this idea of reason, and in
      this connection I refer the reader to the Appendix, and also to my
      “Grundprobleme der Ethik”: Grundl. dd. Moral. § 6, pp. 148-154,
      first and second editions.

    6 Mira in quibusdam rebus verborum proprietas est, et consuetudo
      sermonis antiqui quædam efficacissimis notis signat. _Seneca_,
      epist. 81.

    7 It is shown in the Appendix that matter and substance are one.

    8 This shows the ground of the Kantian explanation of matter, that it
      is “that which is movable in space,” for motion consists simply in
      the union of space and time.

    9 Not, as Kant holds, from the knowledge of time, as will be explained
      in the Appendix.

   10 On this see “The Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient
      Reason,” § 49.

   11 The first four chapters of the first of the supplementary books
      belong to these seven paragraphs.

   12 Compare with this paragraph §§ 26 and 27 of the third edition of the
      essay on the principle of sufficient reason.

   13 Cf. Ch. 5 and 6 of the Supplement.

   14 Cf. Ch. 9 and 10 of the Supplement.

   15 Cf. Ch. 11 of Supplement.

   16 I am therefore of opinion that a science of physiognomy cannot, with
      certainty, go further than to lay down a few quite general rules.
      For example, the intellectual qualities are to be read in the
      forehead and the eyes; the moral qualities, the expression of will,
      in the mouth and lower part of the face. The forehead and the eyes
      interpret each other; either of them seen alone can only be half
      understood. Genius is never without a high, broad, finely-arched
      brow; but such a brow often occurs where there is no genius. A
      clever-looking person may the more certainly be judged to be so the
      uglier the face is; and a stupid-looking person may the more
      certainly be judged to be stupid the more beautiful the face is; for
      beauty, as the approximation to the type of humanity, carries in and
      for itself the expression of mental clearness; the opposite is the
      case with ugliness, and so forth.

   17 Cf. Ch. 7 of the Supplement.

   18 Cf. Ch. 8 of Supplement.

   19 Suarez, Disput. Metaphysicæ, disp. iii. sect. 3, tit. 3.

   20 Cf. Ch. 12 of Supplement.

   21 The reader must not think here of Kant’s misuse of these Greek
      terms, which is condemned in the Appendix.

   22 Spinoza, who always boasts that he proceeds _more geometrico_, has
      actually done so more than he himself was aware. For what he knew
      with certainty and decision from the immediate, perceptive
      apprehension of the nature of the world, he seeks to demonstrate
      logically without reference to this knowledge. He only arrives at
      the intended and predetermined result by starting from arbitrary
      concepts framed by himself (_substantia causa sui_, &c.), and in the
      demonstrations he allows himself all the freedom of choice for which
      the nature of the wide concept-spheres afford such convenient
      opportunity. That his doctrine is true and excellent is therefore in
      his case, as in that of geometry, quite independent of the
      demonstrations of it. Cf. ch. 13 of supplementary volume.

   23 Cf. Ch. 17 of Supplement.

   24 Omnes perturbationes judicio censent fieri et opinione. Cic. Tusc.,
      4, 6. Ταρασσει τους ανθρωπους ου τα πραγματα, αλλα τα περι των
      πραγματων δογματα (Perturbant homines non res ipsæ, sed de rebus
      opiniones). Epictet., c. v.

   25 Τουτο γαρ εστι το αιτιον τοις ανθρωποις παντων των κακων, το τας
      προληψεις τας κοινας μη δυνασθαι εφαρμοξειν ταις επι μερους (Hæc est
      causa mortalibus omnium malorum, non posse communes notiones aptare
      singularibus). Epict. dissert., ii., 26.

   26 Cf. Ch. 16 of Supplement.

   27 Cf. Ch. xviii. of the Supplement.

   28 We can thus by no means agree with Bacon if he (De Augm. Scient., L.
      iv. in fine.) thinks that all mechanical and physical movement of
      bodies has always been preceded by perception in these bodies;
      though a glimmering of truth lies at the bottom of this false
      proposition. This is also the case with Kepler’s opinion, expressed
      in his essay _De Planeta Martis_, that the planets must have
      knowledge in order to keep their elliptical courses so correctly,
      and to regulate the velocity of their motion so that the triangle of
      the plane of their course always remains proportional to the time in
      which they pass through its base.

   29 Cf. Ch. xix. of the Supplement.

   30 Cf. Ch. xx. of the Supplement, and also in my work, “_Ueber den
      Willen in der Natur_,” the chapters on Physiology and Comparative
      Anatomy, where the subject I have only touched upon here is fully
      discussed.

   31 This is specially treated in the 27th Ch. of the Supplement.

   32 This subject is fully worked out in my prize essay on the freedom of
      the will, in which therefore (pp. 29-44 of the “Grundprobleme der
      Ethik”) the relation of _cause_, _stimulus_, and _motive_ has also
      been fully explained.

   33 Cf. Ch. xxiii. of the Supplement, and also the Ch. on the physiology
      of plants in my work “Ueber den Willen in der Natur,” and the Ch. on
      physical astronomy, which is of great importance with regard to the
      kernel of my metaphysic.

   34 Wenzel, De Structura Cerebri Hominis et Brutorum, 1812, ch. iii.;
      Cuvier, Leçons d’Anat., comp. leçon 9, arts. 4 and 5; Vic. d’Azyr,
      Hist. de l’Acad. de Sc. de Paris, 1783, pp. 470 and 483.

   35 On the 16th of September 1840, at a lecture upon Egyptian Archæology
      delivered by Mr. Pettigrew at the Literary and Scientific Institute
      of London, he showed some corns of wheat which Sir G. Wilkinson had
      found in a grave at Thebes, in which they must have lain for three
      thousand years. They were found in an hermetically sealed vase. Mr.
      Pettigrew had sowed twelve grains, and obtained a plant which grew
      five feet high, and the seeds of which were now quite ripe.—_Times_,
      21st September 1840. In the same way in 1830 Mr. Haulton produced in
      the Medical Botanical Society of London a bulbous root which was
      found in the hand of an Egyptian mummy, in which it was probably put
      in observance of some religious rite, and which must have been at
      least two thousand years old. He had planted it in a flower-pot, in
      which it grew up and flourished. This is quoted from the Medical
      Journal of 1830 in the Journal of the Royal Institute of Great
      Britain, October 1830, p. 196.—“In the garden of Mr. Grimstone of
      the Herbarium, Highgate, London, is a pea in full fruit, which has
      sprung from a pea that Mr. Pettigrew and the officials of the
      British Museum took out of a vase which had been found in an
      Egyptian sarcophagus, where it must have lain 2844 years.”—_Times_,
      16th August 1844. Indeed, the living toads found in limestone lead
      to the conclusion that even animal life is capable of such a
      suspension for thousands of years, if this is begun in the dormant
      period and maintained by special circumstances.

   36 Cf. Chap. xxii. of the Supplement, and also my work “Ueber den
      Willen in der Natur,” p. 54 _et seq._, and pp. 70-79 of the first
      edition, or p. 46 _et seq._, and pp. 63-72 of the second, or p. 48
      _et seq._, and pp. 69-77 of the third edition.

   37 The Scholastics therefore said very truly: _Causa finalis movet non
      secundum suum esse reale, sed secundum esse cognitum._ Cf. Suarez,
      Disp. Metaph. disp. xxiii., sec. 7 and 8.

   38 Cf. “Critique of Pure Reason. Solution of the Cosmological Ideas of
      the Totality of the Deduction of the Events in the Universe,” pp.
      560-586 of the fifth, and p. 532 and following of first edition; and
      “Critique of Practical Reason,” fourth edition, pp. 169-179;
      Rosenkranz’ edition, p. 224 and following. Cf. my Essay on the
      Principle of Sufficient Reason, § 43.

   39 Cf. “Ueber den Willen in der Natur,” at the end of the section on
      Comparative Anatomy.

   40 Cf. “Ueber den Willen in der Natur,” the section on Comparative
      Anatomy.

   41 Chatin, Sur la Valisneria Spiralis, in the Comptes Rendus de l’Acad.
      de Sc., No. 13, 1855.

   42 Cf. Chaps. xxvi. and xxvii. of the Supplement.

   43 Cf. Chap. xxviii. of the Supplement.

   44 F. H. Jacobi.

   45 See for example, “Immanuel Kant, a Reminiscence, by Fr. Bouterweck,”
      pg. 49, and Buhle’s “History of Philosophy,” vol. vi. pp. 802-815
      and 823.

   46 Cf. Chap. xxix. of Supplement.

   47 I also recommend the perusal of what Spinoza says in his Ethics
      (Book II., Prop. 40, Schol. 2, and Book V., Props. 25-38),
      concerning the _cognitio tertii generis, sive intuitiva_, in
      illustration of the kind of knowledge we are considering, and very
      specially Prop. 29, Schol.; prop. 36, Schol., and Prop. 38, Demonst.
      et Schol.

   48 Cf. Chap. xxx. of the Supplement.

   49 This last sentence cannot be understood without some acquaintance
      with the next book.

   50 Cf. Chap. xxxi. of the Supplement.

   51 I am all the more delighted and astonished, forty years after I so
      timidly and hesitatingly advanced this thought, to discover that it
      has already been expressed by St. Augustine: _Arbusta formas suas
      varias, quibus mundi hujus visibilis structura formosa est,
      sentiendas sensibus praebent; ut, pro eo quod_ NOSSE _non possunt,
      quasi_ INNOTESCERE _velle videantur_.—_De civ. Dei, xi._ 27.

   52 Cf. Chap. 35 of Supplement.

   53 Jakob Böhm in his book, “de Signatura Rerum,” ch. i., § 13-15, says,
      “There is nothing in nature that does not manifest its internal form
      externally; for the internal continually labours to manifest
      itself.... Everything has its language by which to reveal itself....
      And this is the language of nature when everything speaks out of its
      own property, and continually manifests and declares itself, ... for
      each thing reveals its mother, which thus gives _the essence and the
      will_ to the form.”

   54 The last sentence is the German of the _il n’y a que l’esprit qui
      sente l’esprit_, of Helvetius. In the first edition there was no
      occasion to point this out, but since then the age has become so
      degraded and ignorant through the stupefying influence of the
      Hegelian sophistry, that some might quite likely say that an
      antithesis was intended here between “spirit and nature.” I am
      therefore obliged to guard myself in express terms against the
      suspicion of such vulgar sophisms.

   55 This digression is worked out more fully in the 36th Chapter of the
      Supplement.

   56 In order to understand this passage it is necessary to have read the
      whole of the next book.

_   57 Apparent rari, nantes in gurgite vasto._

   58 Cf. Ch. xxxiv. of Supplement.

   59 It is scarcely necessary to say that wherever I speak of poets I
      refer exclusively to that rare phenomenon the great true poet. I
      mean no one else; least of all that dull insipid tribe, the mediocre
      poets, rhymsters, and inventors of fables, that flourishes so
      luxuriantly at the present day in Germany. They ought rather to have
      the words shouted in their ears unceasingly from all sides—

      _Mediocribus esse poëtis_
      _ Non homines, non Dî, non concessere columnæ._

      It is worthy of serious consideration what an amount of time—both
      their own and other people’s—and paper is lost by this swarm of
      mediocre poets, and how injurious is their influence. For the public
      always seizes on what is new, and has naturally a greater proneness
      to what is perverse and dull as akin to itself. Therefore these
      works of the mediocre poets draw it away and hold it back from the
      true masterpieces and the education they afford, and thus working in
      direct antagonism to the benign influence of genius, they ruin taste
      more and more, and retard the progress of the age. Such poets should
      therefore be scourged with criticism and satire without indulgence
      or sympathy till they are induced, for their own good, to apply
      their muse rather to reading what is good than to writing what is
      bad. For if the bungling of the incompetent so raised the wrath of
      the gentle Apollo that he could flay Marsyas, I do not see on what
      the mediocre poets will base their claim to tolerance.

   60 Cf. Ch. xxxviii. of Supplement.

   61 Cf. Ch. xxxvii. of the Supplement.

   62 Leibnitii epistolæ, collectio Kortholti, ep. 154.

   63 Cf. Ch. xxxix. of Supplement.

   64 The following remark may assist those for whom it is not too subtle
      to understand clearly that the individual is only the phenomenon,
      not the thing in itself. Every individual is, on the one hand, the
      subject of knowing, _i.e._, the complemental condition of the
      possibility of the whole objective world, and, on the other hand, a
      particular phenomenon of will, the same will which objectifies
      itself in everything. But this double nature of our being does not
      rest upon a self-existing unity, otherwise it would be possible for
      us to be conscious of ourselves _in ourselves, and independent of
      the objects of knowledge and will_. Now this is by no means
      possible, for as soon as we turn into ourselves to make the attempt,
      and seek for once to know ourselves fully by means of introspective
      reflection, we are lost in a bottomless void; we find ourselves like
      the hollow glass globe, from out of which a voice speaks whose cause
      is not to be found in it, and whereas we desired to comprehend
      ourselves, we find, with a shudder, nothing but a vanishing spectre.

   65 “Scholastici docuerunt, quod æternitas non sit temporis sine fine
      aut principio successio; sed _Nunc stans_, _i.e._, idem nobis _Nunc
      esse_, quod erat _Nunc Adamo_, _i.e._, inter _nunc_ et _tunc_ nullam
      esse differentiam.”—Hobbes, Leviathan, c. 46.

   66 In Eckermann’s “Conversations of Goethe” (vol. i. p. 161), Goethe
      says: “Our spirit is a being of a nature quite indestructible, and
      its activity continues from eternity to eternity. It is like the
      sun, which seems to set only to our earthly eyes, but which, in
      reality, never sets, but shines on unceasingly.” Goethe has taken
      the simile from me; not I from him. Without doubt he used it in this
      conversation, which was held in 1824, in consequence of a (possibly
      unconscious) reminiscence of the above passage, for it occurs in the
      first edition, p. 401, in exactly the same words, and it is also
      repeated at p. 528 of that edition, as at the close of § 65 of the
      present work. The first edition was sent to him in December 1818,
      and in March 1819, when I was at Naples, he sent me his
      congratulations by letter, through my sister, and enclosed a piece
      of paper upon which he had noted the places of certain passages
      which had specially pleased him. Thus he had read my book.

   67 This is expressed in the Veda by saying, that when a man dies his
      sight becomes one with the sun, his smell with the earth, his taste
      with water, his hearing with the air, his speech with fire, &c., &c.
      (Oupnek’hat, vol. i. p. 249 _et seq._) And also by the fact that, in
      a special ceremony, the dying man gives over his senses and all his
      faculties singly to his son, in whom they are now supposed to live
      on (Oupnek’hat, vol. ii. p. 82 _et seq._)

   68 Cf. Chap. xli.-xliv. of Supplement.

   69 “Critique of Pure Reason,” first edition, pp. 532-558; fifth
      edition, pp. 560-586; and “Critique of Practical Reason,” fourth
      edition, pp. 169-179; Rosenkranz’s edition, pp. 224-231.

   70 Cart. Medit. 4.—Spin. Eth., pt. ii. prop. 48 et 49, cæt.

   71 Herodot. vii. 46.

   72 Cf. Ch. xlvi. of Supplement.

   73 Cf. Ch. xlv. of the Supplement.

   74 Thus the basis of natural right of property does not require the
      assumption of two grounds of right beside each other, that based on
      _detention_ and that based on _formation_; but the latter is itself
      sufficient. Only the name _formation_ is not very suitable, for the
      spending of any labour upon a thing does not need to be a forming or
      fashioning of it.

   75 The further exposition of the philosophy of law here laid down will
      be found in my prize-essay, “Ueber das Fundament der Moral,” § 17,
      pp. 221-230 of 1st ed., pp. 216-226 of 2d ed.

   76 Cf. Ch. xlvii. of Supplement.

   77 Oupnek’hat, vol. i. p. 60 et seq.

   78 That Spanish bishop who, in the last war, poisoned both himself and
      the French generals at his own table, is an instance of this; and
      also various incidents in that war. Examples are also to be found in
      Montaigne, Bk. ii. ch. 12.

   79 Observe, in passing, that what gives every positive system of
      religion its great strength, the point of contact through which it
      takes possession of the soul, is entirely its ethical side. Not,
      however, the ethical side directly as such, but as it appears firmly
      united and interwoven with the element of mythical dogma which is
      present in every system of religion, and as intelligible only by
      means of this. So much is this the case, that although the ethical
      significance of action cannot be explained in accordance with the
      principle of sufficient reason, yet since every mythus follows this
      principle, believers regard the ethical significance of action as
      quite inseparable, and indeed as absolutely identical, and regard
      every attack upon the mythus as an attack upon right and virtue.
      This goes so far that among monotheistic nations atheism or
      godlessness has become synonymous with the absence of all morality.
      To the priests such confusions of conceptions are welcome, and only
      in consequence of them could that horrible monstrosity fanaticism
      arise and govern, not merely single individuals who happen to be
      specially perverse and bad, but whole nations, and finally embody
      itself in the Western world as the Inquisition (to the honour of
      mankind be it said that this only happened once in their history),
      which, according to the latest and most authentic accounts, in
      Madrid alone (in the rest of Spain there were many more such
      ecclesiastical dens of murderers) in 300 years put 300,000 human
      beings to a painful death at the stake on theological grounds—a fact
      of which every zealot ought to be reminded whenever he begins to
      make himself heard.

   80 The Church would say that these are merely _opera operata_, which do
      not avail unless grace gives the faith which leads to the new birth.
      But of this farther on.

   81 The right of man over the life and powers of the brutes rests on the
      fact that, because with the growing clearness of consciousness
      suffering increases in like measure; the pain which the brute
      suffers through death or work is not so great as man would suffer by
      merely denying himself the flesh, or the powers of the brutes.
      Therefore man may carry the assertion of his existence to the extent
      of denying the existence of the brute, and the will to live as a
      whole endures less suffering in this way than if the opposite course
      were adopted. This at once determines the extent of the use man may
      make of the powers of the brutes without wrong; a limit, however,
      which is often transgressed, especially in the case of beasts of
      burden and dogs used in the chase; to which the activity of
      societies for the prevention of cruelty to animals is principally
      devoted. In my opinion, that right does not extend to vivisection,
      particularly of the higher animals. On the other hand, the insect
      does not suffer so much through its death as a man suffers from its
      sting. The Hindus do not understand this.

   82 As I wander sunk in thought, so strong a sympathy with myself comes
      over me that I must often weep aloud, which otherwise I am not wont
      to do.

   83 Cf. Ch. xlvii. of Supplement. It is scarcely necessary to remind the
      reader that the whole ethical doctrine given in outline in §§ 61-67
      has been explained fully and in detail in my prize-essay on the
      foundation of morals.

   84 This thought is expressed by a beautiful simile in the ancient
      philosophical Sanscrit writing, “Sankhya Karica:” “Yet the soul
      remains a while invested with body; as the potter’s wheel continues
      whirling after the pot has been fashioned, by force of the impulse
      previously given to it. When separation of the informed soul from
      its corporeal frame at length takes place and nature in respect of
      it ceases, then is absolute and final deliverance accomplished.”
      Colebrooke, “On the Philosophy of the Hindus: Miscellaneous Essays,”
      vol i. p. 271. Also in the “Sankhya Karica by Horace Wilson,” § 67,
      p. 184.

   85 See, for example, “Oupnek’hat, studio Anquetil du Perron,” vol. ii.,
      Nos. 138, 144, 145, 146. “Mythologie des Indous,” par Mad. de
      Polier, vol. ii., ch. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. “Asiatisches Magazin,” by
      Klaproth: in the first volume, “Ueber die Fo-Religion,” also
      “Baghnat Geeta” or “Gespräche zwischen Krishna und Arjoon;” in the
      second volume, “Moha-Mudgava.” Also, “Institutes of Hindu Law, or
      the Ordinances of Manu,” from the Sanscrit, by Sir William Jones
      (German by Hüttner, 1797), especially the sixth and twelfth
      chapters. Finally, many passages in the “Asiatic Researches.” (In
      the last forty years Indian literature has grown so much in Europe,
      that if I were now to complete this note to the first edition, it
      would occupy several pages.)

   86 At the procession of Jagganath in June 1840, eleven Hindus threw
      themselves under the wheels, and were instantly killed. (Letter of
      an East Indian proprietor in the _Times_ of 30th December 1840.)

   87 On δευτερος πλους cf. Stob. Floril., vol. ii. p. 374.

   88 Bruckeri Hist. Philos., tomi iv. pars. i. p. 10.

   89 Henry VI., Part ii. act 3, sc. 3.

   90 Cf. Ch. xlviii. of the Supplement.

   91 How truly this is the case may be seen from the fact that all the
      contradictions and inconceivabilities contained in the Christian
      dogmatics, consistently systematised by Augustine, which have led to
      the Pelagian insipidity which is opposed to them, vanish as soon as
      we abstract from the fundamental Jewish dogma, and recognize that
      man is not the work of another, but of his own will. Then all is at
      once clear and correct: then there is no need of freedom in the
      _operari_, for it lies in the _esse_; and there also lies the sin as
      original sin. The work of grace is, however, our own. To the
      rationalistic point of view of the day, on the contrary, many
      doctrines of the Augustinian dogmatics, founded on the New
      Testament, appear quite untenable, and indeed revolting; for
      example, predestination. Accordingly Christianity proper is
      rejected, and a return is made to crude Judaism. But the
      miscalculation or the original weakness of Christian dogmatics
      lies—where it is never sought—precisely in that which is withdrawn
      from all investigation as established and certain. Take this away
      and the whole of dogmatics is rational; for this dogma destroys
      theology as it does all other sciences. If any one studies the
      Augustinian theology in the books “_De Civitate Dei_” (especially in
      the Fourteenth Book), he experiences something analogous to the
      feeling of one who tries to make a body stand whose centre of
      gravity falls outside it; however he may turn it and place it, it
      always tumbles over again. So here, in spite of all the efforts and
      sophisms of Augustine, the guilt and misery of the world always
      falls back on God, who made everything and everything that is in
      everything, and also knew how all things would go. That Augustine
      himself was conscious of the difficulty, and puzzled by it, I have
      already shown in my prize-essay on the Freedom of the Will (ch. iv.
      pp. 66-68 of the first and second editions). In the same way, the
      contradiction between the goodness of God and the misery of the
      world, and also between the freedom of the will and the
      foreknowledge of God, is the inexhaustible theme of a controversy
      which lasted nearly a hundred years between the Cartesians,
      Malebranche, Leibnitz, Bayle, Clarke, Arnauld, and many others. The
      only dogma which was regarded as fixed by all parties was the
      existence and attributes of God, and they all unceasingly move in a
      circle, because they seek to bring these things into harmony,
      _i.e._, to solve a sum that will not come right, but always shows a
      remainder at some new place whenever we have concealed it elsewhere.
      But it does not occur to any one to seek for the source of the
      difficulty in the fundamental assumption, although it palpably
      obtrudes itself. Bayle alone shows that he saw this.

   92 This is also just the Prajna—Paramita of the Buddhists, the “beyond
      all knowledge,” _i.e._, the point at which subject and object are no
      more. (Cf. J. J. Schmidt, “Ueber das Mahajana und
      Pratschna-Paramita.”)


================================================================================
[The World as Will and Idea Vol.3 (의지와 표상으로서의 세계 3)]
================================================================================
The Project Gutenberg eBook of The World as Will and Idea (Vol. 3 of 3)
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The World as Will and Idea (Vol. 3 of 3)

Author: Arthur Schopenhauer

Translator: Viscount R. B. Haldane Haldane
        J. Kemp


        
Release date: September 26, 2012 [eBook #40868]
                Most recently updated: June 15, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/40868


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORLD AS WILL AND IDEA (VOL. 3 OF 3) ***





                        The World As Will And Idea

                                    By

                           Arthur Schopenhauer

                      Translated From The German By

                           R. B. Haldane, M.A.

                                   And

                              J. Kemp, M.A.

                                Vol. III.

  Containing Supplements to Part of the Second Book and to the Third and
                               Fourth Books

                              Sixth Edition

                                  London

                    Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co.

                                   1909





CONTENTS


Supplements To The Second Book.
   Chapter XXI. Retrospect and More General View.
   Chapter XXII. Objective View of the Intellect.
   Chapter XXIII.On The Objectification Of The Will In Unconscious Nature.
   Chapter XXIV. On Matter.
   Chapter XXV. Transcendent Considerations Concerning The Will As Thing
   In Itself.
   Chapter XXVI. On Teleology.
   Chapter XXVII. On Instinct And Mechanical Tendency.
   Chapter XXVIII. Characterisation Of The Will To Live.
Supplements to the Third Book.
   Chapter XXIX. On The Knowledge Of The Ideas.
   Chapter XXX. On The Pure Subject Of Knowledge.
   Chapter XXXI. On Genius.
   Chapter XXXII. On Madness.
   Chapter XXXIII. Isolated Remarks On Natural Beauty.
   Chapter XXXIV. On The Inner Nature Of Art.
   Chapter XXXV. On The Æsthetics Of Architecture.
   Chapter XXXVI. Isolated Remarks On The Æsthetics Of The Plastic And
   Pictorial Arts.
   Chapter XXXVII. On The Æsthetics Of Poetry.
   Chapter XXXVIII. On History.
   Chapter XXXIX. On The Metaphysics Of Music.
Supplements to the Fourth Book.
   Chapter XL. Preface.
   Chapter XLI. On Death And Its Relation To The Indestructibility Of Our
   True Nature.
   Chapter XLII. The Life Of The Species.
   Chapter XLIII. On Heredity.
   Chapter XLIV. The Metaphysics Of The Love Of The Sexes.
   Chapter XLV. On The Assertion Of The Will To Live.
   Chapter XLVI. On The Vanity And Suffering Of Life.
   Chapter XLVII. On Ethics.
   Chapter XLVIII. On The Doctrine Of The Denial Of The Will To Live.
   Chapter XLIX. The Way Of Salvation.
   Chapter L. Epiphilosophy.
Appendix.
   Abstract.
   Chapter I.
   Chapter II.
   Chapter III.
   Chapter IV.
   Chapter V.
   Chapter VI.
   Chapter VII.
   Chapter VIII.
Index.
Corrigenda And Addenda In Vol. I.
Footnotes






                               [Cover Art]

[Transcriber’s Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter
at Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]





SUPPLEMENTS TO THE SECOND BOOK.




Chapter XXI. Retrospect and More General View.


If the _intellect_ were not of a subordinate nature, as the two preceding
chapters show, then everything which takes place without it, _i.e._,
without intervention of the idea, such as reproduction, the development
and maintenance of the organism, the healing of wounds, the restoration or
vicarious supplementing of mutilated parts, the salutary crisis in
diseases, the works of the mechanical skill of animals, and the
performances of instinct would not be done so infinitely better and more
perfectly than what takes place with the assistance of intellect, all
conscious and intentional achievements of men, which compared with the
former are mere bungling. In general _nature_ signifies that which
operates, acts, performs without the assistance of the intellect. Now,
that this is really identical with what we find in ourselves as _will_ is
the general theme of this second book, and also of the essay, “_Ueber den
Willen in der Natur_.” The possibility of this fundamental knowledge
depends upon the fact that _in us_ the will is directly lighted by the
intellect, which here appears as self‐consciousness; otherwise we could
just as little arrive at a fuller knowledge of it _within us_ as without
us, and must for ever stop at inscrutable forces of nature. We have to
abstract from the assistance of the _intellect_ if we wish to comprehend
the nature of the will in itself, and thereby, as far as is possible,
penetrate to the inner being of nature.

On this account, it may be remarked in passing, my direct antipode among
philosophers is Anaxagoras; for he assumed arbitrarily as that which is
first and original, from which everything proceeds, a νους, an
intelligence, a subject of ideas, and he is regarded as the first who
promulgated such a view. According to him the world existed earlier in the
mere idea than in itself; while according to me it is the unconscious
_will_ which constitutes the reality of things, and its development must
have advanced very far before it finally attains, in the animal
consciousness, to the idea and intelligence; so that, according to me,
thought appears as the very last. However, according to the testimony of
Aristotle (_Metaph._, i. 4), Anaxagoras himself did not know how to begin
much with his νους, but merely set it up, and then left it standing like a
painted saint at the entrance, without making use of it in his development
of nature, except in cases of need, when he did not know how else to help
himself. All physico‐theology is a carrying out of the error opposed to
the truth expressed at the beginning of this chapter—the error that the
most perfect form of the origin of things is that which is brought about
by means of an _intellect_. Therefore it draws a bolt against all deep
exploration of nature.

From the time of Socrates down to our own time, we find that the chief
subject of the ceaseless disputations of the philosophers has been that
_ens rationis_, called _soul_. We see the most of them assert its
immortality, that is to say, its metaphysical nature; yet others,
supported by facts which incontrovertibly prove the entire dependence of
the intellect upon the bodily organism, unweariedly maintain the contrary.
That soul is by all and before everything taken as _absolutely simple_;
for precisely from this its metaphysical nature, its immateriality and
immortality were proved, although these by no means necessarily follow
from it. For although we can only conceive the destruction of a formed
body through breaking up of it into its parts, it does not follow from
this that the destruction of a simple existence, of which besides we have
no conception, may not be possible in some other way, perhaps by gradually
vanishing. I, on the contrary, start by doing away with the presupposed
simplicity of our subjectively conscious nature, or the _ego_, inasmuch as
I show that the manifestations from which it was deduced have two very
different sources, and that in any case the intellect is physically
conditioned, the function of a material organ, therefore dependent upon
it, and without it is just as impossible as the grasp without the hand;
that accordingly it belongs to the mere phenomenon, and thus shares the
fate of this,—that the _will_, on the contrary, is bound to no special
organ, but is everywhere present, is everywhere that which moves and
forms, and therefore is that which conditions the whole organism; that, in
fact, it constitutes the metaphysical substratum of the whole phenomenon,
consequently is not, like the intellect, a _Posterius_ of it, but its
_Prius_; and the phenomenon depends upon it, not it upon the phenomenon.
But the body is reduced indeed to a mere idea, for it is only the manner
in which the _will_ exhibits itself in the perception of the intellect or
brain. The _will_, again, which in all other systems, different as they
are in other respects, appears as one of the last results, is with me the
very first. The _intellect_, as mere function of the brain, is involved in
the destruction of the body, but the _will_ is by no means so. From this
heterogeneity of the two, together with the subordinate nature of the
intellect, it becomes conceivable that man, in the depths of his self‐
consciousness, feels himself to be eternal and indestructible, but yet can
have no memory, either _a parte ante_ or _a parte post_, beyond the
duration of his life. I do not wish to anticipate here the exposition of
the true indestructibility of our nature, which has its place in the
fourth book, but have only sought to indicate the place where it links
itself on.

But now that, in an expression which is certainly one‐sided, yet from our
standpoint true, the body is called a mere idea depends upon the fact than
an existence in space, as something extended, and in time, as something
that changes, and more closely determined in both through the causal‐
nexus, is only possible in the _idea_, for all those determinations rest
upon its forms, thus in a brain, in which accordingly such an existence
appears as something objective, _i.e._, foreign; therefore even our own
body can have this kind of existence only in a brain. For the knowledge
which I have of my body as extended, space‐occupying, and movable, is only
_indirect_: it is a picture in my brain which is brought about by means of
the senses and understanding. The body is given to me _directly_ only in
muscular action and in pain and pleasure, both of which primarily and
directly belong to the _will_. But the combination of these two different
kinds of knowledge of my own body afterwards affords the further insight
that all other things which also have the objective existence described,
which is primarily only in my brain, are not therefore entirely non‐
existent apart from it, but must also ultimately _in themselves_ be that
which makes itself known in self‐consciousness as _will_.




Chapter XXII.(1) Objective View of the Intellect.


There are two fundamentally different ways of regarding the intellect,
which depend upon the difference of the point of view, and, much as they
are opposed to each other in consequence of this, must yet be brought into
agreement. One is the _subjective_, which, starting from _within_ and
taking the _consciousness_ as the given, shows us by what mechanism the
world exhibits itself in it, and how, out of the materials which the
senses and the understanding provide, it constructs itself in it. We must
look upon Locke as the originator of this method of consideration; Kant
brought it to incomparably higher perfection; and our first book also,
together with its supplements, are devoted to it.

The method of considering the intellect which is opposed to this is the
_objective_, which starts from _without_, takes as its object not our own
consciousness, but the beings given in outward experience, conscious of
themselves and of the world, and now investigates the relation of their
intellect to their other qualities, how it has become possible, how it has
become necessary, and what it accomplishes for them. The standpoint of
this method of consideration is the empirical. It takes the world and the
animal existences present in it as absolutely given, in that it starts
from them. It is accordingly primarily zoological, anatomical,
physiological, and only becomes philosophical by connection with that
first method of consideration, and from the higher point of view thereby
attained. The only foundations of this which as yet have been given we owe
to zootomists and physiologists, for the most part French. Here Cabanis is
specially to be named, whose excellent work, “_Des rapports du physique au
moral_,” is initiatory of this method of consideration on the path of
physiology. The famous Bichat was his contemporary, but his theme was a
much more comprehensive one. Even Gall may be named here, although his
chief aim was missed. Ignorance and prejudice have raised against this
method of consideration the accusation of materialism, because, adhering
simply to experience, it does not know the immaterial substance, soul. The
most recent advances in the physiology of the nervous system, through Sir
Charles Bell, Magendie, Marshall Hall, and others, have also enriched and
corrected the material of this method of consideration. A philosophy
which, like the Kantian, entirely ignores this point of view for the
intellect is one‐sided, and consequently inadequate. It leaves an
impassable gulf between our philosophical and our physiological knowledge,
with which we can never find satisfaction.

Although what I have said in the two preceding chapters concerning the
life and the activity of the brain belongs to this method of
consideration, and in the same way all the discussions to be found under
the heading, “_Pflanzenphysiologie_,” in the essay, “_Ueber den Willen in
der Natur_,” and also a portion of those under the heading “_Vergleichende
Anatomie_,” are devoted to it, the following exposition of its results in
general will be by no means superfluous.

We become most vividly conscious of the glaring contrast between the two
methods of considering the intellect opposed to each other above if we
carry the matter to the extreme and realise that what the one, as
reflective thought and vivid perception, directly assumes and makes its
material is for the other nothing more than the physiological function of
an internal organ, the brain; nay, that we are justified in asserting that
the whole objective world, so boundless in space, so infinite in time, so
unsearchable in its perfection, is really only a certain movement or
affection of the pulpy matter in the skull. We then ask in astonishment:
what is this brain whose function produces such a phenomenon of all
phenomena? What is the matter which can be refined and potentiated to such
a pulp that the stimulation of a few of its particles becomes the
conditional supporter of the existence of an objective world? The fear of
such questions led to the hypothesis of the simple substance of an
immaterial soul, which merely dwelt in the brain. We say boldly: this pulp
also, like every vegetable or animal part, is an organic structure, like
all its poorer relations in the inferior accommodation of the heads of our
irrational brethren, down to the lowest, which scarcely apprehends at all;
yet that organic pulp is the last product of nature, which presupposes all
the rest. But in itself, and outside the idea, the brain also, like
everything else, is _will_. _For existing for another is being perceived;
being in itself is willing_: upon this it depends that on the purely
objective path we never attain to the inner nature of things; but if we
attempt to find their inner nature from without and empirically, this
inner always becomes an outer again in our hands,—the pith of the tree, as
well as its bark; the heart of the animal, as well as its hide; the white
and the yolk of an egg, as well as its shell. On the other hand, upon the
subjective path the inner is accessible to us at every moment; for we find
it as the _will_ primarily in ourselves, and must, by the clue of the
analogy with our own nature, be able to solve that of others, in that we
attain to the insight that a being in itself independent of being known,
_i.e._, of exhibiting itself in an intellect, is only conceivable as
willing.

If now, in the _objective_ comprehension of the intellect, we go back as
far as we possibly can, we shall find that the necessity or the need of
_knowledge in general_ arises from the multiplicity and the _separate_
existence of beings, thus from individuation. For suppose there only
existed _a single_ being, such a being would have no need of knowledge:
because nothing would exist which was different from it, and whose
existence it would therefore have to take up into itself indirectly
through knowledge, _i.e._, image and concept. It would _itself_ already be
all in all, and therefore there would remain nothing for it to know,
_i.e._, nothing foreign that could be apprehended as object. In the case
of a multiplicity of beings, on the other hand, every individual finds
itself in a condition of isolation from all the rest, and hence arises the
necessity of knowledge. The nervous system, by means of which the animal
individual primarily becomes conscious of itself, is bounded by a skin;
yet in the brain that has attained to intellect it passes beyond this
limit by means of its form of knowledge, causality, and thus there arises
for it perception as a consciousness of _other_ things, as an image of
beings in space and time, which change in accordance with causality. In
this sense it would be more correct to say, “Only the different is known
by the different,” than as Empedocles said, “Only the like is known by the
like,” which was a very indefinite and ambiguous proposition; although
points of view may certainly also be conceived from which it is true; as,
for instance, we may observe in passing that of Helvetius when he says so
beautifully and happily: “_Il n’y a que l’esprit qui sente l’esprit: c’est
une corde qui ne frémit qu’à l’unison_,” which corresponds with Xenophon’s
“σοφον ειναι δει τον επιγνωσομενον τον σοφον” (_sapientem esse opportet
eum, qui sapientem agniturus sit_), and is a great sorrow. But now, again,
from the other side we know that multiplicity of similars only becomes
possible through time and space; thus through the forms of our knowledge.
Space first arises in that the knowing subject sees externally; it is the
manner in which the subject comprehends something as different from
itself. But we also saw knowledge in general conditioned by multiplicity
and difference. Thus knowledge and multiplicity, or individuation, stand
and fall together, for they reciprocally condition each other. Hence it
must be inferred that, beyond the phenomenon in the true being of all
things, to which time and space, and consequently also multiplicity, must
be foreign, there can also be no knowledge. Buddhism defines this as
_Pratschna Paramita_, _i.e._, that which is beyond all knowledge (J. J.
Schmidt, “On the Maha‐Jana and Pratschna Paramita”). A “knowledge of
things in themselves,” in the strictest sense of the word, would
accordingly be already impossible from the fact that where the thing in
itself begins knowledge ceases, and all knowledge is essentially concerned
only with phenomena. For it springs from a limitation, by which it is made
necessary, in order to extend the limits.

For the objective consideration the brain is the efflorescence of the
organism; therefore only where the latter has attained its highest
perfection and complexity does the brain appear in its greatest
development. But in the preceding chapter we have recognised the organism
as the objectification of the will; therefore the brain also, as a part of
it, must belong to this objectification. Further, from the fact that the
organism is only the visibility of the will, thus in itself is the will, I
have deduced that every affection of the organism at once and directly
affects the will, _i.e._, is felt as agreeable or painful. Yet, with the
heightening of sensibility, in the higher development of the nervous
system, the possibility arises that in the nobler, _i.e._, the
_objective_, organs of sense (sight and hearing) the exquisitely delicate
affections proper to them are perceived without in themselves and directly
affecting the will, that is, without being either painful or agreeable,
and that therefore they appear in consciousness as indifferent, merely
perceived, sensations. But in the brain this heightening of sensibility
reaches such a high degree that upon received impressions of sense a
reaction even takes place, which does not proceed directly from the will,
but is primarily a spontaneity of the function of understanding, which
makes the transition from the directly perceived sensation of the senses
to its _cause_; and since the brain then at once produces the form of
space, there thus arises the perception of an _external object_. We may
therefore regard the point at which the understanding makes the transition
from the mere sensation upon the retina, which is still a mere affection
of the body and therefore of the will, to the _cause_ of that sensation,
which it projects by means of its form of space, as something external and
different from its own body, as the boundary between the world as will and
the world as idea, or as the birthplace of the latter. In man, however,
the spontaneity of the activity of the brain, which in the last instance
is certainly conferred by the will, goes further than mere _perception_
and immediate comprehension of causal relations. It extends to the
construction of abstract conceptions out of these perceptions, and to
operating with these conceptions, _i.e._, to _thinking_, as that in which
his _reason_ consists. _Thoughts_ are therefore furthest removed from the
affections of the body, which, since the body is the objectification of
the will, may, through increased intensity, pass at once into pain, even
in the organs of sense. Accordingly idea and thought may also be regarded
as the efflorescence of the will, because they spring from the highest
perfection and development of the organism; but the organism, in itself
and apart from the idea, is the _will_. Of course, in my explanation, the
existence of the body presupposes the world of idea; inasmuch as it also,
as body or real object, is only in this world; and, on the other hand, the
idea itself just as much presupposes the body, for it arises only through
the function of an organ of the body. That which lies at the foundation of
the whole phenomenon, that in it which alone has being in itself and is
original, is exclusively the _will_; for it is the will which through this
very process assumes the form of the _idea_, _i.e._, enters the secondary
existence of an objective world, or the sphere of the knowable.
Philosophers before Kant, with few exceptions, approached the explanation
of the origin of our knowledge from the wrong side. They set out from a
so‐called soul, an existence whose inner nature and peculiar function
consisted in thinking, and indeed quite specially in abstract thinking,
with mere conceptions, which belonged to it the more completely the
further they lay from all perception. (I beg to refer here to the note at
the end of § 6 of my prize essay on the foundation of morals.) This soul
has in some inconceivable manner entered the body, and there it is only
disturbed in its pure thinking, first by impressions of the senses and
perceptions, still more by the desires which these excite, and finally by
the emotions, nay, passions, to which these desires develop; while the
characteristic and original element of this soul is mere abstract
thinking, and given up to this it has only universals, inborn conceptions,
and _æternæ veritates_ for its objects, and leaves everything perceptible
lying far below it. Hence, also, arises the contempt with which even now
“sensibility” and the "sensuous" are referred to by professors of
philosophy, nay, are even made the chief source of immorality, while it is
just the senses which are the genuine and innocent source of all our
knowledge, from which all thinking must first borrow its material, for in
combination with the _a priori_ functions of the intellect they produce
the _perception_. One might really suppose that in speaking of sensibility
these gentlemen always think only of the pretended sixth sense of the
French. Thus, as we have said, in the process of knowledge, its ultimate
product was made that which is first and original in it, and accordingly
the matter was taken hold of by the wrong end. According to my exposition,
the intellect springs from the organism, and thereby from the will, and
hence could not be without the latter. Thus, without the will it would
also find no material to occupy it; for everything that is knowable is
just the objectification of the will.

But not only the perception of the external world, or the consciousness of
other things, is conditioned by the brain and its functions, but also
self‐consciousness. The will in itself is without consciousness, and
remains so in the greater part of its phenomena. The secondary world of
idea must be added, in order that it may become conscious of itself, just
as light only becomes visible through the bodies which reflect it, and
without them loses itself in darkness without producing any effect.
Because the will, with the aim of comprehending its relations to the
external world, produces a brain in the animal individual, the
consciousness of its own self arises in it, by means of the subject of
knowledge, which comprehends things as existing and the _ego_ as willing.
The sensibility, which reaches its highest degree in the brain, but is yet
dispersed through its different parts, must first of all collect all the
rays of its activity, concentrate them, as it were, in a focus, which,
however, does not lie without, as in the case of the concave mirror, but
within, as in the convex mirror. With this point now it first describes
the line of time, upon which, therefore, all that it presents to itself as
idea must exhibit itself, and which is the first and most essential form
of all knowledge, or the form of inner sense. This focus of the whole
activity of the brain is what Kant called the synthetic unity of
apperception (_cf._ vol. ii. p. 475). Only by means of this does the will
become conscious of itself, because this focus of the activity of the
brain, or that which knows, apprehends itself as identical with its own
basis, from which it springs, that which wills; and thus the _ego_ arises.
Yet this focus of the brain activity remains primarily a mere subject of
knowledge, and as such capable of being the cold and impartial spectator,
the mere guide and counsellor of the will, and also of comprehending the
external world in a purely objective manner, without reference to the will
and its weal or woe. But whenever it turns within, it recognises the will
as the basis of its own phenomenon, and therefore combines with it in the
consciousness of an _ego_. That focus of the activity of the brain (or the
subject of knowledge) is indeed, as an indivisible point, simple, but yet
is not on this account a substance (soul), but a mere condition or state.
That of which it is itself a condition or state can only be known by it
indirectly, as it were through reflection. But the ceasing of this state
must not be regarded as the annihilation of that of which it is a state.
This _knowing_ and conscious _ego_ is related to the will, which is the
basis of its phenomenal appearance, as the picture in the focus of a
concave mirror is related to the mirror itself, and has, like that
picture, only a conditioned, nay, really a merely apparent, reality. Far
from being the absolutely first (as, for example, Fichte teaches), it is
at bottom tertiary, for it presupposes the organism, and the organism
presupposes the will. I admit that all that is said here is really only an
image and a figure, and in part also hypothetical; but we stand at a point
to which thought can scarcely reach, not to speak of proof. I therefore
request the reader to compare with this what I have adduced at length on
this subject in chapter 20.

Now, although the true being of everything that exists consists in its
will, and knowledge together with consciousness are only added at the
higher grades of the phenomenon as something secondary, yet we find that
the difference which the presence and the different degree of
consciousness places between one being and another is exceedingly great
and of important results. The subjective existence of the plant we must
think of as a weak analogue, a mere shadow of comfort and discomfort; and
even in this exceedingly weak degree the plant knows only of itself, not
of anything outside of it. On the other hand, even the lowest animal
standing next to it is forced by increased and more definitely specified
wants to extend the sphere of its existence beyond the limits of its own
body. This takes place through knowledge. It has a dim apprehension of its
immediate surroundings, out of which the motives for its action with a
view to its own maintenance arise. Thus accordingly the _medium of
motives_ appears, and this is—the world existing objectively in time and
space, _the world as idea_, however weak, obscure, and dimly dawning this
first and lowest example of it may be. But it imprints itself ever more
and more distinctly, ever wider and deeper, in proportion as in the
ascending scale of animal organisations the brain is ever more perfectly
produced. This progress in the development of the brain, thus of the
intellect, and of the clearness of the idea, at each of these ever higher
grades is, however, brought about by the constantly increasing and more
complicated _wants_ of this phenomenon of the will. This must always first
afford the occasion for it, for without necessity nature (_i.e._, the will
which objectifies itself in it) produces nothing, least of all the hardest
of its productions—a more perfect brain: in consequence of its _lex
parsimoniæ_: _natura nihil agit frustra et nihil facit supervacaneum_. It
has provided every animal with the organs which are necessary for its
sustenance and the weapons necessary for its conflict, as I have shown at
length in my work, “_Ueber den Willen in der Natur_,” under the heading,
“_Vergleichende Anatomie_.” According to this measure, therefore, it
imparts to each the most important of those organs concerned with what is
without, the brain, with its function the intellect. The more complicated,
through higher development, its organisation became, the more multifarious
and specially determined did its wants also become, and consequently the
more difficult and the more dependent upon opportunity was the provision
of what would satisfy them. Thus there was needed here a wider range of
sight, a more accurate comprehension, a more correct distinction of things
in the external world, in all their circumstances and relations.
Accordingly we see the faculty of forming ideas, and its organs, brain,
nerves, and special senses, appear ever more perfect the higher we advance
in the scale of animals; and in proportion as the cerebral system
develops, the external world appears ever more distinct, many‐sided, and
complete in consciousness. The comprehension of it now demands ever more
attention, and ultimately in such a degree that sometimes its relation to
the will must momentarily be lost sight of in order that it may take place
more purely and correctly. Quite definitely this first appears in the case
of man. With him alone does a _pure separation of knowing and willing_
take place. This is an important point, which I merely touch on here in
order to indicate its position, and be able to take it up again later.
But, like all the rest, nature takes this last step also in extending and
perfecting the brain, and thereby in increasing the powers of knowledge,
only in consequence of the increased needs, thus in the service of the
_will_. What this aims at and attains in man is indeed essentially the
same, and not more than what is also its goal in the brutes—nourishment
and propagation. But the requisites for the attainment of this goal became
so much increased in number, and of so much higher quality and greater
definiteness through the organisation of man, that a very much more
considerable heightening of the intellect than the previous steps demanded
was necessary, or at least was the easiest means of reaching the end. But
since now the intellect, in accordance with its nature, is a tool of the
most various utility, and is equally applicable to the most different
kinds of ends, nature, true to her spirit of parsimony, could now meet
through it alone all the demands of the wants which had now become so
manifold. Therefore she sent forth man without clothing, without natural
means of protection or weapons of attack, nay, with relatively little
muscular power, combined with great frailty and little endurance of
adverse influences and wants, in reliance upon that one great tool, in
addition to which she had only to retain the hands from the next grade
below him, the ape. But through the predominating intellect which here
appears not only is the comprehension of motives, their multiplicity, and
in general the horizon of the aims infinitely increased, but also the
distinctness with which the will is conscious _of itself_ is enhanced in
the highest degree in consequence of the clearness of the whole
consciousness which has been brought about, which is supported by the
capacity for abstract knowledge, and now attains to complete
reflectiveness. But thereby, and also through the vehemence of the will,
which is necessarily presupposed as the supporter of such a heightened
intellect, an intensifying of all the _emotions_ appears, and indeed the
possibility of the _passions_, which, properly speaking, are unknown to
the brute. For the vehemence of the will keeps pace with the advance of
intelligence, because this advance really always springs from the
increased needs and pressing demands of the will: besides this, however,
the two reciprocally support each other. Thus the vehemence of the
character corresponds to the greater energy of the beating of the heart
and the circulation of the blood, which physically heighten the activity
of the brain. On the other hand, the clearness of the intelligence
intensifies the emotions, which are called forth by the outward
circumstances, by means of the more vivid apprehension of the latter.
Hence, for example, young calves quietly allow themselves to be packed in
a cart and carried off; but young lions, if they are only separated from
their mother, remain permanently restless, and roar unceasingly from
morning to night; children in such a position would cry and vex themselves
almost to death. The vivaciousness and impetuosity of the ape is in exact
proportion to its greatly developed intellect. It depends just on this
reciprocal relationship that man is, in general, capable of far greater
sorrows than the brute, but also of greater joy in satisfied and pleasing
emotions. In the same way his higher intelligence makes him more sensible
to _ennui_ than the brute; but it also becomes, if he is individually very
complete, an inexhaustible source of entertainment. Thus, as a whole, the
manifestation of the will in man is related to that in the brute of the
higher species, as a note that has been struck to its fifth pitched two or
three octaves lower. But between the different kinds of brutes also the
differences of intellect, and thereby of consciousness, are great and
endlessly graduated. The mere analogy of consciousness which we must yet
attribute to plants will be related to the still far deader subjective
nature of an unorganised body, very much as the consciousness of the
lowest species of animals is related to the _quasi_ consciousness of
plants. We may present to our imagination the innumerable gradations in
the degree of consciousness under the figure of the different velocity of
points which are unequally distant from the centre of a revolving sphere.
But the most correct, and indeed, as our third book teaches, the natural
figure of that gradation is afforded us by the scale in its whole compass
from the lowest audible note to the highest. It is, however, the grade of
consciousness which determines the grade of existence of a being. For
every immediate existence is subjective: the objective existence is in the
consciousness of another, thus only for this other, consequently quite
indirect. Through the grade of consciousness beings are as different as
through the will they are alike, for the will is what is common to them
all.

But what we have now considered between the plant and the animal, and then
between the different species of animals, occurs also between man and man.
Here also that which is secondary, the intellect, by means of the
clearness of consciousness and distinctness of knowledge which depends
upon it, constitutes a fundamental and immeasurably great difference in
the whole manner of the existence, and thereby in the grade of it. The
higher the consciousness has risen, the more distinct and connected are
the thoughts, the clearer the perceptions the more intense the sensations.
Through it everything gains more depth: emotion, sadness, joy, and sorrow.
Commonplace blockheads are not even capable of real joy: they live on in
dull insensibility. While to one man his consciousness only presents his
own existence, together with the motives which must be apprehended for the
purpose of sustaining and enlivening it, in a bare comprehension of the
external world, it is to another a _camera obscura_ in which the macrocosm
exhibits itself:


    “He feels that he holds a little world
    Brooding in his brain,
    That it begins to work and to live,
    That he fain would give it forth.”


The difference of the whole manner of existence which the extremes of the
gradation of intellectual capacity establish between man and man is so
great that that between a king and a day labourer seems small in
comparison. And here also, as in the case of the species of animals, a
connection between the vehemence of the will and the height of the
intellect can be shown. Genius is conditioned by a passionate temperament,
and a phlegmatic genius is inconceivable: it seems as if an exceptionally
vehement, thus a violently longing, will must be present if nature is to
give an abnormally heightened intellect, as corresponding to it; while the
merely physical account of this points to the greater energy with which
the arteries of the head move the brain and increase its turgescence.
Certainly, however, the quantity, quality, and form of the brain itself is
the other and incomparably more rare condition of genius. On the other
hand, phlegmatic persons are as a rule of very moderate mental power; and
thus the northern, cold‐blooded, and phlegmatic nations are in general
noticeably inferior in mind to the southern vivacious and passionate
peoples; although, as Bacon(2) has most pertinently remarked, if once a
man of a northern nation is highly gifted by nature, he can then reach a
grade which no southern ever attains to. It is accordingly as perverse as
it is common to take the great minds of different nations as the standard
for comparing their mental powers: for that is just attempting to prove
the rule by the exceptions. It is rather the great majority of each nation
that one has to consider: for one swallow does not make a summer. We have
further to remark here that that very passionateness which is a condition
of genius, bound up with its vivid apprehension of things, produces in
practical life, where the will comes into play, and especially in the case
of sudden occurrences, so great an excitement of the emotions that it
disturbs and confuses the intellect; while the phlegmatic man in such a
case still retains the full use of his mental faculties, though they are
much more limited, and then accomplishes much more with them than the
greatest genius can achieve. Accordingly a passionate temperament is
favourable to the original quality of the intellect, but a phlegmatic
temperament to its use. Therefore genius proper is only for theoretical
achievements, for which it can choose and await its time, which will just
be the time at which the will is entirely at rest, and no waves disturb
the clear mirror of the comprehension of the world. On the other hand,
genius is ill adapted and unserviceable for practical life, and is
therefore for the most part unfortunate. Goethe’s “Tasso” is written from
this point of view. As now genius proper depends upon the _absolute_
strength of the intellect, which must be purchased by a correspondingly
excessive vehemence of disposition, so, on the other hand, the great pre‐
eminence in practical life that makes generals and statesmen depends upon
the _relative_ strength of the intellect, thus upon the highest degree of
it that can be attained without too great excitability of the emotions,
and too great vehemence of character, and that therefore can hold its own
even in the storm. Great firmness of will and constancy of mind, together
with a capable and fine understanding, are here sufficient; and whatever
goes beyond this acts detrimentally, for too great a development of the
intelligence directly impedes firmness of character and resolution of
will. Hence this kind of eminence is not so abnormal, and is a hundred
times less rare than the former kind; and accordingly we see great
generals and great ministers appear in every age, whenever the merely
external conditions are favourable to their efficiency. Great poets and
philosophers, on the other hand, leave centuries waiting for them; and yet
humanity may be contented even with this rare appearance of them, for
their works remain, and do not exist only for the present, like the
achievements of those other men. It is also quite in keeping with the law
of the parsimony of nature referred to above that it bestows great
eminence of mind in general upon very few, and genius only as the rarest
of all exceptions, while it equips the great mass of the human race with
no more mental power than is required for the maintenance of the
individual and the species. For the great, and through their very
satisfaction, constantly increasing needs of the human race make it
necessary that the great majority of men should pass their lives in
occupations of a coarsely physical and entirely mechanical description.
And what would be the use to them of an active mind, a glowing
imagination, a subtle understanding, and a profoundly penetrating
intellect? These would only make them useless and unhappy. Therefore
nature has thus gone about the most costly of all her productions in the
least extravagant manner. In order not to judge unfairly one ought also to
settle definitely one’s expectations of the mental achievements of men
generally from this point of view, and to regard, for example, even
learned men, since as a rule they have become so only by the force of
outward circumstances, primarily as men whom nature really intended to be
tillers of the soil; indeed even professors of philosophy ought to be
estimated according to this standard, and then their achievements will be
found to come up to all fair expectations. It is worth noticing that in
the south, where the necessities of life press less severely upon the
human race, and more leisure is allowed, the mental faculties even of the
multitude also become more active and finer. It is physiologically
noteworthy that the preponderance of the mass of the brain over that of
the spinal cord and the nerves, which, according to Sömmerring’s acute
discovery, affords the true and closest measure of the degree of
intelligence both of species of brutes and of individual men, at the same
time increases the direct power of moving, the agility of the limbs;
because, through the great inequality of the relation, the dependence of
all motor nerves upon the brain becomes more decided; and besides this the
cerebellum, which is the primary controller of movements, shares the
qualitative perfection of the cerebrum; thus through both all voluntary
movements gain greater facility, rapidity, and manageableness, and by the
concentration of the starting‐point of all activity that arises which
Lichtenberg praises in Garrick: “that he appeared to be present in all the
muscles of his body.” Hence clumsiness in the movement of the body
indicates clumsiness in the movement of the thoughts, and will be regarded
as a sign of stupidity both in individuals and nations, as much as
sleepiness of the countenance and vacancy of the glance. Another symptom
of the physiological state of the case referred to is the fact that many
persons are obliged at once to stand still whenever their conversation
with any one who is walking with them begins to gain some connection;
because their brain, as soon as it has to link together a few thoughts,
has no longer as much power over as is required to keep the limbs in
motion by means of the motory nerves, so closely is everything measured
with them.

It results from this whole objective consideration of the intellect and
its origin, that it is designed for the comprehension of those ends upon
the attainment of which depends the individual life and its propagation,
but by no means for deciphering the inner nature of things and of the
world, which exists independently of the knower. What to the plant is the
susceptibility to light, in consequence of which it guides its growth in
the direction of it, that is, in kind, the knowledge of the brute, nay,
even of man, although in degree it is increased in proportion as the needs
of each of these beings demand. With them all apprehension remains a mere
consciousness of their relations to other things, and is by no means
intended to present again in the consciousness of the knower the peculiar,
absolutely real nature of these things. Rather, as springing from the
will, the intellect is also only designed for its service, thus for the
apprehension of motives; it is adapted for this, and is therefore of a
thoroughly practical tendency. This also holds good if we conceive the
significance of life as ethical; for in this regard too we find man
knowing only for the benefit of his conduct. Such a faculty of knowledge,
existing exclusively for practical ends, will from its nature always
comprehend only the relations of things to each other, but not the inner
nature of them, as it is in itself. But to regard the complex of these
relations as the absolute nature of the world as it is in itself, and the
manner in which it necessarily exhibits itself in accordance with the laws
predisposed in the brain as the eternal laws of the existence of all
things, and then to construct ontology, cosmology, and theology in
accordance with this view—this was really the old fundamental error, of
which Kant’s teaching has made an end. Here, then, our objective, and
therefore for the most part physiological consideration of the intellect
meets _his_ transcendental consideration of it; nay, appears in a certain
sense even as an _a priori_ insight into it; for, from a point of view
which we have taken up outside of it, our objective view enables us to
know in its origin, and therefore as _necessary_, what that transcendental
consideration, starting from facts of consciousness, presents only as a
matter of fact. For it follows from our objective consideration of the
intellect, that the world as idea, as it exists stretched out in space and
time, and moves on regularly according to the strict law of causality, is
primarily only a physiological phenomenon, a function of the brain, which
brings it about, certainly upon the occasion of certain external stimuli,
but yet in conformity with its own laws. Accordingly it is beforehand a
matter of course, that what goes on in this function itself, and therefore
through it and for it, must by no means be regarded as the nature of
_things in themselves_, which exist independently of it and are entirely
different from it, but primarily exhibits only the mode or manner of this
function itself, which can always receive only a very subordinate
modification through that which exists completely independently of it, and
sets it in motion as a stimulus. As, then, Locke claimed for the organs of
sense all that comes into our apprehension by means of the sensation, in
order to deny that it belongs to things in themselves, so Kant, with the
same intention, and pursuing the same path further, has proved all that
makes _perception_ proper possible, thus space, time, and causality, to be
functions of the brain; although he has refrained from using this
physiological expression, to which, however, our present method of
investigation, coming from the opposite side, the side of the real,
necessarily leads us. Kant arrived upon his analytical path at the result
that what we know are mere _phenomena_. What this mysterious expression
really means becomes clear from our objective and genetic investigation of
the intellect. The phenomena are the motives for the aims of individual
will as they exhibit themselves in the intellect which the will has
produced for this purpose (which itself appears as a phenomenon
objectively, as the brain), and which, when comprehended, as far as one
can follow their concatenation, afford us in their connection the world
which extends itself objectively in time and space, and which I call the
world as idea. Moreover, from our point of view, the objectionable element
vanishes which in the Kantian doctrine arises from the fact that, because
the intellect knows merely phenomena instead of things as they are in
themselves, nay, in consequence of this is led astray into paralogisms and
unfounded hypostases by means of “sophistications, not of men but of the
reason itself, from which even the wisest does not free himself, and if,
perhaps indeed after much trouble, he avoids error, can yet never get quit
of the illusion which unceasingly torments and mocks him”—because of all
this, I say, the appearance arises that our intellect is intentionally
designed to lead us into errors. For the objective view of the intellect
given here, which contains a genesis of it, makes it conceivable that,
being exclusively intended for practical ends, it is merely the _medium of
motives_, and therefore fulfils its end by an accurate presentation of
these, and that if we undertake to discover the nature of things in
themselves, from the manifold phenomena which here exhibit themselves
objectively to us, and their laws, we do this at our own peril and on our
own responsibility. We have recognised that the original inner force of
nature, without knowledge and working in the dark, which, if it has worked
its way up to self‐consciousness, reveals itself to this as _will_,
attains to this grade only by the production of an animal brain and of
knowledge, as its function, whereupon the phenomenon of the world of
perception arises in this brain. But to explain this mere brain
phenomenon, with the conformity to law which is invariably connected with
its functions, as the objective inner nature of the world and the things
in it, which is independent of the brain, existing before and after it, is
clearly a spring which nothing warrants us in making. From this _mundus
phœnomenon_, however, from this perception which arises under such a
variety of conditions, all our conceptions are drawn. They have all their
content from it, or even only in relation to it. Therefore, as Kant says,
they are only for immanent, not for transcendental, use; that is to say,
these conceptions of ours, this first material of thought, and
consequently still more the judgments which result from their combination,
are unfitted for the task of thinking the nature of things in themselves,
and the true connection of the world and existence; indeed, to undertake
this is analogous to expressing the stereometrical content of a body in
square inches. For our intellect, originally only intended to present to
an individual will its paltry aims, comprehends accordingly mere
_relations_ of things, and does not penetrate to their inner being, to
their real nature. It is therefore a merely superficial force, clings to
the surface of things, and apprehends mere _species transitivas_, not the
true being of things. From this it arises that we cannot understand and
comprehend any single thing, even the simplest and smallest, through and
through, but something remains entirely inexplicable to us in each of
them. Just because the intellect is a product of nature, and is therefore
only intended for its ends, the Christian mystics have very aptly called
it “the light of nature,” and driven it back within its limits; for nature
is the object to which alone it is the subject. The thought from which the
Critique of Pure Reason has sprung really lies already at the foundation
of this expression. That we cannot comprehend the world on the direct
path, _i.e._, through the uncritical, direct application of the intellect
and its data, but when we reflect upon it become ever more deeply involved
in insoluble mysteries, points to the fact that the intellect, thus
knowledge itself, is secondary, a mere product, brought about by the
development of the inner being of the world, which consequently till then
preceded it, and it at last appeared as a breaking through to the light
out of the obscure depths of the unconscious striving the nature of which
exhibits itself as _will_ to the self‐consciousness which now at once
arises. That which preceded knowledge as its condition, whereby it first
became possible, thus its own basis, cannot be directly comprehended by
it; as the eye cannot see itself. It is rather the relations of one
existence to another, exhibiting themselves upon the surface of things,
which alone are its affair, and are so only by means of the apparatus of
the intellect, its forms, space, time, and causality. Just because the
world has made itself without the assistance of knowledge, its whole being
does not enter into knowledge, but knowledge presupposes the existence of
the world; on which account the origin of the world does not lie within
its sphere. It is accordingly limited to the relations between the things
which lie before it, and is thus sufficient for the individual will, for
the service of which alone it appeared. For the intellect is, as has been
shown, conditioned by nature, lies in it, belongs to it, and cannot
therefore place itself over against it as something quite foreign to it,
in order thus to take up into itself its whole nature, absolutely,
objectively, and thoroughly. It can, if fortune favours it, understand all
that is in nature, but not nature itself, at least not directly.

However discouraging to metaphysics this essential limitation of the
intellect may be, which arises from its nature and origin, it has yet
another side which is very consoling. It deprives the direct utterances of
nature of their unconditional validity, in the assertion of which
_naturalism_ proper consists. If, therefore, nature presents to us every
living thing as appearing out of nothing, and, after an ephemeral
existence, returning again for ever to nothing, and if it seems to take
pleasure in the unceasing production of new beings, in order that it may
be able unceasingly to destroy, and, on the other hand, is unable to bring
anything permanent to light; if accordingly we are forced to recognise
_matter_ as that which alone is permanent, which never came into being and
never passes away, but brings forth all things from its womb, whence its
name appears to be derived from _mater rerum_, and along with it, as the
father of things, _form_, which, just as fleeting as matter is permanent,
changes really every moment, and can only maintain itself so long as it
clings as a parasite to matter (now to one part of it, now to another),
but when once it entirely loses hold, disappears, as is shown by the
palæotheria and the ichthyosaurians, we must indeed recognise this as the
direct and genuine utterance of nature, but on account of the origin of
the intellect explained above, and the nature of it which results from
this origin, we cannot ascribe to this utterance an _unconditional truth_,
but rather only an entirely _conditional_ truth, which Kant has
appropriately indicated as such by calling it the _phenomenon_ in
opposition to the _thing in itself_.

If, in spite of this essential limitation of the intellect, it is
possible, by a circuitous route, to arrive at a certain understanding of
the world and the nature of things, by means of reflection widely pursued,
and the skilful combination of objective knowledge directed towards
without, with the data of self‐consciousness, this will yet be only a very
limited, entirely indirect, and relative understanding, a parabolical
translation into the forms of knowledge, thus a _quadam prodire tenus_,
which must always leave many problems still unsolved. On the other hand,
the fundamental error of the old _dogmatism_ in all its forms, which was
destroyed by Kant, was this, that it started absolutely from _knowledge_,
i.e., _the world as idea_, in order to deduce and construct from its laws
being in general, whereby it accepted that world of idea, together with
its laws, as absolutely existing and absolutely real; while its whole
existence is throughout relative, and a mere result or phenomenon of the
true being which lies at its foundation,—or, in other words, that it
constructed an ontology when it had only materials for a dianoiology. Kant
discovered the subjectively conditioned and therefore entirely immanent
nature of knowledge, _i.e._, its unsuitableness for transcendental use,
from the constitution of knowledge itself; and therefore he very
appropriately called his doctrine the _Critique of Reason_. He
accomplished this partly by showing the important and thoroughly _a
priori_ part of all knowledge, which, as throughout subjective, spoils all
objectivity, and partly by professedly proving that if they were followed
out to the end the principles of knowledge, taken as purely objective, led
to contradictions. He had, however, hastily assumed that, apart from
_objective_ knowledge, _i.e._, apart from the world as _idea_, there is
nothing given us except conscience, out of which he constructed the little
that still remained of metaphysics, his moral theology, to which, however,
he attributed absolutely only a practical validity, and no theoretical
validity at all. He had overlooked that although certainly objective
knowledge, or the world as idea, affords nothing but phenomena, together
with their phenomenal connection and regressus, yet our own nature
necessarily also belongs to the world of things in themselves, for it must
have its root in it. But here, even if the root itself cannot be brought
to light, it must be possible to gather some data for the explanation of
the connection of the world of phenomena with the inner nature of things.
Thus here lies the path upon which I have gone beyond Kant and the limits
which he drew, yet always restricting myself to the ground of reflection,
and consequently of honesty, and therefore without the vain pretension of
intellectual intuition or absolute thought which characterises the period
of pseudo‐philosophy between Kant and me. In his proof of the
insufficiency of rational knowledge to fathom the nature of the world Kant
started from knowledge as a _fact_, which our consciousness affords us,
thus in this sense he proceeded _a posteriori_. But in this chapter, and
also in my work, “_Ueber den Willen in der Natur_,” I have sought to show
what knowledge is in its _nature and origin_, something secondary,
designed for individual ends; whence it follows that it _must be_
insufficient to fathom the nature of the world. Thus so far I have reached
the same goal _a priori_. But one never knows anything wholly and
completely until one has gone right round it for that purpose, and has got
back to it from the opposite side from which one started. Therefore also,
in the case of the important fundamental knowledge here considered, one
must not merely go from the intellect to the knowledge of the world, as
Kant has done, but also from the world, taken as given, to the intellect,
as I have undertaken here. Then this physiological consideration, in the
wider sense, becomes the supplement of that ideological, as the French
say, or, more accurately, transcendental consideration.

In the above, in order not to break the thread of the exposition, I have
postponed the explanation of one point which I touched upon. It was this,
that in proportion as, in the ascending series of animals, the intellect
appears ever more developed and complete, _knowledge_ always separates
itself more distinctly from _will_, and thereby becomes purer. What is
essential upon this point will be found in my work, “_Ueber den Willen in
der Natur_,” under the heading, “_Pflanzenphysiologie_” (p. 68‐72 of the
second, and 74‐77 of the third edition), to which I refer, in order to
avoid repetition, and merely add here a few remarks. Since the plant
possesses neither irritability nor sensibility, but the will objectifies
itself in it only as plastic or reproductive power, it has neither muscle
nor nerve. In the lowest grades of the animal kingdom, in zoophites,
especially in polyps, we cannot as yet distinctly recognise the separation
of these two constituent parts, but still we assume their existence,
though in a state of fusion; because we perceive movements which follow,
not, as in the case of plants, upon mere stimuli, but upon motives,
_i.e._, in consequence of a certain apprehension. Now in proportion as, in
the ascending series of animals, the nervous and muscular systems
_separate_ ever more distinctly from each other, till in the vertebrate
animals, and most completely in man, the former divides into an organic
and a cerebral nervous system, and of these the latter again develops into
the excessively complicated apparatus of the cerebrum and cerebellum,
spinal marrow, cerebral and spinal nerves, sensory and motor nerve
fascicles, of which only the cerebrum, together with the sensory nerves
depending upon it, and the posterior spinal nerve fascicles are intended
for the _apprehension of the motive_ from the external world, while all
the other parts are intended for the _transmission_ of the motive to the
muscles in which the will manifests itself directly; in the same
proportion does the _motive_ separate ever more distinctly in
_consciousness_ from the _act of will_ which it calls forth, thus the
_idea_ from the _will_; and thereby the _objectivity_ of consciousness
constantly increases, for the ideas exhibit themselves ever more
distinctly and purely in it. These two _separations_ are, however, really
only one and the same, which we have here considered from two sides, the
objective and the subjective, or first in the consciousness of other
things and then in self‐consciousness. Upon the degree of this separation
ultimately depends the difference and the gradation of intellectual
capacity, both between different kinds of animals and between individual
human beings; thus it gives the standard for the intellectual completeness
of these beings. For the clearness of the consciousness of the external
world, the objectivity of the perception, depends upon it. In the passage
referred to above I have shown that the brute only perceives things so far
as they are _motives_ for its will, and that even the most intelligent of
the brutes scarcely overstep these limits, because their intellect is too
closely joined to the will from which it has sprung. On the other hand,
even the stupidest man comprehends things in some degree _objectively_;
for he recognises not merely what they are with reference to him, but also
something of what they are with reference to themselves and to other
things. Yet in the case of very few does this reach such a degree that
they are in a position to examine and judge of anything purely
_objectively_; but “that must I do, that must I say, that must I believe,”
is the goal to which on every occasion their thought hastens in a direct
line, and at which their understanding at once finds welcome rest. For
thinking is as unendurable to the weak head as the lifting of a burden to
the weak arm; therefore both hasten to set it down. The objectivity of
knowledge, and primarily of perceptive knowledge, has innumerable grades,
which depend upon the energy of the intellect and its separation from the
will, and the highest of which is _genius_, in which the comprehension of
the external world becomes so pure and objective that to it even more
reveals itself directly in the individual thing than the individual thing
itself, namely, the nature of its whole _species_, _i.e._, its Platonic
Idea; which is brought about by the fact that in this case the will
entirely vanishes from consciousness. Here is the point at which the
present investigation, starting from physiological grounds, connects
itself with the subject of our third book, the metaphysics of the
beautiful, where æsthetic comprehension proper, which, in a high degree,
is peculiar to genius alone, is fully considered as the condition of pure,
_i.e._, perfectly will‐less, and on that account completely objective
knowledge. According to what has been said, the rise of intelligence, from
the obscurest animal consciousness up to that of man, is a progressive
_loosening of the intellect from the will_, which appears complete,
although only as an exception, in the _genius_. Therefore genius may be
defined as the highest grade of the _objectivity_ of knowledge. The
condition of this, which so seldom occurs, is a decidedly larger measure
of intelligence than is required for the service of the will, which
constitutes its basis; it is accordingly this free surplus which first
really properly comes to know the world, _i.e._, comprehends it perfectly
_objectively_, and now paints pictures, composes poems, and thinks in
accordance with this comprehension.




Chapter XXIII.(3)On The Objectification Of The Will In Unconscious Nature.


That the will which we find within us does not proceed, as philosophy has
hitherto assumed, first from knowledge, and indeed is a mere modification
of it, thus something secondary, derived, and, like knowledge itself,
conditioned by the brain; but that it is the _prius_ of knowledge, the
kernel of our nature, and that original force itself which forms and
sustains the animal body, in that it carries out both its unconscious and
its conscious functions;—this is the first step in the fundamental
knowledge of my metaphysics. Paradoxical as it even now seems to many that
the will in itself is without knowledge, yet the scholastics in some way
already recognised and confessed it; for Jul. Cæs. Vaninus (that well‐
known sacrifice to fanaticism and priestly fury), who was thoroughly
versed in their philosophy, says in his “_Amphitheatro_,” p. 181:
“_Voluntas potentia cœca est, ex scholasticorum opinione_.” That, further,
it is that same will which in the plant forms the bud in order to develop
the leaf and the flower out of it; nay, that the regular form of the
crystal is only the trace which its momentary effort has left behind, and
that in general, as the true and only αυτοματον, in the proper sense of
the word, it lies at the foundation of all the forces of unorganised
nature, plays, acts, in all their multifarious phenomena, imparts power to
their laws, and even in the crudest mass manifests itself as gravity;—this
insight is the second step in that fundamental knowledge, and is brought
about by further reflection. But it would be the grossest misunderstanding
to suppose that this is a mere question of a word to denote an unknown
quantity. It is rather the most real of all real knowledge which is here
expressed in language. For it is the tracing back of that which is quite
inaccessible to our immediate knowledge, and therefore in its essence
foreign and unknown to us, which we denote by the words _force of nature_,
to that which is known to us most accurately and intimately, but which is
yet only accessible to us in our own being and directly, and must
therefore be carried over from this to other phenomena. It is the insight
that what is inward and original in all the changes and movements of
bodies, however various they may be, is in its nature identical; that yet
we have only one opportunity of getting to know it more closely and
directly, and that is in the movements of our own body. In consequence of
this knowledge we must call it _will_. It is the insight that that which
acts and strives in nature, and exhibits itself in ever more perfect
phenomena, when it has worked itself up so far that the light of knowledge
falls directly upon it, _i.e._, when it has attained to the state of self‐
consciousness—exists as that _will_, which is what is most intimately
known to us, and therefore cannot be further explained by anything else,
but rather affords the explanation of all other things. It is accordingly
the _thing in itself_ so far as this can ever be reached by knowledge.
Consequently it is that which must express itself in some way in
everything in the world, for it is the inner nature of the world and the
kernel of all phenomena.

As my essay, “_Ueber den Willen in der Natur_,” specially refers to the
subject of this chapter, and also adduces the evidence of unprejudiced
empiricists in favour of this important point of my doctrine, I have only
to add now to what is said there a few supplementary remarks, which are
therefore strung together in a somewhat fragmentary manner.

First, then, with reference to plant life, I draw attention to the
remarkable first two chapters of Aristotle’s work upon plants. What is
most interesting in them, as is so often the case with Aristotle, are the
opinions of earlier profound philosophers quoted by him. We see there that
Anaxagoras and Empedocles quite rightly taught that plants have the motion
of their growth by virtue of their indwelling _desires_ (επιθυμια); nay,
that they also attributed to them pleasure and pain, therefore sensation.
But Plato only ascribed to them desires, and that on account of their
strong appetite for nutrition (_cf._ Plato in the “_Timœus_,” p. 403,
Bip.) Aristotle, on the other hand, true to his customary method, glides
on the surface of things, confines himself to single characteristics and
conceptions fixed by current expressions, and asserts that without
sensation there can be no desires, and that plants have not sensation. He
is, however, in considerable embarrassment, as his confused language
shows, till here also, “where fails the comprehension, a word steps
promptly in as deputy,” namely, το θρεπτικον, the faculty of nourishing.
Plants have this, and thus a part of the so‐called soul, according to his
favourite division into _anima vegetativa_, _sensitiva_, and
_intellectiva_. This, however, is just a scholastic _Quidditas_, and
signifies _plantœ nutriuntur quia habent facultatem nutritivam_. It is
therefore a bad substitute for the more profound research of his
predecessors, whom he is criticising. We also see, in the second chapter,
that Empedocles even recognised the sexuality of plants; which Aristotle
then also finds fault with, and conceals his want of special knowledge
behind general propositions, such as this, that plants could not have both
sexes combined, for if so they would be more complete than animals. By
quite an analogous procedure he displaces the correct astronomical system
of the world of the Pythagoreans, and by his absurd fundamental
principles, which he specially explains in the books _de Cœlo_, introduces
the system of Ptolemy, whereby mankind was again deprived of an already
discovered truth of the greatest importance for almost two thousand years.

I cannot refrain from giving here the saying of an excellent biologist of
our own time who fully agrees with my teaching. It is G. R. Treviranus,
who, in his work, “_Ueber die Erscheinungen und Gesetze des organischen
Lebens_,” 1832, Bd. 2, Abth. 1, § 49, has said what follows: “A form of
life is, however, conceivable in which the effect of the external upon the
internal produces merely feelings of desire or dislike. Such is the life
of plants. In the higher forms of animal life the external is felt as
something objective.” Treviranus speaks here from pure unprejudiced
comprehension of nature, and is as little conscious of the metaphysical
importance of his words as of the _contradictio in adjecto_ which lies in
the conception of something “felt as objective,” a conception which indeed
he works out at great length. He does not know that all feeling is
essentially subjective, and all that is objective is, on the other hand,
perception, and therefore a product of the understanding. Yet this does
not detract at all from the truth and importance of what he says.

In fact, in the life of plants the truth that will can exist without
knowledge is apparent—one might say palpably recognisable. For here we see
a decided effort, determined by wants, modified in various ways, and
adapting itself to the difference of the circumstances, yet clearly
without knowledge. And just because the plant is without knowledge it
bears its organs of generation ostentatiously in view, in perfect
innocence; it knows nothing about it. As soon, on the other hand, as in
the series of existences knowledge appears the organs of generation are
transferred to a hidden part. Man, however, with whom this is again less
the case, conceals them intentionally: he is ashamed of them.

Primarily, then, the vital force is identical with the will, but so also
are all other forces of nature; though this is less apparent. If,
therefore, we find the recognition of a desire, _i.e._, of a will, as the
basis of _plant life_, expressed at all times, with more or less
distinctness of conception, on the other hand, the reference of the forces
of _unorganised_ nature to the same foundation is rarer in proportion as
their remoteness from our own nature is greater. In fact, the boundary
between the organised and the unorganised is the most sharply drawn in the
whole of nature, and perhaps the only one that admits of no
transgressions; so that _natura non facit saltus_ seems to suffer an
exception here. Although certain crystallisations display an external form
resembling the vegetable, yet even between the smallest lichen, the lowest
fungus, and everything unorganised there remains a fundamental and
essential difference. In the _unorganised_ body that which is essential
and permanent, thus that upon which its identity and integrity rests, is
the material, the _matter_; what is unessential and changing is, on the
other hand, the _form_. With the _organised_ body the case is exactly
reversed; for its life, _i.e._, its existence as an organised being,
simply consists in the constant change of the _material_, while the _form_
remains permanent. Its being and its identity thus lies in the _form_
alone. Therefore the continuance of the _unorganised_ body depends upon
_repose_ and exclusion from external influences: thus alone does it retain
its existence; and if this condition is perfect, such a body lasts for
ever. The continuance of the _organised_ body, on the contrary, just
depends upon continual _movement_ and the constant reception of external
influences. As soon as these are wanting and the movement in it stops it
is dead, and thereby ceases to be organic, although the trace of the
organism that has been still remains for a while. Therefore the talk,
which is so much affected in our own day, of the life of what is
unorganised, indeed of the globe itself, and that it, and also the
planetary system, is an organism, is entirely inadmissible. The predicate
life belongs only to what is organised. Every organism, however, is
throughout organised, is so in all its parts; and nowhere are these, even
in their smallest particles, composed by aggregation of what is
unorganised. Thus if the earth were an organism, all mountains and rocks,
and the whole interior of their mass, would necessarily be organised, and
accordingly really nothing unorganised would exist; and therefore the
whole conception of it would be wanting.

On the other hand, that the manifestation of a _will_ is as little bound
up with life and organisation as with knowledge, and that therefore the
unorganised has also a will, the manifestations of which are all its
fundamental qualities, which cannot be further explained,—this is an
essential point in my doctrine; although the trace of such a thought is
far seldomer found in writers who have preceded me than that of the will
in plants, where, however, it is still unconscious.

In the forming of the crystal we see, as it were, a tendency towards an
attempt at life, to which, however, it does not attain, because the
fluidity of which, like a living thing, it is composed at the moment of
that movement is not enclosed in a _skin_, as is always the case with the
latter, and consequently it has neither vessels in which that movement
could go on, nor does anything separate it from the external world.
Therefore, rigidity at once seizes that momentary movement, of which only
the trace remains as the crystal.

The thought that the will, which constitutes the basis of our own nature,
is also the same will which shows itself even in the lowest unorganised
phenomena, on account of which the conformity to law of both phenomena
shows a perfect analogy, lies at the foundation of Goethe’s
“_Wahlverwandtschaften_,” as the title indeed indicates, although he
himself was unconscious of this.

Mechanics and astronomy specially show us how this will conducts itself so
far as it appears at the lowest grade of its manifestation merely as
gravity, rigidity, and inertia. Hydraulics shows us the same thing where
rigidity is wanting and the fluid material is now unrestrainedly
surrendered to its predominating passion, gravity. In this sense
hydraulics may be conceived as a characteristic sketch of water, for it
presents to us the manifestations of will to which water is moved by
gravity; these always correspond exactly to the external influences, for
in the case of all non‐individual existences there is no particular
character in addition to the general one; thus they can easily be referred
to fixed characteristics, which are called laws, and which are learned by
experience of water. These laws accurately inform us how water will
conduct itself under all different circumstances, on account of its
gravity, the unconditioned mobility of its parts, and its want of
elasticity. Hydrostatics teaches how it is brought to rest through
gravity; hydrodynamics, how it is set in motion; and the latter has also
to take account of hindrances which adhesion opposes to the will of water:
the two together constitute hydraulics. In the same way Chemistry teaches
us how the will conducts itself when the inner qualities of materials
obtain free play by being brought into a fluid state, and there appears
that wonderful attraction and repulsion, separating and combining, leaving
go of one to seize upon another, from which every precipitation
originates, and the whole of which is denoted by “elective affinity” (an
expression which is entirely borrowed from the conscious will). But
Anatomy and Physiology allow us to see how the will conducts itself in
order to bring about the phenomenon of life and sustain it for a while.
Finally, the poet shows us how the will conducts itself under the
influence of motives and reflection. He exhibits it therefore for the most
part in the most perfect of its manifestations, in rational beings, whose
character is individual, and whose conduct and suffering he brings before
us in the Drama, the Epic, the Romance, &c. The more correctly, the more
strictly according to the laws of nature his characters are there
presented, the greater is his fame; hence Shakespeare stands at the top.
The point of view which is here taken up corresponds at bottom to the
spirit in which Goethe followed and loved the natural sciences, although
he was not conscious of the matter in the abstract. Nay more, this not
only appears from his writings, but is also known to me from his personal
utterances.

If we consider the will, where no one denies it, in conscious beings, we
find everywhere, as its fundamental effort, the _self‐preservation_ of
every being: _omnis natura vult esse conservatrix sui_. But all
manifestations of this fundamental effort may constantly be traced back to
a seeking or pursuit and a shunning or fleeing from, according to the
occasion. Now this also may be shown even at the lowest grades of nature,
that is, of the objectification of the will, where the bodies still act
only as bodies in general, thus are the subject‐matter of mechanics, and
are considered only with reference to the manifestations of
impenetrability, cohesion, rigidity, elasticity, and gravity. Here also
the _seeking_ shows itself as gravitation, and the _shunning_ as the
receiving of motion; and the _movableness_ of bodies by pressure or
impact, which constitutes the basis of mechanics, is at bottom a
manifestation of the effort after _self‐preservation_, which dwells in
them also. For, since as bodies they are impenetrable, this is the sole
means of preserving their cohesion, thus their continuance at any time.
The body which is impelled or exposed to pressure would be crushed to
pieces by the impelling or pressing body if it did not withdraw itself
from its power by flight, in order to preserve its cohesion; and when
flight is impossible for it this actually happens. Indeed, one may regard
_elastic_ bodies as the more _courageous_, which seek to repel the enemy,
or at least to prevent him from pursuing further. Thus in the one secret
which (besides gravity) is left by mechanics otherwise so clear, in the
communicability of motion, we see a manifestation of the fundamental
effort of the will in all its phenomena, the effort after self‐
preservation, which shows itself even at the lowest grades as that which
is essential.

In unorganised nature the will objectifies itself primarily in the
universal forces, and only by means of these in the phenomena of the
particular things which are called forth by causes. In § 26 of the first
volume I have fully explained the relation between cause, force of nature,
and will as thing in itself. One sees from that explanation that
metaphysics never interrupts the course of physics, but only takes up the
thread where physics leaves it, at the original forces in which all causal
explanation has its limits. Only here does the metaphysical explanation
from the will as the thing in itself begin. In the case of every physical
phenomenon, of every _change_ of material things, its cause is primarily
to be looked for; and this cause is just such a particular _change_ which
has appeared immediately before it. Then, however, the original force of
nature is to be sought by virtue of which this cause was capable of
acting. And first of all the _will_ is to be recognised as the inner
nature of this force in opposition to its manifestation. Yet the will
shows itself just as directly in the fall of a stone as in the action of
the man; the difference is only that its particular manifestation is in
the one case called forth by a motive, in the other by a mechanically
acting cause, for example, the taking away of what supported the stone;
yet in both cases with equal necessity; and that in the one case it
depends upon an individual character, in the other upon an universal force
of nature. This identity of what is fundamentally essential is even made
palpable to the senses. If, for instance, we carefully observe a body
which has lost its equilibrium, and on account of its special form rolls
back and forward for a long time till it finds its centre of gravity
again, a certain appearance of life forces itself upon us, and we directly
feel that something analogous to the foundation of life is also active
here. This is certainly the universal force of nature, which, however, in
itself identical with the _will_, becomes here, as it were, the soul of a
very brief _quasi_ life. Thus what is identical in the two extremes of the
manifestation of the will makes itself faintly known here even to direct
perception, in that this raises a feeling in us that here also something
entirely original, such as we only know in the acts of our own will,
directly succeeded in manifesting itself.

We may attain to an intuitive knowledge of the existence and activity of
the will in unorganised nature in quite a different and a sublime manner
if we study the problem of the three heavenly bodies, and thus learn more
accurately and specially the course of the moon round the earth. By the
different combinations which the constant change of the position of these
three heavenly bodies towards each other introduces, the course of the
moon is now accelerated; now retarded, now it approaches the earth, and
again recedes from it; and this again takes place differently in the
perihelion of the earth from in its aphelion, all of which together
introduces such irregularity into the moon’s course that it really obtains
a capricious appearance; for, indeed, Kepler’s third law is no longer
constantly valid, but in equal times it describes unequal areas. The
consideration of this course is a small and separate chapter of celestial
mechanics, which is distinguished in a sublime manner from terrestrial
mechanics by the absence of all impact and pressure, thus of the _vis a
tergo_ which appears to us so intelligible, and indeed of the actually
completed case, for besides _vis inertiœ_ it knows no other moving and
directing force, except only gravitation, that longing for union which
proceeds from the very inner nature of bodies. If now we construct for
ourselves in imagination the working of this given case in detail, we
recognise distinctly and directly in the moving force here that which is
given to us in self‐consciousness as will. For the alterations in the
course of the earth and the moon, according as one of them is by its
position more or less exposed to the influence of the sun, are evidently
analogous to the influence of newly appearing motives upon our wills, and
to the modifications of our action which result.

The following is an illustrative example of another kind. Liebig (_Chemie
in Anwendung auf Agrikultur_, p. 501), says: “If we bring moist copper
into air which contains carbonic acid, the affinity of the metal for the
oxygen of the air will be increased by the contact with this acid to such
a degree that the two will combine with each other; its surface will be
coated with green carbonic oxide of copper. But now two bodies which have
the capacity of combining, the moment they meet assume opposite electrical
conditions. Therefore if we touch the copper with iron, by producing a
special electrical state, the capacity of the copper to enter into
combination with the oxygen is destroyed; even under the above conditions
it remains bright.” The fact is well known and of technical use. I quote
it in order to say that here the will of the copper, laid claim to and
occupied by the electrical opposition to iron, leaves unused the
opportunity which presents itself for its chemical affinity for oxygen and
carbonic acid. Accordingly it conducts itself exactly as the will in a man
who omits an action which he would otherwise feel himself moved to in
order to perform another to which a stronger motive urges him.

I have shown in the first volume that the forces of nature lie outside the
chain of causes and effects, because they constitute their accompanying
condition, their metaphysical foundation, and therefore prove themselves
to be eternal and omnipresent, _i.e._, independent of time and space. Even
in the uncontested truth that what is essential to a _cause_ as such
consists in this, that it will produce the same effect at any future time
as it does now, it is already involved that something lies in the cause
which is independent of the course of time, _i.e._, is outside of all
time; this is the force of nature which manifests itself in it. One can
even convince oneself to a certain extent empirically and as a matter of
fact of the _ideality_ of this form of our perception by fixing one’s eyes
upon the powerlessness of time as opposed to natural forces. If, for
example, a rotatory motion is imparted to a planet by some external cause,
if no new cause enters to stop it, this motion will endure for ever. This
could not be so if time were something in itself and had an objective,
real existence; for then it would necessarily also produce some effect.
Thus we see here, on the one hand, the _forces of nature_, which manifest
themselves in that rotation, and, if it is once begun, carry it on for
ever without becoming weary or dying out, prove themselves to be eternal
or timeless, and consequently absolutely real and existing in themselves;
and, on the other hand, _time_ as something which consists only in the
manner in which we apprehend that phenomenon, since it exerts no power and
no influence upon the phenomenon itself; for _what does not act is not_.

We have a natural inclination whenever it is possible to explain every
natural phenomenon _mechanically_; doubtless because mechanics calls in
the assistance of the fewest original, and hence inexplicable, forces,
and, on the other hand, contains much that can be known _a priori_, and
therefore depends upon the forms of our own intellect, which as such
carries with it the highest degree of comprehensibility and clearness.
However, in the “Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science” Kant
has referred mechanical activity itself to a dynamical activity. On the
other hand, the application of mechanical explanatory hypotheses, beyond
what is demonstrably mechanical, to which, for example, Acoustics also
belongs, is entirely unjustified, and I will never believe that even the
simplest chemical combination or the difference of the three states of
aggregation will ever admit of mechanical explanation, much less the
properties of light, of heat, and electricity. These will always admit
only of a dynamical explanation, _i.e._, one which explains the phenomenon
from original forces which are entirely different from those of impact,
pressure, weight, &c., and are therefore of a higher kind, _i.e._, are
more distinct objectifications of that will which obtains visible form in
all things. I am of opinion that light is neither an emanation nor a
vibration; both views are akin to that which explains transparency from
pores and the evident falseness of which is proved by the fact that light
is subject to no mechanical laws. In order to obtain direct conviction of
this one only requires to watch the effects of a storm of wind, which
bends, upsets, and scatters everything, but during which a ray of light
shooting down from a break in the clouds is entirely undisturbed and
steadier than a rock, so that with great directness it imparts to us the
knowledge that it belongs to another order of things than the mechanical:
it stands there unmoved like a ghost. Those constructions of light from
molecules and atoms which have originated with the French are indeed a
revolting absurdity. An article by Ampère, who is otherwise so acute, upon
light and heat, which is to be found in the April number of the “_Annales
de chimie et physique_,” of 1835, may be considered as a flagrant
expression of this, and indeed of the whole of atomism in general. There
the solid, the fluid, and the elastic consist of the same atoms, and all
differences arise solely from their aggregation; nay, it is said that
space indeed is infinitely divisible, but not matter; because, if the
division has been carried as far as the atoms, the further division must
fall in the spaces between the atoms! Light and heat, then, are here
vibrations of the atoms; and sound, on the other hand, is a vibration of
the molecules composed of the atoms. In truth, however, these atoms are a
fixed idea of the French savants, and therefore they just speak of them as
if they had seen them. Otherwise one would necessarily marvel that such a
matter‐of‐fact nation as the French can hold so firmly to a completely
transcendent hypothesis, which is quite beyond the possibility of
experience, and confidently build upon it up to the sky. This is just a
consequence of the backward state of the metaphysics they shun so much,
which is poorly represented by M. Cousin, who, with all good will, is
shallow and very scantily endowed with judgment. At bottom they are still
Lockeians, owing to the earlier influence of Condillac. Therefore for them
the thing in itself is really matter, from the fundamental properties of
which, such as impenetrability, form, hardness, and the other primary
qualities, everything in the world must be ultimately explicable. They
will not let themselves be talked out of this, and their tacit assumption
is that matter can only be moved by mechanical forces. In Germany Kant’s
teaching has prevented the continuance of the absurdities of the atomistic
and purely mechanical physics for any length of time; although at the
present moment these views prevail here also, which is a consequence of
the shallowness, crudeness, and folly introduced by Hegel. However, it
cannot be denied that not only the evidently porous nature of natural
bodies, but also two special doctrines of modern physics, apparently
render assistance to the atomic nuisance. These are, Hauz’s
Crystallography, which traces every crystal back to its kernel form, which
is an ultimate form, though only _relatively_ indivisible; and Berzelius’s
doctrine of chemical atoms, which are yet mere expressions for combining
proportions, thus only arithmetical quantities, and at bottom nothing more
than counters. On the other hand, Kant’s thesis in the second antinomy in
defence of atoms, which is certainly only set up for dialectical purposes,
is a mere sophism, as I have proved in my criticism of his philosophy, and
our understanding itself by no means leads us necessarily to the
assumption of atoms. For just as little as I am obliged to think that the
slow but constant and uniform _motion_ of a body before my eyes is
composed of innumerable motions which are absolutely quick, but broken and
interrupted by just as many absolutely short moments of rest, but, on the
contrary, know very well that the stone that has been thrown flies more
slowly than the projected bullet, yet never pauses for an instant on the
way, so little am I obliged to think of the mass of a body as consisting
of atoms and the spaces between them, _i.e._, of absolute density and
absolute vacuity; but I comprehend those two phenomena without difficulty
as constant _continua_, one of which uniformly fills time and the other
space. But just as the one motion may yet be quicker than another, _i.e._,
in an equal time can pass through more space, so also one body may have a
greater specific gravity than another, _i.e._, in equal space may contain
more matter: in both cases the difference depends upon the intensity of
the acting force; for Kant (following Priestley) has quite correctly
reduced matter to forces. But even if the analogy here set up should not
be admitted as valid, and it should be insisted upon that the difference
of specific gravity can only have its ground in porosity, even this
assumption would always lead, not to atoms, but only to a perfectly dense
matter, unequally distributed among different bodies; a matter which would
certainly be no longer _compressible_, when no pores ran through it, but
yet, like the space which it fills, would always remain infinitely
_divisible_. For the fact that it would have no pores by no means involves
that no possible force could do away with the continuity of its spatial
parts. For to say that everywhere this is only possible by extending the
already existing intervals is a purely arbitrary assertion.

The assumption of atoms rests upon the two phenomena which have been
touched upon, the difference of the specific gravity of bodies and that of
their compressibility, for both are conveniently explained by the
assumption of atoms. But then both must also always be present in like
measure, which is by no means the case. For, for example, water has a far
lower specific gravity than all metals properly so called. It must thus
have fewer atoms and greater interstices between them, and consequently be
very compressible: but it is almost entirely incompressible.

The defence of atoms might be conducted in this way. One may start from
porosity and say something of this sort: All bodies have pores, and
therefore so also have all parts of a body: now if this were carried out
to infinity, there would ultimately be nothing left of a body but pores.
The refutation would be that what remained over would certainly have to be
assumed as without pores, and so far as absolutely dense, yet not on that
account as consisting of absolutely indivisible particles, atoms;
accordingly it would certainly be absolutely incompressible, but not
absolutely indivisible. It would therefore be necessary that it should be
asserted that the division of a body is only possible by penetrating into
its pores; which, however, is entirely unproved. If, however, this is
assumed, then we certainly have atoms, _i.e._, absolutely indivisible
bodies, thus bodies of such strong cohesion of their spatial parts that no
possible power can separate them: but then one may just as well assume
such bodies to be large as small, and an atom might be as big as an ox, if
it only would resist all possible attacks upon it.

Imagine two bodies of very different kinds, entirely freed from all pores
by compression, as by means of hammering, or by pulverisation;—would their
specific gravity then be the same? This would be the criterion of
dynamics.




Chapter XXIV. On Matter.


Matter has already been spoken of in the fourth chapter of the supplements
to the first book, when we were considering the part of our knowledge of
which we are conscious _a priori_. But it could only be considered there
from a one‐sided point of view, because we were then concerned merely with
its relation to the forms of our intellect, and not to the thing in
itself, and therefore we investigated it only from the subjective side,
_i.e._, so far as it is an idea, and not from the objective side, _i.e._,
with regard to what it may be in itself. In the first respect, our
conclusion was that it is objective _activity_ in general, yet conceived
without fuller determination; therefore it takes the place of causality in
the table of our _a priori_ knowledge which is given there. For what is
material is that which _acts_ (the actual) in general, and regarded apart
from the specific nature of its action. Hence also matter, merely as such,
is not an object of _perception_, but only of _thought_, and thus is
really an abstraction. It only comes into perception in connection with
form and quality, as a body, _i.e._, as a fully determined kind of
activity. It is only by abstracting from this fuller determination that we
think of matter as such, _i.e._, separated from form and quality;
consequently under matter we think of _acting_ absolutely and in general,
thus of _activity_ in the abstract. The more fully determined acting we
then conceive as the _accident_ of matter; but only by means of this does
matter become perceptible, _i.e._, present itself as a body and an object
of experience. Pure matter, on the other hand, which, as I have shown in
the Criticism of the Kantian Philosophy, alone constitutes the true and
admissible content of the conception of _substance_, is causality itself,
thought objectively, consequently as in space, and therefore filling it.
Accordingly the whole being of matter consists in _acting_. Only thus does
it occupy space and last in time. It is through and through pure
causality. Therefore wherever there is action there is matter, and the
material is the active in general. But causality itself is the form of our
understanding; for it is known to us _a priori_, as well as time and
space. Thus matter also, _so far_ and up to this point, belongs to the
formal part of our knowledge, and is consequently that form of the
understanding, _causality_ itself, bound up with space and time, hence
objectified, _i.e._, conceived as that which fills space. (The fuller
explanation of this doctrine will be found in the second edition of the
essay on the principle of sufficient reason, p. 77; third edition, p. 82.)
So far, however, matter is properly not the _object_ but the _condition_
of experience; like the pure understanding itself, whose function it so
far is. Therefore of pure matter there is also only a _conception_, no
_perception_. It enters into all external experience as a necessary
constituent part of it; yet it cannot be given in any experience, but is
only _thought_, and thought indeed as that which is absolutely inert,
inactive, formless, and without qualities, and which is yet the supporter
of all forms, qualities, and effects. Accordingly, of all fleeting
phenomena, thus of all manifestations of natural forces and all living
beings, matter is the _permanent substratum_ which is necessarily produced
by the forms of our intellect in which the world as _idea_ exhibits
itself. As such, and as having sprung from the forms of the intellect, it
is entirely _indifferent_ to those phenomena themselves, _i.e._, it is
just as ready to be the supporter of this force of nature as of that,
whenever, under the guidance of causality, the necessary conditions
appear; while it itself, just because its existence is really only
_formal_, _i.e._, is founded in the _intellect_ must be thought as that
which under all that change is absolutely permanent, thus with regard to
time is without beginning and without end. This is why we cannot give up
the thought that anything may be made out of anything, for example, gold
out of lead; for this would only require that we should find out and bring
about the intermediate states which matter, in itself indifferent, would
have to pass through upon that path. For _a priori_ we can never see why
the same matter which is now the supporter of the quality lead could not
some time become the supporter of the quality gold. Matter, as that which
is only _thought_ _a priori_, is distinguished from the _a priori_
_intuitions_ or _perceptions_ proper by the fact that we can also think it
entirely away; space and time, on the contrary, never. But this only shows
that we can present to ourselves space and time in imagination without
matter. For the matter which has once been placed in them, and accordingly
thought as _existing_, we can never again absolutely think away, _i.e._,
imagine it as vanished and annihilated, but are always forced to think of
it merely as transferred to another space. So far, then, matter is as
inseparably connected with our faculty of knowledge as space and time
themselves. Yet even the difference that it must first be voluntarily
thought as existing indicates that it does not belong so entirely and in
every regard to the _formal_ part of our knowledge as space and time, but
also contains an element which is only given _a posteriori_. It is, in
fact, the point of connection of the empirical part of our knowledge with
the pure and _a priori_ part, consequently the peculiar foundation‐stone
of the world of experience.

Only where all _a priori_ assertions cease, therefore in the _entirely
empirical_ part of our knowledge of bodies, in their form, quality, and
definite manner of acting, does that _will_ reveal itself which we have
already recognised and established as the true inner nature of things. But
these forms and qualities always appear only as the properties and
manifestations of that very _matter_ the existence and nature of which
depends upon the subjective forms of our intellect, _i.e._, they only
become visible in it, and therefore by means of it. For that which always
exhibits itself to us is only _matter_ acting in some specially determined
manner. Out of the inner properties of such matter, properties which
cannot be further explained, proceeds every definite kind of effect of
given bodies; and yet the matter itself is never perceived, but only these
effects, and the definite properties which lie at their foundation, after
separating which, matter, as that which then remains over, is necessarily
added in thought by us; for, according to the exposition given above, it
is objectified _causality itself_. Accordingly matter is that whereby the
_will_, which constitutes the inner nature of things, becomes capable of
being apprehended, perceptible, _visible_. In this sense, then, matter is
simply the _visibility_ of the will, or the bond between the world as will
and the world as idea. It belongs to the latter inasmuch as it is the
product of the functions of the intellect, to the former inasmuch as that
which manifests itself in all material existences, _i.e._, phenomena is
the will. Therefore every object is, as thing in itself, will, and as
phenomenon, matter. If we could strip any given matter of all the
properties that come to it _a priori_, _i.e._, of all the forms of our
perception and apprehension, we would have left the thing in itself, that
which, by means of those forms, appears as the purely empirical in matter,
but which would then itself no longer appear as something extended and
active; _i.e._, we would no longer have matter before us, but the will.
This very thing in itself, or the will, in that it becomes a phenomenon,
_i.e._, enters the forms of our intellect, appears as matter, _i.e._, as
the invisible but necessarily assumed supporter of the properties which
are only visible through it. In this sense, then, matter is the visibility
of the _will_. Consequently Plotinus and Giordano Bruno were right, not
only in their sense but also in ours, when they made the paradoxical
assertion already referred to in chapter 4: Matter itself is not extended,
consequently it is incorporeal. For space, which is our form of
perception, imparts extension to matter, and corporeal existence consists
in acting, which depends upon causality, and consequently upon the form of
our understanding. On the other hand, every definite property, thus
everything empirical in matter, even gravity, depends upon that which only
becomes visible by means of matter, the thing in itself, the will. Gravity
is yet the lowest of all grades of the objectification of the will;
therefore it appears in all matter without exception, thus is inseparable
from matter in general. Yet, just because it is a manifestation of the
will, it belongs to knowledge _a posteriori_, not to knowledge _a priori_.
Therefore we can always picture to ourselves matter without weight, but
not without extension, repulsive force, and stability, for then it would
be without impenetrability, and consequently would not occupy space,
_i.e._, it would be without _the power of acting_; but the nature of
matter as such just consists in _acting_, _i.e._, in causality in general;
and causality depends upon the _a priori_ form of our understanding, and
therefore cannot be thought away.

Matter is accordingly the _will_ itself, but no longer in itself, but so
far as it is _perceived_, _i.e._, assumes the form of the objective idea.
Thus what objectively is matter is subjectively will. Exactly
corresponding to this, as was proved above, our body is just the
visibility, objectivity of our will, and so also every body is the
objectivity of the will at some one of its grades. Whenever the will
exhibits itself to objective knowledge it enters into the forms of
perception of the intellect, time, space, and causality. But on account of
this it exists at once as a _material_ object. We can present to our minds
form without matter, but not the reverse; because matter deprived of form
would be the will itself, and the will only becomes objective by entering
the forms of perception of our intellect, and therefore only by means of
the assumption of form. Space is the form of perception of matter because
the latter is the substance (Stoff) of mere form, but matter can _appear_
only in form.

Since the will becomes objective, _i.e._, passes over into the idea,
matter is the universal substratum of this objectification, or rather it
is this objectification itself taken abstractly, _i.e._, regarded apart
from all form. Matter is accordingly the _visibility_ of the will in
general, while the character of its definite manifestations has its
expression in form and quality. Hence what in the manifestation, _i.e._,
for the idea, is _matter_ is in itself _will_. Therefore, under the
conditions of experience and perception, everything holds good of it that
holds good of the will in itself, and it repeats all the relations and
properties of the will in temporal images. Accordingly it is the substance
of the world of perception, as the will is the inner nature of all things.
The forms are innumerable, the matter is one; just as the will is one in
all its objectifications. As the will never objectifies itself as general,
_i.e._, as absolute will, but always as particular, _i.e._, under special
determinations and a given character, so matter never appears as such, but
always in connection with some particular form and quality. In the
manifestation or objectification of the will matter represents its
totality, it itself, which in all is one, as matter is one in all bodies.
As the will is the inmost kernel of all phenomenal beings, so matter is
the substance which remains after all the accidents have been taken away.
As the will is that which is absolutely indestructible in all existence,
so matter is that which is imperishable in time and permanent through all
changes. That matter for itself, thus separated from form, cannot be
perceived or presented in imagination depends upon the fact that in
itself, and as the pure substantiality of bodies, it is really the _will_
itself. But the will cannot be apprehended objectively, or perceived in
itself, but only under all the conditions of the _idea_, and therefore
only as _phenomenon_. Under these conditions, however, it exhibits itself
at once as body, _i.e._, as matter clothed in form and quality. But form
is conditioned by space, and quality or power of acting by causality; thus
both depend upon the functions of the intellect. Matter without them would
just be the thing in itself, _i.e._, the will itself. Therefore, as has
been said, Plotinus and Giordano Bruno could only be brought by a
completely objective path to the assertion that matter in and for itself
is without extension, consequently without spatial properties,
consequently incorporeal.

Because, then, matter is the visibility of the will, and every force in
itself is will, no force can appear without a material substratum, and
conversely no body can be without forces dwelling in it which constitute
its quality. Therefore a body is the union of matter and form which is
called substance (Stoff). Force and substance are inseparable because at
bottom they are one; for, as Kant has shown, matter itself is given us
only as the union of two forces, the force of expansion and that of
attraction. Thus there is no opposition between force and substance,
rather they are precisely one.

Led by the course of our consideration to this standpoint, and having
attained to this metaphysical view of matter, we will confess without
reluctance that the temporal _origin_ of forms, shapes, or species cannot
reasonably be sought elsewhere than in matter. Some time or other they
must have come forth from it, just because it is the mere _visibility of
the will_ which constitutes the inner nature of all phenomena. In that the
will manifests itself, _i.e._, presents itself _objectively_ to the
intellect, matter, as its visibility, assumes _form_ by means of the
functions of the intellect. Hence the Schoolmen said: “_Materia appetit
formam_.” That such was the origin of all forms of life cannot be doubted:
we cannot even conceive it otherwise. Whether, however, now, since the
paths to the perpetuation of the forms stand open, and are secured and
sustained by nature with boundless care and jealousy, _generatio œquivoca_
still takes place, can only be decided by experience; especially since the
saying, _Natura nihil facit frustra_, might, with reference to the paths
of regular propagation, be used as a valid argument against it. Yet in
spite of the most recent objections to it, I hold that at very low grades
_generatio œquivoca_ is very probable, and primarily indeed in the case of
entozoa and epizoa, particularly such as appear in consequence of special
cachexia of the animal organism. For the conditions of their life only
appear exceptionally; consequently their species cannot propagate itself
in the regular manner, and therefore has always to arise anew whenever
opportunity offers. Therefore as soon as the conditions of life of epizoa
have appeared in consequence of certain chronic diseases, or cachexia, and
in accordance with them, _pediculus capitis_ or _pubis_ or _corporis_
appears entirely of itself, and without any egg; and this notwithstanding
the complex structure of these insects, for the putrefaction of a living
animal body affords material for higher productions than that of hay in
water, which only produces infusoria. Or is it thought more likely that
the eggs of the epizoa are constantly floating about in the air in
expectation? (Fearful to think of!) Let us rather remember the disease of
phthiriasis, which occurs even now. An analogous case takes place when
through special circumstances the conditions of life appear of a species
which up till then was foreign to that _place_. Thus August St. Hilaire
saw in Brazil, after the burning of a primitive forest, as soon as ever
the ashes had cooled, a number of plants grow up out of them, the species
of which was not to be found far and wide; and quite recently Admiral
Petit‐Thouars informed the _Académie des sciences_ that upon the growing
coral islands in Polynesia a soil gradually deposits itself which is now
dry, now lies in water, and which vegetation soon takes possession of,
bringing forth trees which are absolutely peculiar to these islands
(_Comptes rendus_, 17th Jan. 1859, p. 147). Whenever putrefaction takes
place mould, fungi, and in liquids infusoria appear. The assumption now in
favour that spores and eggs of the innumerable species of all those kinds
of animal life are everywhere floating in the air, and wait through long
years for a favourable opportunity, is more paradoxical than that of
_generatio œquivoca_. Putrefaction is the decomposition of an organised
body, first into its _more immediate_ chemical constituents. Since now
these are more or less the same in all living beings, the omnipresent will
to live can possess itself of them, in order, in accordance with the
circumstances, to produce new existences from them; and these forming
themselves according to design, _i.e._, objectifying the volition of the
will at the time, solidify out of the chemical elements as the chicken out
of the fluidity of the egg. When, however, this does not take place, the
putrefying matter is resolved into its _ultimate_ constituent parts, which
are the chemical elements, and now passes over again into the great course
of nature. The war which has been waged for the last ten or fifteen years
against _generatio œquivoca_, with its premature shouts of victory, was
the prelude to the denial of the vital force, and related to it. Let no
one, however, be deceived by dogmatic assertions and brazen assurances
that the questions are decided, settled, and generally recognised. On the
contrary, the whole mechanical and atomistic view of nature is approaching
its bankruptcy, and its defenders have to learn that something more is
concealed behind nature than action and reaction. The reality of
_generatio œquivoca_ and the folly of the extraordinary assumption that in
the atmosphere, everywhere and always, billions of seeds of all possible
kinds of fungi, and eggs of all possible kinds of infusoria, are floating
about, till now one and then another by chance finds its suitable medium,
has quite recently (1859) been thoroughly and victoriously shown by
Pouchet before the French Academy, to the great vexation of the other
members.

Our wonder at the origin of forms in matter is at bottom like that of the
savage who looks for the first time in a mirror and marvels at his own
image which he sees there. For our own inner nature is the will, whose
mere _visibility_ is matter. Yet matter never appears otherwise than with
the _visible_, _i.e._, under the outer shell of form and quality, and
therefore is never directly apprehended, but always merely added in
thought as that which is identical in all things, under all differences of
quality and form. On this account it is more a metaphysical than a
physical principle of explanation of things, and to make all existences
arise from it is really to explain them from something which is very
mysterious; which all know it to be except those who confound attacking
with comprehending. In truth, the ultimate and exhaustive explanation of
things is by no means to be sought in matter, although certainly the
temporal origin both of unorganised forms and of organised beings is to be
sought in it. Yet it seems that the origination of organised forms, the
production of the species themselves, is almost as difficult for nature to
accomplish as it is for us to comprehend. This is indicated by the
entirely extravagant provision which nature always makes for maintaining
the species which once exist. Yet on the present surface of this planet
the will to live has gone through the scale of its objectification three
times, quite independently of each other, in a different modulation, and
also with great difference of perfection and fulness. The old world,
America, and Australia have, it is well known, each their peculiar
independent fauna, entirely different from that of the other two. Upon
each of these great continents the species are throughout different, but
yet, because all three belong to the same planet, they have a thorough
analogy with each other running parallel through them; therefore the
_genera_ are for the most part the same. In Australia this analogy can
only be very imperfectly followed because its fauna is very poor in
mammalia, and contains neither beasts of prey nor apes. On the other hand,
between the old world and America it is obvious, and in the following
manner. In mammals America always produces the inferior analogue, but in
birds and reptiles the better. Thus it has the advantage in the condor,
the macaw, the humming‐bird, and the largest batrachia and ophidia; but,
for example, instead of the elephant it has only the tapir, instead of the
lion the puma, instead of the tiger the jaguar, instead of the camel the
lama, and instead of apes proper only monkeys. Even from this last defect
it may be concluded that in America nature was not able to rise to man;
for even from the nearest grade below man, the chimpanzee and the orang‐
outang or pongo, the step to man was still an excessively great one.
Correspondingly we find that the three races of men which, both upon
physiological and linguistic grounds, are undoubtedly equally original,
the Caucasian, the Mongolian, and the Ethiopian, are only at home in the
old world; while America, on the other hand, is peopled by a mixed or
climatically modified Mongolian race, which must have come over from Asia.
On the surface of the earth which immediately preceded the present surface
apes were reached here and there, but not men.

From this standpoint of our consideration, which shows us matter as the
direct visibility of the will which manifests itself in all things, nay,
indeed, for the merely physical investigation which follows the guidance
of time and causality, lets it pass as the origin of things, we are easily
led to the question whether even in philosophy we could not just as well
start from the objective as from the subjective side, and accordingly set
up as the fundamental truth the proposition: “There is in general nothing
but matter and its indwelling forces.” But, with regard to these
“indwelling forces” here so easily used, we must remember that their
assumption leads every explanation back to a completely incomprehensible
miracle, and then leaves it beside it, or rather leaves it to begin from
it. For every definite, inexplicable force of nature which lies at the
foundation of the most different kinds of effects of an unorganised body,
not less than the vital force which manifests itself in every organised
body, is such an incomprehensible miracle, as I have fully explained in
chap. 17, and have also shown that physics can never be set upon the
throne of metaphysics, just because it leaves quite untouched the
assumption referred to and also many others; whereby from the beginning it
renounces all claim to give an ultimate explanation of things. I must
further remind the reader here of the proof of the insufficiency of
materialism, which is given towards the end of the first chapter, because,
as was said there, it is the philosophy of the subject which forgets
itself in its calculation. But all these truths rest upon the fact that
everything _objective_, everything external, since it is always only
something apprehended, something known, remains also always indirect and
secondary, therefore absolutely never can become the ultimate ground of
explanation of things or the starting‐point of philosophy. Philosophy
necessarily requires what is absolutely immediate for its starting‐point.
But clearly only that which is given in _self‐consciousness_ fulfils this
condition, that which is within, the _subjective_. And hence it is so
eminent a merit of Descartes that he first made philosophy start from
self‐consciousness. Since then, upon this path, the genuine philosophers,
especially Locke, Berkeley, and Kant, have gone even further, each in his
own manner, and in consequence of their investigations I was led to
recognise and make use, not of one, but of two completely different data
of immediate knowledge in self‐consciousness, the idea and the will, by
the combined application of which one can go further in philosophy, in the
same proportion as in the case of an algebraical problem one can
accomplish more if two known quantities are given than if only one is
given.

In accordance with what has been said, the ineradicable falseness of
materialism primarily consists in the fact that it starts from a _petitio
principii_, which when more closely considered turns out indeed to be a
πρωτον φευδος. It starts from the assumption that matter is something
absolutely and unconditionally given, something existing independently of
the knowledge of the subject, thus really a thing in itself. It attributes
to matter (and consequently also to its presuppositions time and space) an
_absolute_ existence, _i.e._, an existence independent of the perceiving
subject; this is its fundamental error. Then, if it will go honestly to
work, it must leave the qualities inherent in the given materials, _i.e._,
in the substances, together with the natural forces which manifest
themselves in these, and finally also the vital force, unexplained, as
unfathomable _qualitates occultæ_, and start from them; as physics and
physiology actually do, because they make no claim to be the ultimate
explanation of things. But just to avoid this, materialism—at least as it
has hitherto appeared—has not proceeded honestly. It denies all those
original forces, for it pretends and seems to reduce them all, and
ultimately also the vital force, to the mere mechanical activity of
matter, thus to manifestations of impenetrability, form, cohesion,
impulsive power, inertia, gravity, &c., qualities which certainly have
least that is inexplicable in themselves, just because they partly depend
upon what is known _a priori_, consequently on the forms of our own
intellect, which are the principle of all comprehensibility. But the
intellect as the condition of all objects, and consequently of the whole
phenomenal world, is entirely ignored by materialism. Its plan is now to
refer everything qualitative to something merely quantitative, for it
attributes the former to mere _form_ in opposition to _matter_ proper. To
matter it leaves, of the properly _empirical_ qualities, only gravity,
because it already appears as something quantitative, the only measure of
the quantity of the matter. This path necessarily leads it to the fiction
of atoms, which now become the material out of which it thinks to
construct the mysterious manifestations of all original forces. But here
it has really no longer to do with empirically _given_ matter, but with a
matter which is not to be found _in rerum natura_, but is rather a mere
abstraction of that real matter, a matter which would absolutely have no
other than those mechanical qualities which, with the exception of
gravity, can be pretty well construed _a priori_, just because they depend
upon the forms of space, time, and causality, and consequently upon our
intellect; to this poor material, then, it finds itself reduced for the
construction of its castle in the air.

In this way it inevitably becomes _atomism_; as happened to it already in
its childhood in the hands of Leucippus and Democritus, and happens to it
again now that it has come to a second childhood through age; with the
French because they have never known the Kantian philosophy, and with the
Germans because they have forgotten it. And indeed it carries it further
in this its second childhood than in its first. Not merely _solid_ bodies
are supposed to consist of atoms, but liquids, water, air, gas, nay, even
light, which is supposed to be the undulations of a completely
hypothetical and altogether unproved ether, consisting of atoms, the
difference of the rapidity of these undulations causing colours. This is
an hypothesis which, like the earlier Newtonian seven‐colour theory,
starts from an analogy with music, entirely arbitrarily assumed, and then
violently carried out. One must really be credulous to an unheard‐of
degree to let oneself be persuaded that the innumerable different ether
vibrations proceeding from the infinite multiplicity of coloured surfaces
in this varied world could constantly, and each in its own time, run
through and everywhere cross each other without ever disturbing each
other, but should rather produce through such tumult and confusion the
profoundly peaceful aspect of illumined nature and art. _Credat Judæus
Apella!_ Certainly the nature of light is to us a secret; but it is better
to confess this than to bar the way of future knowledge by bad theories.
That light is something quite different from a mere mechanical movement,
undulation, or vibration and tremor, indeed that it is material, is shown
by its chemical effects, a beautiful series of which was recently laid
before the _Académie des sciences_ by Chevreul, who let sunlight act upon
different coloured materials. The most beautiful thing in these
experiments is, that a white roll of paper which has been exposed to the
sunlight exhibits the same effects, nay, does so even after six months, if
during this time it has been secured in a firmly closed metal tube. Has,
then, the tremulation paused for six months, and does it now fall into
time again? (_Comptes rendus_ of 20th December 1858.) This whole
hypothesis of vibrating ether atoms is not only a chimera, but equals in
awkward crudeness the worst of Democritus, and yet is shameless enough, at
the present day, to profess to be an established fact, and has thus
brought it about that it is orthodoxly repeated by a thousand stupid
scribblers of all kinds, who are devoid of all knowledge of such things,
and is believed in as a gospel. But the doctrine of atoms in general goes
still further: it is soon a case of _Spartam, quam nactus es, orna_!
Different perpetual motions are then ascribed to all the atoms, revolving,
vibrating, &c., according to the office of each; in the same way every
atom has its atmosphere of ether, or something else, and whatever other
similar fancies there may be. The fancies of Schelling’s philosophy of
nature and its disciples were for the most part ingenious, lofty, or at
least witty; but these, on the contrary, are clumsy, insipid, paltry, and
awkward, the production of minds which, in the first place, are unable to
think any other reality than a fabulous, qualityless matter, which is also
an absolute object, _i.e._, an object without a subject; and secondly can
think of no other activity than motion and impact: these two alone are
comprehensible to them, and that everything runs back to these is their _a
priori_ assumption; for these are their _thing in itself_. To attain this
end the vital force is reduced to chemical forces (which are insidiously
and unjustifiably called molecular forces), and all processes of
unorganised nature to mechanism, _i.e._, to action and reaction. And thus
at last the whole world and everything in it becomes merely a piece of
mechanical ingenuity, like the toys worked by levers, wheels, and sand,
which represent a mine or the work on a farm. The source of the evil is,
that through the amount of hand‐work which experimenting requires the
head‐work of thinking has been allowed to get out of practice. The
crucible and the voltaic pile are supposed to assume its functions; hence
also the profound abhorrence of all philosophy.

But the matter might be put in this way. One might say that materialism,
as it has hitherto appeared, has only failed because it did not adequately
_know_ the matter out of which it thought to construct the world, and
therefore was dealing, not with matter itself, but with a propertyless
substitute for it. If, on the contrary, instead of this, it had taken the
actual and _empirically_ given matter (_i.e._, material substance, or
rather substances), endowed as it is with all physical, chemical,
electrical properties, and also with the power of spontaneously producing
life out of itself, thus the true _mater rerum_, from the obscurity of
whose womb all phenomena and forms come forth, to fall back into it some
time again; from this, _i.e._, from matter fully comprehended and
exhaustively known, a world might have been constructed of which
materialism would not need to be ashamed. Quite true: only the trick would
then consist in this, that the _Quæsita_ had been placed in the _Data_,
for professedly what was taken as given, and made the starting‐point of
the deduction, was mere matter, but really it included all the mysterious
forces of nature which cling to it, or more correctly, by means of it
become visible to us, much the same as if under the name of the dish we
understand what lies upon it. For in fact, for our knowledge, matter is
really merely the _vehicle_ of the qualities and natural forces, which
appear as its accidents, and just because I have traced these back to the
will I call matter the mere _visibility of the will_. Stripped of all
these qualities, matter remains behind as that which is without qualities,
the _caput mortuum_ of nature, out of which nothing can honestly be made.
If, on the contrary, in the manner referred to, one leaves it all these
properties, one is guilty of a concealed _petitio principii_, for one has
assumed the _Quæsita_ beforehand as _Data_. But what is accomplished with
_this_ will no longer be a proper _materialism_, but merely _naturalism_,
_i.e._, an absolute system of _physics_, which, as was shown in chap. 17
already referred to, can never assume and fill the place of metaphysics,
just because it only begins after so many assumptions, thus never
undertakes to explain things from the foundation. Mere naturalism is
therefore essentially based simply upon _qualitates occultæ_, which one
can never get beyond except, as I have done, by calling in the aid of the
_subjective_ source of knowledge, which then certainly leads to the long
and toilsome round‐about path of metaphysics, for it presupposes the
complete analysis of self‐consciousness and of the intellect and will
given in it. However, the starting from what is _objective_, at the
foundation of which lies _external perception_, so distinct and
comprehensible, is a path so natural and which presents itself of its own
accord to man, that _naturalism_, and consequently, because this cannot
satisfy as it is not exhaustive, _materialism_, are systems to which the
speculative reason must necessarily have come, nay, must have come first
of all. Therefore at the very beginning of the history of philosophy we
meet naturalism, in the systems of the Ionic philosophers, and then
materialism in the teaching of Leucippus and Democritus, and also later we
see them ever appear anew from time to time.




Chapter XXV. Transcendent Considerations Concerning The Will As Thing In
Itself.


Even the merely empirical consideration of nature recognises a constant
transition from the simplest and most necessary manifestation of a
universal force of nature up to the life and consciousness of man himself,
through gentle gradations, and with only relative, and for the most part
fluctuating, limits. Reflection, following this view, and penetrating
somewhat more deeply into it, will soon be led to the conviction that in
all these phenomena, the inner nature, that which manifests itself, that
which appears, is one and the same, which comes forth ever more
distinctly; and accordingly that what exhibits itself in a million forms
of infinite diversity, and so carries on the most varied and the strangest
play without beginning or end, this is one being which is so closely
disguised behind all these masks that it does not even recognise itself,
and therefore often treats itself roughly. Thus the great doctrine of the
ἑν και παν early appeared both in the east and in the west, and, in spite
of all contradiction, has asserted itself, or at least constantly revived.
We, however, have now entered even deeper into the secret, since by what
has already been said we have been led to the insight that when in any
phenomenon a _knowing consciousness_ is added to that inner being which
lies at the foundation of all phenomena, a consciousness which when
directed inwardly becomes _self‐consciousness_, then that inner being
presents itself to this self‐consciousness as that which is so familiar
and so mysterious, and is denoted by the word _will_. Accordingly we have
called that universal fundamental nature of all phenomena _the will_,
after that manifestation in which it unveils itself to us most fully; and
by this word nothing is further from our intention than to denote an
unknown _x_; but, on the contrary, we denote that which at least on one
side is infinitely better known and more intimate than anything else.

Let us now call to mind a truth, the fullest and most thorough proof of
which will be found in my prize essay on the freedom of the will—the truth
that on account of the absolutely universal validity of the law of
causality, the conduct or the action of all existences in this world is
always strictly _necessitated_ by the causes which in each case call it
forth. And in this respect it makes no difference whether such an action
has been occasioned by causes in the strictest sense of the word, or by
stimuli, or finally by motives, for these differences refer only to the
grade of the susceptibility of the different kinds of existences. On this
point we must entertain no illusion: the law of causality knows no
exception; but everything, from the movement of a mote in a sunbeam to the
most deeply considered action of man, is subject to it with equal
strictness. Therefore, in the whole course of the world, neither could a
mote in a sunbeam describe any other line in its flight than it has
described, nor a man act any other way than he has acted; and no truth is
more certain than this, that all that happens, be it small or great,
happens with absolute _necessity_. Consequently, at every given moment of
time, the whole condition of all things is firmly and accurately
determined by the condition which has just preceded it, and so is it with
the stream of time back to infinity and on to infinity. Thus the course of
the world is like that of a clock after it has been put together and wound
up; thus from this incontestable point of view it is a mere machine, the
aim of which we cannot see. Even if, quite without justification, nay, at
bottom, in spite of all conceivability and its conformity to law, one
should assume a first beginning, nothing would thereby be essentially
changed. For the arbitrarily assumed first condition of things would at
its origin have irrevocably determined and fixed, both as a whole and down
to the smallest detail, the state immediately following it; this state,
again, would have determined the one succeeding it, and so on _per secula
seculorum_, for the chain of causality, with its absolute strictness—this
brazen bond of necessity and fate—introduces every phenomenon irrevocably
and unalterably, just as it is. The difference merely amounts to this,
that in the case of the one assumption we would have before us a piece of
clockwork which had once been wound up, but in the case of the other a
perpetual motion; the necessity of the course, on the other hand, would
remain the same. In the prize essay already referred to I have irrefutably
proved that the action of man can make no exception here, for I showed how
it constantly proceeds with strict necessity from two factors—his
character and the motives which come to him. The character is inborn and
unalterable; the motives are introduced with necessity under the guidance
of causality by the strictly determined course of the world.

Accordingly then, from one point of view, which we certainly cannot
abandon, because it is established by the objective laws of the world,
which are _a priori_ valid, the world, with all that is in it, appears as
an aimless, and therefore incomprehensible, play of an eternal necessity,
an inscrutable and inexorable Αναγκη. Now, what is objectionable, nay,
revolting, in this inevitable and irrefutable view of the world cannot be
thoroughly done away with by any assumption except this, that as in one
aspect every being in the world is a phenomenon, and necessarily
determined by the laws of the phenomenon, in another aspect it is in
itself _will_, and indeed absolutely _free will_, for necessity only
arises through the forms which belong entirely to the phenomenon, through
the principle of sufficient reason in its different modes. Such a will,
then, must be self‐dependent, for, as free, _i.e._, as a thing in itself,
and therefore not subject to the principle of sufficient reason, it cannot
depend upon another in its being and nature any more than in its conduct
and action. By this assumption alone will as much _freedom_ be supposed as
is needed to counterbalance the inevitable strict _necessity_ which
governs the course of the world. Accordingly one has really only the
choice either of seeing that the world is a mere machine which runs on of
necessity, or of recognising a free will as its inner being whose
manifestation is not directly the action but primarily the _existence and
nature_ of things. This freedom is therefore transcendental, and consists
with empirical necessity, in the same way as the transcendental ideality
of phenomena consists with their empirical reality. That only under this
assumption the action of a man, in spite of the necessity with which it
proceeds from his character and the motives, is yet _his own_ I have shown
in my prize essay on the freedom of the will; with this, however, self‐
dependency is attributed to his nature. The same relation holds good of
all things in the world. The strictest _necessity_, carried out honestly
with rigid consistency, and the most perfect _freedom_, rising to
omnipotence, had to appear at once and together in philosophy; but,
without doing violence to truth, this could only take place by placing the
whole _necessity_ in the _acting and doing_ (_Operari_), and the whole
_freedom_ in the _being and nature_ (_Esse_). Thereby a riddle is solved
which is as old as the world, simply because it has hitherto always been
held upside down and the freedom persistently sought in the _Operari_, the
necessity in the _Esse_. I, on the contrary, say: Every being without
exception _acts_ with strict necessity, but it _exists_ and is what it is
by virtue of its _freedom_. Thus with me freedom and necessity are to be
met with neither more nor less than in any earlier system; although now
one and now the other must be conspicuous according as one takes offence
that _will_ is attributed to processes of nature which hitherto were
explained from necessity, or that the same strict necessity is recognised
in motivation as in mechanical causality. The two have merely changed
places: freedom has been transferred to the _Esse_, and necessity limited
to the _Operari_.

In short, _Determinism_ stands firm. For fifteen hundred years men have
wearied themselves in vain to shake it, influenced by certain crotchets,
which are well known, but dare scarcely yet be called by their name. Yet
in accordance with it the world becomes a mere puppet‐show, drawn by wires
(motives), without it being even possible to understand for whose
amusement. If the piece has a plan, then fate is the director; if it has
none, then blind necessity. There is no other deliverance from this
absurdity than the knowledge that the _being and nature_ of all things is
the manifestation of a really _free will_, which knows itself in them; for
their _doing and acting_ cannot be delivered from necessity. To save
freedom from fate and chance, it had to be transferred from the action to
the existence.

As now necessity only affects the phenomenon, not the thing in itself,
_i.e._, the true nature of the world, so also does _multiplicity_. This is
sufficiently explained in § 25 of the first volume. I have only to add
here one remark in confirmation and illustration of this truth.

Every one knows only _one_ being quite immediately—his own will in self‐
consciousness. Everything else he knows only indirectly, and then judges
it by analogy with this; a process which he carries further in proportion
to the grade of his reflective powers. Even this ultimately springs from
the fact that there really is _only one being_; the illusion of
multiplicity (_Maja_), which proceeds from the forms of external,
objective comprehension, could not penetrate to inner, simple
consciousness; therefore this always finds before it only one being.

If we consider the perfection of the works of nature, which can never be
sufficiently admired, and which even in the lowest and smallest organisms,
for example, in the fertilising parts of plants or in the internal
construction of insects, is carried out with as infinite care and
unwearied labour as if each work of nature had been its only one, upon
which it was therefore able to expend all its art and power; if we yet
find this repeated an infinite number of times in each one of innumerable
individuals of every kind, and not less carefully worked out in that one
whose dwelling‐place is the most lonely, neglected spot, to which, till
then, no eye had penetrated; if we now follow the combination of the parts
of every organism as far as we can, and yet never come upon one part which
is quite simple, and therefore ultimate, not to speak of one which is
inorganic; if, finally, we lose ourselves in calculating the design of all
those parts of the organism for the maintenance of the whole by virtue of
which every living thing is complete in and for itself; if we consider at
the same time that each of these masterpieces, itself of short duration,
has already been produced anew an innumerable number of times, and yet
every example of a species, every insect, every flower, every leaf, still
appears just as carefully perfected as was the first of its kind; thus
that nature by no means wearies and begins to bungle, but, with equally
patient master‐hand, perfects the last like the first: then we become
conscious, first of all, that all human art is completely different, not
merely in degree, but in kind, from the works of nature; and, next, that
the working force, the _natura naturans_, in each of its innumerable
works, in the least as in the greatest, in the last as in the first, _is
immediately present whole and undivided_, from which it follows that, as
such and in itself, it knows nothing of space and time. If we further
reflect that the production of these hyperboles of all works of art costs
nature absolutely nothing, so that, with inconceivable prodigality, she
creates millions of organisms which never attain to maturity, and without
sparing exposes every living thing to a thousand accidents, yet, on the
other hand, if favoured by chance or directed by human purpose, readily
affords millions of examples of a species of which hitherto there was only
one, so that millions cost her no more than one; this also leads us to see
that the multiplicity of things has its root in the nature of the
knowledge of the subject, but is foreign to the thing in itself, _i.e._,
to the inner primary force which shows itself in things; that consequently
space and time, upon which the possibility of all multiplicity depends,
are mere forms of our perception; nay, that even that whole inconceivable
ingenuity of structure associated with the reckless prodigality of the
works upon which it has been expended ultimately springs simply from the
way in which things are apprehended by us; for when the simple and
indivisible original effort of the will exhibits itself as object in our
cerebral knowledge, it must appear as an ingenious combination of separate
parts, as means and ends of each other, accomplished with wonderful
completeness.

The _unity of that will_, here referred to, which lies beyond the
phenomenon, and in which we have recognised the inner nature of the
phenomenal world, is a metaphysical unity, and consequently transcends the
knowledge of it, _i.e._, does not depend upon the functions of our
intellect, and therefore can not really be comprehended by it. Hence it
arises that it opens to the consideration an abyss so profound that it
admits of no thoroughly clear and systematically connected insight, but
grants us only isolated glances, which enable us to recognise this unity
in this and that relation of things, now in the subjective, now in the
objective sphere, whereby, however, new problems are again raised, all of
which I will not engage to solve, but rather appeal here to the words _est
quadam prodire tenus_, more concerned to set up nothing false or
arbitrarily invented than to give a thorough account of all;—at the risk
of giving here only a fragmentary exposition.

If we call up to our minds and distinctly go through in thought the
exceedingly acute theory of the origin of the planetary system, first put
forth by Kant and later by Laplace, a theory of which it is scarcely
possible to doubt the correctness, we see the lowest, crudest, and
blindest forces of nature bound to the most rigid conformity to law, by
means of their conflict for one and the same given matter, and the
accidental results brought about by this produce the framework of the
world, thus of the designedly prepared future dwelling‐place of
innumerable living beings, as a system of order and harmony, at which we
are the more astonished the more distinctly and accurately we come to
understand it. For example, if we see that every planet, with its present
velocity, can only maintain itself exactly where it actually has its
place, because if it were brought nearer to the sun it would necessarily
fall into it, or if placed further from it would necessarily fly away from
it; how, conversely, if we take the place as given, it can only remain
there with its present velocity and no other, because if it went faster it
would necessarily fly away from the sun, and if it went slower it would
necessarily fall into it; that thus only one definite place is suitable to
each definite velocity of a planet; and if we now see this solved by the
fact that the same physical, necessary, and blindly acting cause which
appointed it its place, at the same time and just by doing so, imparted to
it exactly the only velocity suitable for this place, in consequence of
the law of nature that a revolving body increases its velocity in
proportion as its revolution becomes smaller; and, moreover, if finally we
understand how endless permanence is assured to the whole system, by the
fact that all the mutual disturbances of the course of the planets which
unavoidably enter, must adjust themselves in time; how then it is just the
irrationality of the periods of revolution of Jupiter and Saturn to each
other that prevents their respective perturbations from repeating
themselves at one place, whereby they would become dangerous, and brings
it about that, appearing seldom and always at a different place, they must
sublate themselves again, like dissonances in music which are again
resolved into harmony. By means of such considerations we recognise a
design and perfection, such as could only have been brought about by the
freest absolute will directed by the most penetrating understanding and
the most acute calculation. And yet, under the guidance of that cosmogony
of Laplace, so well thought out and so accurately calculated, we cannot
prevent ourselves from seeing that perfectly blind forces of nature,
acting according to unalterable natural laws, through their conflict and
aimless play among themselves, could produce nothing else but this very
framework of the world, which is equal to the work of an extraordinarily
enhanced power of combination. Instead now, after the manner of
Anaxagoras, of dragging in the aid of an _intelligence_ known to us only
from animal nature, and adapted only to its aims, an intelligence which,
coming from without, cunningly made use of the existing forces of nature
and their laws in order to carry out its ends, which are foreign to
these,—we recognise in these lowest forces of nature themselves that same,
one will, which indeed first manifests itself in them, and already in this
manifestation striving after its goal, through its original laws
themselves works towards its final end, to which therefore all that
happens according to blind laws of nature must minister and correspond.
And this indeed cannot be otherwise, because everything material is
nothing but just the phenomenal appearance, the visibility, the
objectivity of the will to live which is one. Thus even the lowest forces
of nature themselves are animated by that same will, which afterwards, in
the individual beings provided with intelligence, marvels at its own work,
as the somnambulist wonders in the morning at what he has done in his
sleep; or, more accurately, which is astonished at its own form which it
beholds in the mirror. This unity which is here proved of the accidental
with the intentional, of the necessary with the free, on account of which
the blindest chances, which, however, rest upon universal laws of nature,
are as it were the keys upon which the world‐spirit plays its melodies so
full of significance,—this unity, I say, is, as has already been remarked,
an abyss in the investigation into which even philosophy can throw no full
light, but only a glimmer.

But I now turn to a _subjective_ consideration belonging to this place, to
which, however, I am able to give still less distinctness than to the
objective consideration which has just been set forth; for I shall only be
able to express it by images and similes. Why is our consciousness
brighter and more distinct the further it extends towards without, so that
its greatest clearness lies in sense perception, which already half
belongs to things outside us,—and, on the other hand, grows dimmer as we
go in, and leads, if followed to its inmost recesses, to a darkness in
which all knowledge ceases? Because, I say, consciousness presupposes
_individuality_; but this belongs to the mere phenomenon, for it is
conditioned by the forms of the phenomenon, space and time, as
multiplicity of the similar. Our inner nature, on the other hand, has its
root in that which is no longer phenomenon, but thing in itself, to which,
therefore, the forms of the phenomenon do not extend; and thus the chief
conditions of individuality are wanting, and with these the distinctness
of consciousness falls off. In this root of existence the difference of
beings ceases, like that of the radii of a sphere in the centre; and as in
the sphere the surface is produced by the radii ending and breaking off,
so consciousness is only possible where the true inner being runs out into
the phenomenon, through whose forms the separate individuality becomes
possible upon which consciousness depends, which is just on that account
confined to phenomena. Therefore all that is distinct and thoroughly
comprehensible in our consciousness always lies without upon this surface
of the sphere. Whenever, on the contrary, we withdraw entirely from this,
consciousness forsakes us,—in sleep, in death, to a certain extent also in
magnetic or magic influences; for these all lead through the centre. But
just because distinct consciousness, being confined to the surface of the
sphere, is not directed towards the centre, it recognises other
individuals certainly as of the same kind, but not as identical, which yet
in themselves they are. Immortality of the individual might be compared to
a point of the surface flying off at a tangent. But immortality, by virtue
of the eternal nature of the inner being of the whole phenomenon, may be
compared to the return of that point, on the radius, to the centre, of
which the whole surface is just the extension. The will as the thing in
itself is whole and undivided in every being, as the centre is an integral
part of every radius; while the peripherical end of this radius is in the
most rapid revolution, with the surface, which represents time and its
content, the other end, at the centre, which represents eternity, remains
in the profoundest peace, because the centre is the point of which the
rising half is not different from the sinking. Therefore in the Bhagavad‐
gita it is said: “_Haud distributum animantibus, et quasi distributum
tamen insidens, animantiumque sustentaculum id cognoscendum, edax et
rursus genitale_” (Lect. 13, 16 vers. Schlegel). Certainly we fall here
into mystical and figurative language, but it is the only language in
which anything can be said on this entirely transcendent theme. So this
simile also may pass. The human race may be imagined as an _animal
compositum_, a form of life of which many polypi, especially those which
swim, such as _Veretillum_, _Funiculina_, and others, afford examples. As
in these the head isolates each individual animal, and the lower part,
with the common stomach, combines them all in the unity of one life
process, so the brain with its consciousness isolates the human
individual, while the unconscious part, the vegetative life with its
ganglion system, into which in sleep the brain‐consciousness disappears,
like a lotus which nightly sinks in the flood, is a common life of all, by
means of which in exceptional cases they can even communicate, as, for
example, occurs when dreams communicate themselves directly, the thoughts
of the mesmeriser pass into the somnambulist, and finally also in the
magnetic or generally magical influence proceeding from intentional
willing. Such an influence, if it occurs, is _toto genere_ different from
every other on account of the _influxus physicus_ which takes place, for
it is really an _actio in distans_ which the will, certainly proceeding
from the individual, yet performs in its metaphysical quality as the
omnipresent substratum of the whole of nature. One might also say that as
in the _generatio æquivoca_ there sometimes and as an exception appears a
weak residue of the original _creative power_ of the will, which in the
existing forms of nature has already done its work and is extinguished, so
there may be, exceptionally, acting in these magical influences, as it
were, a surplus of its original _omnipotence_, which completes its work
and spends itself in the construction and maintenance of the organisms. I
have spoken fully of this magical property of the will in “The Will in
Nature,” and I gladly omit here discussions which have to appeal to
uncertain facts, which yet cannot be altogether ignored or denied.




Chapter XXVI.(4) On Teleology.


The universal teleology or design of organised nature relative to the
continuance of every existing being, together with the adaptation of
organised to unorganised nature, cannot without violence enter into the
connection of any philosophical system except that one which makes a
_will_ the basis of the existence of every natural being; a will which
accordingly expresses its nature and tendency not merely in the actions,
but already in the _form_ of the phenomenal organism. In the preceding
chapter I have merely indicated the account which our system of thought
gives of this subject, since I have already expounded it in the passage of
the first volume referred to below, and with special clearness and fulness
in “The Will in Nature,” under the rubric “Comparative Anatomy.”

The astounding amazement which is wont to take possession of us when we
consider the endless design displayed in the construction of organised
beings ultimately rests upon the certainly natural but yet false
assumption that that _adaptation_ of the parts to each other, to the whole
of the organism and to its aims in the external world, as we comprehend it
and judge of it by means of _knowledge_, thus upon the path of the _idea_,
has also come into being upon the same path; thus that as it exists _for_
the intellect, it was also brought about _by_ the intellect. We certainly
can only bring about something regular and conforming to law, such, for
example, as every crystal is, under the guidance of the law and the rule;
and in the same way, we can only bring about something designed under the
guidance of the conception of the end; but we are by no means justified in
imputing this limitation of ours to nature, which is itself prior to all
intellect, and whose action is entirely different in kind from ours, as
was said in the preceding chapter. It accomplishes that which appears so
designed and planned without reflection and without conception of an end,
because without idea, which is of quite secondary origin. Let us first
consider what is merely according to rule, not yet adapted to ends. The
six equal radii of a snowflake, separating at equal angles, are measured
beforehand by no knowledge; but it is the simple tendency of the original
will, which so exhibits itself to knowledge when knowledge appears. As now
here the will brings about the regular figure without mathematics, so also
without physiology does it bring about the form which is organised and
furnished with organs evidently adapted to special ends. The regular form
in space only exists for the perception, the perceptive form of which is
space; so the design of the organism only exists for the knowing reason,
the reflection of which is bound to the conceptions of end and means. If
direct insight into the working of nature was possible for us, we would
necessarily recognise that the wonder excited by teleology referred to
above is analogous to that which that savage referred to by Kant in his
explanation of the ludicrous felt when he saw the froth irresistibly
foaming out of a bottle of beer which had just been opened, and expressed
his wonder not that it should come out, but that any one had ever been
able to get it in; for we also assume that the teleology of natural
productions has been put in the same as it comes out for us. Therefore our
astonishment at design may likewise be compared to that which the first
productions of the art of printing excited in those who considered them
under the supposition that they were works of the pen, and therefore had
to resort to the assumption of the assistance of a devil in order to
explain them. For, let it be said again, it is our intellect which by
means of its own forms, space, time, and causality, apprehends as object
the act of will, in itself metaphysical and indivisible, which exhibits
itself in the phenomenon of an animal,—it is our intellect which first
produces the multiplicity and diversity of the parts, and is then struck
with amazement at their perfect agreement and conspiring together, which
proceeds from the original unity; whereby then, in a certain sense, it
marvels at its own work.

If we give ourselves up to the contemplation of the indescribably and
infinitely ingenious construction of any animal, even if it were only the
commonest insect, lose ourselves in admiration of it, and it now occurs to
us that nature recklessly exposes even this exceedingly ingenious and
highly complicated organism daily and by thousands to destruction by
accident, animal rapacity, and human wantonness, this wild prodigality
fills us with amazement; but our amazement is based upon an ambiguity of
the conceptions, for we have in our minds the human work of art which is
accomplished by the help of the intellect and by overcoming a foreign and
resisting material, and therefore certainly costs much trouble. Nature’s
works, on the contrary, however ingenious they may be, cost her absolutely
no trouble; for here the will to work is already the work itself, since,
as has already been said, the organism is merely the visibility of the
will which is here present, brought about in the brain.

In consequence of the nature of organised beings which has been set forth,
teleology, as the assumption of the adaptation of every part to its end,
is a perfectly safe guide in considering the whole of organised nature; on
the other hand, in a metaphysical regard, for the explanation of nature
beyond the possibility of experience, it must only be regarded as valid in
a secondary and subsidiary manner for the confirmation of principles of
explanation which are otherwise established: for here it belongs to the
problems which have to be given account of. Accordingly, if in some animal
a part is found of which we do not see any use, we must never venture the
conjecture that nature has produced it aimlessly, perhaps trifling, or out
of mere caprice. Certainly it is possible to conceive something of this
kind under the Anaxagorean assumption that the disposition of nature has
been brought about by means of an ordering understanding, which, as such,
obeys a foreign will; but not under the assumption that the true inner
being (_i.e._, outside of our idea) of every organism is simply and solely
_its own will_; for then the existence of every part is conditioned by the
circumstance that in some way it serves the will which here lies at its
foundation, expresses and realises some tendency of it, and consequently
in some way contributes to the maintenance of this organism. For apart
from _the will which manifests itself in it_, and the conditions of the
external world under which this has voluntarily undertaken to live, for
the conflict with which its whole form and disposition is already adapted,
nothing can have influenced it and determined its form and parts, thus no
arbitrary power, no caprice. On this account everything in it must be
designed; and therefore final causes (_causæ finales_) are the clue to the
understanding of organised nature, as efficient causes (_causæ
efficientes_) are the clue to the understanding of unorganised nature. It
depends upon this, that if in anatomy or zoology, we cannot find the end
or aim of an existing part, our understanding receives a shock similar to
that which it receives in physics from an effect whose cause remains
concealed; and as we assume the latter as necessary, so also we assume the
former, and therefore go on searching for it, however long we may already
have done so in vain. This is, for example, the case with the spleen, as
to the use of which men never cease inventing hypotheses, till some day
one shall have proved itself correct. So is it also with the large spiral‐
formed teeth of the babyroussa, the horn‐shaped excrescences of certain
caterpillars, and more of the like. Negative cases are also judged by us
according to the same rule; for example, that in a class which, as a
whole, is so uniform as that of lizards, so important a part as the
bladder is present in many species, while it is wanting in others;
similarly that dolphins and certain cetacea related to them are entirely
without olfactory nerves, while the rest of the cetacea and even fishes
have them: there must be a reason which determines this.

Individual real exceptions to this universal law of design in organised
nature have indeed been discovered, and with great surprise; but in these
cases that _exceptio firmat regulam_ applies, since they can be accounted
for upon other grounds. Such, for example, is the fact that the tadpoles
of the pipa toad have tails and gills, although, unlike all other
tadpoles, they do not swim, but await their metamorphosis on the back of
the mother; that the male kangaroo has the marsupial bones which in the
female carry the pouch; that male mammals have breasts; that the _Mus
typhlus_, a rat, has eyes, although very small ones, without any opening
for them in the outer skin, which thus covers them, clothed with hair; and
that the moles of the Apennines, and also two fishes—_Murena cœcilia_ and
_Gastrobrauchus cœcus_—are in the same case; of like kind is the _Proteus
anguinus_. These rare and surprising exceptions to the rule of nature,
which is otherwise so rigid, these contradictions with itself into which
it falls, we must explain from the inner connection which the different
kinds of phenomena have with each other, by virtue of the unity of that
which manifests itself in them, and in consequence of which nature must
hint at some thing in one, simply because another of the same type
actually has it. Accordingly the male animal has a rudimentary form of an
organ which is actually present in the female. As now here the difference
of the _sex_ cannot abolish the type of the _species_, so also the type of
a whole order—for example, of the batrachia—asserts itself even where in
one particular species (pipa) one of its determinations is superfluous.
Still less can nature allow a determination (eyes) which belongs to the
type of a whole division (Vertebrata) to vanish entirely without a trace,
even if it is wanting in some particular species (_Mus typhlus_) as
superfluous; but here also it must at least indicate in a rudimentary
manner what it carries out in all the others.

Even from this point of view it is to some extent possible to see upon
what depends that _homology_ in the skeleton primarily of mammals, and in
a wider sense of all vertebrates, which has been so fully explained,
especially by Richard Owen in his “_Ostéologie comparée_,” and on account
of which, for example, all mammals have seven cervical vertebræ, every
bone of the human hand and arm finds its analogue in the fin of the whale,
the skull of the bird in the egg has exactly as many bones as that of the
human fœtus, &c. All this points to a principle which is independent of
teleology, but which is yet the foundation upon which teleology builds, or
the already given material for its works, and just that which Geoffroy St.
Hilaire has explained as the “anatomical element.” It is the _unité de
plan_, the fundamental type of the higher animal world, as it were the
arbitrarily chosen key upon which nature here plays.

Aristotle has already correctly defined the difference between the
efficient cause (_causa efficiens_) and the final cause (_causa finalis_)
in these words: “Δυο τροποι της αιτιας, το οὑ ἑνεκα και το εξ αναγκης, και
δει λεγοντας τυγχανειν μαλιστα μεν αμφοιν.” (_Duo sunt causæ modi: alter
cujus gratia, et alter e necessitate; ac potissimum utrumque eruere
oportet._) _De part. anim._, i. 1. The efficient cause is that _whereby_
something is, the final cause that _on account of which_ it is; the
phenomenon to be explained has, in time, the former _behind_ it, and the
latter _before_ it. Only in the case of the voluntary actions of animal
beings do the two directly unite, for here the final cause, the end,
appears as the motive; a motive, however, is always the true and proper
_cause_ of the action, is wholly and solely its _efficient_ cause, the
change preceding it which calls it forth, by virtue of which it
necessarily appears, and without which it could not happen; as I have
shown in my prize essay upon freedom. For whatever of a physiological
nature one might wish to insert between the act of will and the corporeal
movement, the _will_ always remains here confessedly that which moves, and
what moves _it_ is the _motive_ coming from without, thus the _causa
finalis_; which consequently appears here as _causa efficiens_. Besides,
we know from what has gone before that the bodily movement is one with the
act of will, for it is merely its phenomenal appearance in cerebral
perception. This union of the _causa finalis_ with the efficient cause in
the one phenomenon _intimately_ known to us, which accordingly remains
throughout our typical phenomenon, is certainly to be firmly retained; for
it leads precisely to the conclusion that at least in organised nature,
the knowledge of which has throughout final causes for its clue, a _will_
is the forming power. In fact, we cannot otherwise distinctly think a
final cause except as an end in view, _i.e._, a motive. Indeed, if we
carefully consider the final causes in nature in order to express their
transcendent nature, we must not shrink from a contradiction, and boldly
say: the final cause is a motive which acts upon a being, by which it is
not known. For certainly the termite nests are the motive which has
produced the toothless muzzle of the ant‐bear, and also its long
extensile, glutinous tongue: the hard egg‐shell which holds the chicken
imprisoned is certainly the motive for the horny point with which its beak
is provided in order to break through that shell, after which it throws it
off as of no further use. And in the same way the laws of the reflection
and refraction of light are the motive for the wonderfully ingenious and
complex optical instrument, the human eye, which has the transparency of
its cornea, the different density of its three humours, the form of its
lens, the blackness of its choroid, the sensitiveness of its retina, the
contracting power of its pupil, and its muscular system, accurately
calculated according to those laws. But those motives acted before they
were apprehended; it is not otherwise, however contradictory it may sound.
For here is the transition of the physical into the metaphysical. But the
latter we have already recognised in the _will_; therefore we must see
that the will which extends an elephant’s trunk towards an object is the
same will which has also called it forth and formed it, anticipating
objects.

It is in conformity with this that in the investigation of _organised_
nature we are entirely referred to _final causes_, everywhere seek for
these and explain everything from them. The _efficient causes_, on the
contrary, here assume only a quite subordinate position as the mere tools
of the final causes, and, just as in the case of the voluntary movement of
the limbs, which is confessedly effected by external motives, they are
rather assumed than pointed out. In explaining the physiological
_functions_ we certainly look about for the efficient causes, though for
the most part in vain; but in explaining the origin of the parts we again
look for them no more, but are satisfied with the final causes alone. At
the most we have here some such general principle as that the larger the
part is to be the stronger must be the artery that conducts blood to it;
but of the actually efficient causes which bring about, for example, the
eye, the ear, the brain, we know absolutely nothing. Indeed, even in
explaining the mere functions the final cause is far more important and
more to the point than the efficient; therefore, if the former alone is
known we are instructed and satisfied with regard to the principal matter,
while, on the other hand, the efficient cause alone helps us little. For
example, if we really knew the _efficient cause_ of the circulation of the
blood, as we do not, but still seek it, this would help us little unless
we knew the final cause, that the blood must go into the lungs for the
purpose of oxidation, and again flow back for the purpose of nourishing;
but by the knowledge of this, even without the knowledge of the efficient
cause, we have gained much light. Moreover, I am of opinion, as was said
above, that the circulation of the blood has no properly efficient cause,
but that the will is here as immediately active as in muscular movement
where motives determine it by means of nerve conduction, so that here also
the movement is called forth directly by the final cause; thus by the need
of oxidation in the lungs, which here to a certain extent acts as a motive
upon the blood, yet so that the mediation of knowledge is in this case
wanting, because everything takes place in the interior of the organism.
The so‐called metamorphosis of plants, a thought lightly thrown out by
Kaspar Wolf, which, under this hyperbolic title, Goethe pompously and with
solemn delivery expounds as his own production, belongs to the class of
explanations of organic nature from the efficient cause; although
ultimately he only says that nature does not in the case of every
production begin from the beginning and create out of nothing, but as it
were, writing on in the same style, adds on to what already exists, makes
use of the earlier forms, developed, and raised to higher power, to carry
its work further: just as it has done in the ascending series of animals
entirely in accordance with the law: _Natura non facit saltus, et quod
commodissimum in omnibus suis operationibus sequitur_ (_Arist. de incessu
animalium, c. 2 et 8_). Indeed, to explain the blossom by pointing out in
all its parts the form of the leaf seems to me almost the same as
explaining the structure of a house by showing that all its parts,
storeys, balconies, and garrets, are only composed of bricks and mere
repetitions of the original unity of the brick. And not much better,
though much more problematical, seems to me the explanation of the skull
from vertebræ, although even here also it is a matter of course that the
covering or case of the brain will not be absolutely different and
entirely disparate from that of the spinal cord, of which it is the
continuation and terminal knob, but will rather be a carrying out of the
same kind of thing. This whole method of consideration belongs to the
Homology of Richard Owen referred to above. On the other hand, it seems to
me that the following explanation of the nature of the flower from its
_final cause_, suggested by an Italian whose name has escaped me, is a far
more satisfactory account to give. The end of the _corolla_ is—(1.)
Protection of the pistil and the _stamina_; (2.) by means of it the
purified saps are prepared, which are concentrated in the _pollen_ and
_germs_; (3.) from the glands of its base the essential oil distils which,
for the most part as a fragrant vapour, surrounding the anthers and
pistil, protects them to a certain extent from the influence of the damp
air. It is also one of the advantages of final causes that every
_efficient_ cause always ultimately rests upon something that cannot be
fathomed, a force of nature, _i.e._, a _qualitas occulta_, and, therefore,
it can only give a _relative_ explanation; while the final cause within
its sphere affords a sufficient and perfect explanation. It is true we are
only perfectly content when we know both the efficient cause, also called
by Aristotle ἡ αιτια εξ αναγκης, and the final cause, ἡ χαριν του
βελτιονος, at once and yet separately, as their concurrence, their
wonderful working together, then surprises us, and on account of it the
best appears as the absolutely necessary, and the necessary again as if it
were merely the best and not necessary; for then arises in us the dim
perception that both causes, however different may be their origin, are
yet connected in the root, in the nature of the thing in itself. But such
a twofold knowledge is seldom attainable; in _organised_ nature, because
the efficient cause is seldom known to us; in _unorganised_ nature,
because the final cause remains problematical. However, I will illustrate
this by a couple of examples as good as I find within the range of my
physiological knowledge, for which physiologists may be able to substitute
clearer and more striking ones. The louse of the negro is black. Final
cause: its own safety. Efficient cause: because its nourishment is the
black _rete Malpighi_ of the negro. The multifarious, brilliant, and gay
colouring of the plumage of tropical birds is explained, although only
very generally, from the strong effect of the light in the tropics, as its
efficient cause. As the final cause I would assign that those brilliant
feathers are the gorgeous uniform in which the individuals of the
innumerable species there, often belonging to the same genus, may
recognise each other; so that each male may find his female. The same
holds good of butterflies of different zones and latitudes. It has been
observed that consumptive women, in the last stage of their illness,
readily become pregnant, that the disease stops during pregnancy, but
after delivery appears again worse than before, and now generally results
in death: similarly that consumptive men generally beget another child in
the last days of their life. The _final cause_ here is that nature, always
so anxiously concerned for the maintenance of the species, seeks to
replace by a new individual the approaching loss of one in the prime of
life; the _efficient cause_, on the other hand, is the unusually excited
state of the nervous system which occurs in the last period of
consumption. From the same final cause is to be explained the analogous
phenomenon that (according to Oken, _Die Zeugung_, p. 65) flies poisoned
with arsenic still couple, and die in the act of copulation. The final
cause of the pubes in both sexes, and of the Mons Veneris in the female,
is that even in the case of very thin subjects the Ossa pubis shall not be
felt, which might excite antipathy; the efficient cause, on the other
hand, is to be sought in the fact that wherever the mucous membrane passes
over to the outer skin, hair grows in the vicinity; and, secondly, also
that the head and the genitals are to a certain extent opposite poles of
each other, and therefore have various relations and analogies between
them, among which is that of being covered with hair. The same efficient
cause holds good also of the beard of the man; the final cause of it, I
suppose, lies in the fact that the pathogonomic signs, thus the rapid
alterations of the countenance betraying every movement of the mind, are
principally visible in the mouth and its vicinity; therefore, in order to
conceal these from the prying eye of the adversary, as something dangerous
in bargaining, or in sudden emergencies, nature gave man the beard (which
shows that _homo homini lupus_). The woman, on the other hand, could
dispense with this; for with her dissimulation and command of countenance
are inborn. As I have said, there must be far more apt examples to be
found to show how the completely blind working of nature unites in the
result with the apparently intentional, or, as Kant calls it, the
mechanism of nature with its technic; which points to the fact that both
have their common origin beyond their difference in the will as the thing
in itself. Much would be achieved for the elucidation of this point of
view, if, for example, we could find the efficient cause which carries the
driftwood to the treeless polar lands, or that which has concentrated the
dry land of our planet principally in the northern half of it; while it is
to be regarded as the final cause of this that the winter of that half,
because it occurs in the perihelion which accelerates the course of the
earth, is eight days shorter, and hereby is also milder. Yet in
considering _unorganised_ nature the final cause is always ambiguous, and,
especially when the _efficient_ cause is found, leaves us in doubt whether
it is not a merely subjective view, an aspect conditioned by our point of
view. In this respect, however, it may be compared to many works of art;
for example, to coarse mosaics, theatre decorations, and to the god
Apennine at Pratolino, near Florence, composed of large masses of rock,
all of which only produce their effect at a distance, and vanish when we
come near, because instead of them the efficient cause of their appearance
now becomes visible: but the forms are yet actually existent, and are no
mere imagination. Analogous to this, then, are the final causes in
unorganised nature, if the efficient causes appear. Indeed, those who take
a wide view of things would perhaps allow it to pass if I added that
something similar is the case with omens.

For the rest, if any one desires to misuse the _external_ design, which,
as has been said, always remains ambiguous for physico‐theological
demonstrations, which is done even at the present day, though it is to be
hoped only by Englishmen, there are in this class enough examples _in
contrarium_, thus ateleological instances, to derange his conception. One
of the strongest is presented by the unsuitableness of sea‐water for
drinking, in consequence of which man is never more exposed to the danger
of dying of thirst than in the midst of the greatest mass of water on his
planet. “Why, then, does the sea need to be salt?” let us ask our
Englishman.

That in _unorganised_ nature the final causes entirely withdraw into the
background, so that an explanation from them alone is here no longer
valid, but the efficient causes are rather indispensably required, depends
upon the fact that the will which objectifies itself here also no longer
appears in individuals which constitute a whole for themselves, but in
forces of nature and their action, whereby end and means are too far
separated for their relation to be clear and for us to recognise a
manifestation of will in it. This already occurs in organised nature, in a
certain degree, when the design is an external one, _i.e._, the end lies
in _one_ individual and the means in _another_. Yet even here it remains
unquestionable so long as the two belong to the same species, indeed it
then becomes the more striking. Here we have first to count the
reciprocally adapted organisation of the genitals of the two sexes, and
then also many circumstances that assist the propagation of the species,
for example, in the case of the _Lampyris noctiluca_ (the glowworm) the
circumstance that only the male, which does not shine, has wings to enable
it to seek out the female; the wingless female, on the other hand, since
it only comes out in the evening, possesses the phosphorescent light, so
that the male may be able to find it. Yet in the case of the _Lampyris
Italica_ both sexes shine, which is an instance of the natural luxury of
the South. But a striking, because quite special, example of the kind of
design we are speaking of is afforded by the discovery made by Geoffroy
St. Hilaire, in his last years, of the more exact nature of the sucking
apparatus of the cetacea. Since all sucking requires the action of
respiration, it can only take place in the respirable medium itself, and
not under water, where, however, the sucking young of the whale hangs on
to the teats of the mother; now to meet this the whole mammary apparatus
of the cetacea is so modified that it has become an injecting organ, and
placed in the mouth of the young injects the milk into it without it
requiring to suck. When, on the contrary, the individual that affords
essential help to another belongs to an entirely different species, and
even to another kingdom of nature, we will doubt this external design just
as in unorganised nature; unless it is evident that the maintenance of the
species depends upon it. But this is the case with many plants whose
fructification only takes place by means of insects, which either bear the
pollen to the stigma or bend the stamina to the pistil. The common
barberry, many kinds of iris, and _Aristolochia Clematitis_ cannot
fructify themselves at all without the help of insects (_Chr. Cour._
Sprengel, _Entdecktes Geheimniss, &c._, 1793; Wildenow, _Grundriss der
Kräuterkunde_, 353). Very many diœcia, monœcia, and polygamia are in the
same position. The reciprocal support which the plant and the insect
worlds receive from each other will be found admirably described in
Burdach’s large Physiology, vol. i. § 263. He very beautifully adds: “This
is no mechanical assistance, no make‐shift, as if nature had made the
plants yesterday, and had committed an error which she tries to correct
to‐day through the insect; it is rather a deep‐lying sympathy between the
plant and the animal worlds. It ought to reveal the identity of the two.
Both, children of one mother, ought to subsist with each other and through
each other.” And further on: “But the organised world stands in such a
sympathy with the unorganised world also,” &c. A proof of this _consensus
naturæ_ is also afforded by the observation communicated in the second
volume of the “Introduction into Entomology” by Kirby and Spence, that the
insect eggs that pass the winter attached to the twigs of the trees, which
serve as nourishment for their larvæ, are hatched exactly at the time at
which the twig buds; thus, for example, the aphis of the birch a month
earlier than that of the ash. Similarly, that the insects of perennial
plants pass the winter upon these as eggs; but those of mere annuals,
since they cannot do this, in the state of pupæ.

Three great men have entirely rejected teleology, or the explanation from
final causes, and many small men have echoed them. These three are,
Lucretius, Bacon of Verulam, and Spinoza. But in the case of all three we
know clearly enough the source of this aversion, namely, that they
regarded it as inseparable from speculative theology, of which, however,
they entertained so great a distrust (which Bacon indeed prudently sought
to conceal) that they wanted to give it a wide berth. We find Leibnitz
also entirely involved in this prejudice, for, with characteristic
naïveté, he expresses it as something self‐evident in his _Lettre à M.
Nicaise_ (_Spinozæ op. ed Paulus_, vol. ii. p. 672): “_Les causes finales,
ou ce qui est la même chose, la consideration de la sagesse divine dans
l’ordre des choses._” (The devil also _même chose_!) At the same point of
view we find, indeed, Englishmen even at the present day. The Bridgewater‐
Treatise‐men—Lord Brougham, &c.—nay, even Richard Owen also, in his
“_Ostéologie Comparée_,” thinks precisely as Leibnitz, which I have
already found fault with in the first volume. To all these teleology is at
once also theology, and at every instance of design recognised in nature,
instead of thinking and learning to understand nature, they break at once
into the childish cry, “Design! design!” then strike up the refrain of
their old wives’ philosophy, and stop their ears against all rational
arguments, such as, however, the great Hume has already advanced against
them.(5)

The ignorance of the Kantian philosophy now, after seventy years, which is
really a disgrace to Englishmen of learning, is principally responsible
for this whole outcast position of the English; and this ignorance, again,
depends, at least in great measure, upon the nefarious influence of the
detestable English clergy, with whom stultification of every kind is a
thing after their own hearts, so that only they may be able still to hold
the English nation, otherwise so intelligent, involved in the most
degrading bigotry; therefore, inspired by the basest obscurantism, they
oppose with all their might the education of the people, the investigation
of nature, nay, the advancement of all human knowledge in general; and
both by means of their connections and by means of their scandalous,
unwarrantable wealth, which increases the misery of the people, they
extend their influence even to university teachers and authors, who
accordingly (for example, Th. Brown, “On Cause and Effect”) resort to
suppressions and perversions of every kind simply in order to avoid
opposing even in a distant manner that “cold superstition” (as Pückler
very happily designates their religion, or the current arguments in its
favour).

But, on the other hand, the three great men of whom we are speaking, since
they lived long before the dawn of the Kantian philosophy, are to be
pardoned for their distrust of teleology on account of its origin; yet
even Voltaire regarded the physico‐theological proof as irrefutable. In
order, however, to go into this somewhat more fully: first of all, the
polemic of Lucretius (iv. 824‐858) against teleology is so crude and
clumsy that it refutes itself and convinces us of the opposite. But as
regards Bacon (_De augm. scient._, iii. 4), he makes, in the first place,
no distinction with reference to the use of final causes between organised
and unorganised nature (which is yet just the principal matter), for, in
his examples of final causes, he mixes the two up together. Then he
banishes final causes from physics to metaphysics; but the latter is for
him, as it is still for many at the present day, identical with
speculative theology. From this, then, he regards final causes as
inseparable, and goes so far in this respect that he blames Aristotle
because he has made great use of final causes, yet without connecting them
with speculative theology (which I shall have occasion immediately
especially to praise). Finally, Spinoza (_Eth._ i. _prop._ 36, _appendix_)
makes it abundantly clear that he identifies teleology so entirely with
physico‐theology, against which he expresses himself with bitterness, that
he explains _Natura nihil frustra agere_: _hoc est, quod in usum hominum
non sit_: similarly, _Omnia naturalia tanquam ad suum utile media
considerant, et credunt aliquem alium esse, qui illa media paraverit_; and
also: _Hinc statuerunt, Deos omnia in usum hominum fecisse et dirigere_.
Upon this, then, he bases his assertion: _Naturam finem nullum sibi
præfixum habere et omnes causas finales nihil, nisi humana esse figmenta_.
His aim merely was to block the path of theism; and he had quite rightly
recognised the physico‐theological proof as its strongest weapon. But it
was reserved for Kant really to refute this proof, and for me to give the
correct exposition of its material, whereby I have satisfied the maxim:
_Est enim verum index sui et falsi_. But Spinoza did not know how else to
help himself but by the desperate stroke of denying teleology itself, thus
design in the works of nature—an assertion the monstrosity of which is at
once evident to every one who has gained any accurate knowledge of
organised nature. This limited point of view of Spinoza, together with his
complete ignorance of nature, sufficiently prove his entire incompetence
in this matter, and the folly of those who, upon his authority, believe
they must judge contemptuously of final causes.

Aristotle, who just here shows his brilliant side, contrasts very
advantageously with these modern philosophers. He goes unprejudiced to
nature, knows of no physico‐theology—such a thing has never entered his
mind,—and he has never looked at the world for the purpose of seeing
whether it was a bungled piece of work. He is in his heart pure from all
this, for he also sets up hypotheses as to the origin of animals and men
(_De generat. anim._, iii. 11) without lighting upon the physico‐
theological train of thought. He always says: “ἡ φυσις ποιει (_natura
facit_), never ἡ φυσις πεποιηται” (_natura facta est_). But after he has
truly and diligently studied nature, he finds that it everywhere proceeds
teleologically, and he says: “ματην ὁρωμεν ουδεν ποιουσαν την φυσιν”
(_naturam nihil frustra facere cernimus_), _De respir._, c. 10; and in the
books, _De partibus animalium_, which are a comparative anatomy: “Ουδε
περιεργον ουδεν, ουτε ματην ἡ φυσις ποιει.—Ἡ φυσις ἑνεκα του ποιει
παντα.—Πανταχου δε λεγομεν τοδε τουδε ἑνεκα, ὁπου αν φαινηται τελος τι,
προς ὁ ἡ κινησις περαινει; ὡστε ειναι φανερον, ὁτι εστι τι τοιουτον, ὁ δη
και καλουμεν φυσιν. Επει το σωμα οργανον; ἑνεκα τινος γαρ ἑκαστον των
μοριων, ομοιως τε και το ὁλον.” (_Nihil supervacaneum, nihil frustra
natura facit.—Natura rei alicujus gratia facit omnia.—Rem autem hanc esse
illius gratia asserere ubique solemus, quoties finem intelligimus aliquem,
in quem motus terminetur; quocirca ejusmodi aliquid esse constat, quod
Naturam vocamus. Est enim corpus instrumentum: nam membrum unumquodque __
rei alicujus gratia est, tum vero totum ipsum._) At greater length, p. 633
and 645 of the Berlin quarto edition, and also _De incessu animalium_, c.
2: “Ἡ φυσις ουδεν ποιει ματην, αλλ᾽ αει, εκ των ενδεχομενων τῃ ουσιᾳ, περι
ἑκαστον γενος ζωου το αριστον.” (_Natura nihil frustra facit, sed semper
ex iis, quæ cuique animalium generis essentiæ contingunt, id quod optimum
est._) But he expressly recommends teleology at the end of the books _De
generatione animalium_, and blames Democritus for having denied it, which
is just what Bacon, in his prejudice, praises in him. Especially, however,
in the “Physica,” ii. 8, p. 198, Aristotle speaks _ex professo_ of final
causes, and establishes them as the true principle of the investigation of
nature. In fact, every good and regular mind must, in considering
organised nature, hit upon teleology, but unless it is determined by the
preconceived opinions, by no means either upon physico‐theology or upon
the anthropo‐teleology condemned by Spinoza. With regard to Aristotle
generally, I wish further to draw attention to the fact here, that his
teaching, so far as it concerns _unorganised_ nature, is very defective
and unserviceable, as in the fundamental conceptions of mechanics and
physics he accepts the most gross errors, which is the less pardonable,
since before him the Pythagoreans and Empedocles had been upon the right
path and had taught much better. Empedocles indeed, as we learn from
Aristotle’s second book, _De cœlo_ (c. 1, p. 284), had already grasped the
conception of a tangential force arising from rotation, and counteracting
gravity, which Aristotle again rejects. Quite the reverse, however, is
Aristotle’s relation to the investigation of _organised_ nature. This is
his field; here the wealth of his knowledge, the keenness of his
observation, nay, sometimes the depth of his insight, astonish us. Thus,
to give just one example, he already knew the antagonism in which in the
ruminants the horns and the teeth of the upper jaw stand to each other, on
account of which, therefore, the latter are wanting where the former are
found, and conversely (_De partib. anim._, iii. 2). Hence then, also his
correct estimation of final causes.




Chapter XXVII. On Instinct And Mechanical Tendency.


It is as if nature had wished, in the mechanical tendencies of animals, to
give the investigator an illustrative commentary upon her works, according
to final causes and the admirable design of her organised productions
which is thereby introduced. For these mechanical tendencies show most
clearly that creatures can work with the greatest decision and
definiteness towards an end which they do not know, nay, of which they
have no idea. Such, for instance, is the bird’s nest, the spider’s web,
the ant‐lion’s pitfall, the ingenious bee‐hive, the marvellous termite
dwelling, &c., at least for those individual animals that carry them out
for the first time; for neither the form of the perfected work nor the use
of it can be known to them. Precisely so, however, does _organising_
nature work; and therefore in the preceding chapter I gave the paradoxical
explanation of the final cause, that it is a motive which acts without
being known. And as in working from mechanical tendency that which is
active is evidently and confessedly the _will_, so is it also really the
will which is active in the working of organising nature.

One might say, the will of animal creatures is set in motion in two
different ways: either by motivation or by instinct; thus from without, or
from within; by an external occasion, or by an internal tendency; the
former is explicable because it lies before us without, the latter is
inexplicable because it is merely internal. But, more closely considered,
the contrast between the two is not so sharp, indeed ultimately it runs
back into a difference of degree. The motive also only acts under the
assumption of an inner tendency, _i.e._, a definite quality of will which
is called its _character_. The motive in each case only gives to this a
definite direction—individualises it for the concrete case. So also
instinct, although a definite tendency of the will, does not act entirely,
like a spring, from within; but it also waits for some external
circumstance necessarily demanded for its action, which at least
determines the time of its manifestation; such is, for the migrating bird,
the season of the year; for the bird that builds its nest, the fact of
pregnancy and the presence of the material for the nest; for the bee it
is, for the beginning of the structure, the basket or the hollow tree, and
for the following work many individually appearing circumstances; for the
spider, it is a well‐adapted corner; for the caterpillar, the suitable
leaf; for egg‐laying insects, the for the most part very specially
determined and often rare place, where the hatched larvæ will at once find
their nourishment, and so on. It follows from this that in works of
mechanical tendency it is primarily the instinct of these animals that is
active, yet subordinated also to their intellect. The instinct gives the
universal, the rule; the intellect the particular, the application, in
that it directs the detail of the execution, in which therefore the work
of these animals clearly adapts itself to the circumstances of the
existing case. According to all this, the difference between instinct and
mere character is to be fixed thus: Instinct is a character which is only
set in motion by a _quite specially determined_ motive, and on this
account the action that proceeds from it is always exactly of the same
kind; while the character which is possessed by every species of animal
and every individual man is certainly a permanent and unalterable quality
of will, which can yet be set in motion by very different motives, and
adapts itself to these; and on account of this the action proceeding from
it may, according to its material quality, be very different, but yet will
always bear the stamp of the same character, and will therefore express
and reveal this; so that for the knowledge of this character the material
quality of the action in which it appears is essentially a matter of
indifference. Accordingly we might explain instinct as a character which
is beyond all measure one‐sided and strictly determined. It follows from
this exposition that being determined by mere motivation presupposes a
certain width of the sphere of knowledge, and consequently a more fully
developed intellect: therefore it is peculiar to the higher animals, quite
pre‐eminently, however, to man; while being determined by instinct only
demands as much intellect as is necessary to apprehend the one quite
specially determined motive, which alone and exclusively becomes the
occasion for the manifestation of the instinct. Therefore it is found in
the case of an exceedingly limited sphere of knowledge, and consequently,
as a rule, and in the highest degree, only in animals of the lower
classes, especially insects. Since, accordingly, the actions of these
animals only require an exceedingly simple and small motivation from
without, the medium of this, thus the intellect or the brain, is very
slightly developed in them, and their outward actions are for the most
part under the same guidance as the inner, follow upon mere stimuli,
physiological functions, thus the ganglion system. This is, then, in their
case excessively developed; their principal nerve‐stem runs under the
belly in the form of two cords, which at every limb of the body form a
ganglion little inferior to the brain in size, and, according to Cuvier,
this nerve‐stem is an analogue not so much of the spinal cord as of the
great sympathetic nerve. According to all this, instinct and action
through mere motivation, stand in a certain antagonism, in consequence of
which the former has its maximum in insects, and the latter in man, and
the actuation of other animals lies between the two in manifold gradations
according as in each the cerebral or the ganglion system is
preponderatingly developed. Just because the instinctive action and the
ingenious contrivances of insects are principally directed from the
ganglion system, if we regard them as proceeding from the brain alone, and
wish to explain them accordingly, we fall into absurdities, because we
then apply a false key. The same circumstance, however, imparts to their
action a remarkable likeness to that of somnambulists, which indeed is
also explained as arising from the fact that, instead of the brain, the
sympathetic nerve has undertaken the conduct of the outward actions also;
insects are accordingly, to a certain extent, natural somnambulists.
Things which we cannot get at directly we must make comprehensible to
ourselves by means of an analogy. What has just been referred to will
accomplish this in a high degree when assisted by the fact that in
Kieser’s “_Tellurismus_” (vol. ii. p. 250) a case is mentioned “in which
the command of the mesmerist to the somnambulist to perform a definite
action in a waking state was carried out by him when he awoke, without
remembering the command.” Thus it was as if he must perform that action
without rightly knowing why. Certainly this has the greatest resemblance
to what goes on in the case of mechanical instincts in insects. The young
spider feels that it must spin its web, although it neither knows nor
understands the aim of it. We are also reminded here of the dæmon of
Socrates, on account of which he had the feeling that he must leave undone
some action expected of him, or lying near him, without knowing why—for
his prophetic dream about it was forgotten. We have in our own day quite
well‐authenticated cases analogous to this; therefore I only briefly call
these to mind. One had taken his passage on a ship, but when it was about
to sail he positively would not go on board without being conscious of a
reason;—the ship went down. Another goes with companions to a powder
magazine; when he has arrived in its vicinity he absolutely will not go
any further, but turns hastily back, seized with anxiety he knows not
why;—the magazine blows up. A third upon the ocean feels moved one night,
without any reason, not to undress, but lays himself on the bed in his
clothes and boots, and even with his spectacles on;—in the night the ship
goes on fire, and he is among the few who save themselves in the boat. All
this depends upon the dull after‐effect of forgotten fatidical dreams, and
gives us the key to an analogous understanding of instinct and mechanical
tendencies.

On the other hand, as has been said, the mechanical tendencies of insects
reflect much light upon the working of the unconscious will in the inner
functions of the organism and in its construction. For without any
difficulty we can see in the ant‐hill or the beehive the picture of an
organism explained and brought to the light of knowledge. In this sense
Burdach says (_Physiologie_, vol. ii. p. 22): “The formation and
depositing of the eggs is the part of the queen‐bee, and the care for the
cultivation of them falls to the workers; thus in the former the ovary,
and in the latter the uterus, is individualised.” In the insect society,
as in the animal organism, the _vita propria_ of each part is subordinated
to the life of the whole, and the care for the whole precedes that for
particular existence; indeed the latter is only conditionally willed, the
former unconditionally; therefore the individuals are even sacrificed
occasionally for the whole, as we allow a limb to be taken off in order to
save the whole body. Thus, for example, if the path is closed by water
against the march of the ants, those in front boldly throw themselves in
until their corpses are heaped up into a dam for those that follow. When
the drones have become useless they are stung to death. Two queens in the
hive are surrounded, and must fight with each other till one of them loses
its life. The ant‐mother bites its own wings off after it has been
impregnated, for they would only be a hindrance to it in the work that is
before it of tending the new family it is about to found under the earth
(Kirby and Spence, vol. i.) As the liver will do nothing more than secrete
gall for the service of the digestion, nay, will only itself exist for
this end—and so with every other part—the working bees also will do
nothing more than collect honey, secrete wax, and make cells for the brood
of the queen; the drones nothing more than impregnate; the queen nothing
but deposit eggs; thus all the parts work only for the maintenance of the
whole which alone is the unconditional end, just like the parts of the
organism. The difference is merely that in the organism the will acts
perfectly blindly in its primary condition; in the insect society, on the
other hand, the thing goes on already in the light of knowledge, to which,
however, a decided co‐operation and individual choice is only left in the
accidents of detail, where it gives assistance and adopts what has to be
carried out to the circumstances. But the insects will the end as a whole
without knowing it; just like organised nature working according to final
causes; even the choice of the means is not as a whole left to their
knowledge, but only the more detailed disposition of them. Just on this
account, however, their action is by no means automatic, which becomes
most distinctly visible if one opposes obstacles to their action. For
example, the caterpillar spins itself in leaves without knowing the end;
but if we destroy the web it skilfully repairs it. Bees adapt their hive
at the first to the existing circumstances, and subsequent misfortunes,
such as intentional destruction, they meet in the way most suitable to the
special case (Kirby and Spence, _Introduc. to Entomol._; Huber, _Des
abeilles_). Such things excite our astonishment, because the apprehension
of the circumstances and the adaptation to these is clearly a matter of
knowledge; while we believe them capable once for all of the most
ingenious preparation for the coming race and the distant future, well
knowing that in this they are not guided by knowledge, for a forethought
of that kind proceeding from knowledge demands an activity of the brain
rising to the level of reason. On the other hand, the intellect even of
the lower animals is sufficient for the modifying and arranging of the
particular case according to the existing or appearing circumstances;
because, guided by instinct, it has only to fill up the gaps which this
leaves. Thus we see ants carry off their larvæ whenever the place is too
damp, and bring them back again when it becomes dry. They do not know the
aim of this, thus are not guided in it by knowledge; but the choice of the
time at which the place is no longer suitable for the larvæ, and also of
the place to which they now bring them, is left to their knowledge. I wish
here also to mention a fact which some one related to me verbally from his
own experience, though I have since found that Burdach quotes it from
Gleditsch. The latter, in order to test the burying‐beetle (_Necrophorus
vespillo_), had tied a dead frog lying upon the ground to a string, the
upper end of which was fastened to a stick stuck obliquely in the ground.
Now after several burying‐beetles had, according to their custom,
undermined the frog, it could not, as they expected, sink into the ground;
after much perplexed running hither and thither they undermined the stick
also. To this assistance rendered to instinct, and that repairing of the
works of mechanical tendency, we find in the organism the _healing power_
of nature analogous, which not only heals wounds, replacing even bone and
nerve substance, but, if through the injury of a vein or nerve branch a
connection is interrupted, opens a new connection by means of enlargement
of other veins or nerves, nay, perhaps even by producing new branches;
which further makes some other part or function take the place of a
diseased part or function; in the case of the loss of an eye sharpens the
other, or in the case of the loss of one of the senses sharpens all the
rest; which even sometimes closes an intestinal wound, in itself fatal, by
the adhesion of the mesentery or the peritoneum; in short, seeks to meet
every injury and every disturbance in the most ingenious manner. If, on
the other hand, the injury is quite incurable, it hastens to expedite
death, and indeed the more so the higher is the species of the organism,
thus the greater its sensibility. Even this has its analogue in the
instinct of insects. The wasps, for instance, who through the whole summer
have with great care and labour fed their larvæ on the produce of their
plundering, but now, in October, see the last generation of them facing
starvation, sting them to death (Kirby and Spence, vol. i. p. 374). Nay,
still more curious and special analogies may be found; for example, this:
if the female humble‐bee (_Apis terrestris, bombylius_) lays eggs, the
working humble‐bees are seized with a desire to devour them, which lasts
from six to eight hours and is satisfied unless the mother keeps them off
and carefully guards the eggs. But after this time the working humble‐bees
show absolutely no inclination to eat the eggs even when offered to them;
on the contrary, they now become the zealous tenders and nourishers of the
larvæ now being hatched out. This may without violence be taken as an
analogue of children’s complaints, especially teething, in which it is
just the future nourishers of the organism making an attack upon it which
so often costs it its life. The consideration of all these analogies
between organised life and the instinct, together with the mechanical
tendencies of the lower animals, serves ever more to confirm the
conviction that the _will_ is the basis of the one as of the other, for it
shows here also the subordinate rôle of knowledge in the action of the
will, sometimes more, sometimes less, confined, and sometimes wanting
altogether.

But in yet another respect instincts and the animal organisation
reciprocally illustrate each other: through the _anticipation of the
future_ which appears in both. By means of instincts and mechanical
tendencies animals care for the satisfaction of wants which they do not
yet feel, nay, not only for their own wants, but even for those of the
future brood. Thus they work for an end which is as yet unknown to them.
This goes so far, as I have illustrated by the example of the Bombex in
“The Will in Nature” (second edit. p. 45, third edit. p. 47), that they
pursue and kill in advance the enemies of their future eggs. In the same
way we see the future wants of an animal, its prospective ends,
anticipated in its whole corporisation by the organised implements for
their attainment and satisfaction; from which, then, proceeds that perfect
adaptation of the structure of every animal to its manner of life, that
equipment of it with the needful weapons to attack its prey and to ward
off its enemies, and that calculation of its whole form with reference to
the element and the surroundings in which it has to appear as a pursuer,
which I have fully described in my work on the will in nature under the
rubric “Comparative Anatomy.” All these anticipations, both in the
instinct and in the organisation of animals, we might bring under the
conception of a knowledge _a priori_, if _knowledge_ lay at their
foundation at all. But this is, as we have shown, not the case. Their
source lies deeper than the sphere of knowledge, in the will as the thing
in itself, which as such remains free even from the _forms_ of knowledge;
therefore with reference to it time has no significance, consequently the
future lies as near it as the present.




Chapter XXVIII.(6) Characterisation Of The Will To Live.


Our second book closed with the question as to the goal and aim of that
will which had shown itself to be the inner nature of all things in the
world. The following remarks may serve to supplement the answer to this
question given there in general terms, for they lay down the character of
the will as a whole.

Such a characterisation is possible because we have recognised as the
inner nature of the world something thoroughly real and empirically given.
On the other hand, the very name “world‐soul,” by which many have denoted
that inner being, gives instead of this a mere _ens rationis_; for “soul”
signifies an individual unity of consciousness which clearly does not
belong to that nature, and in general, since the conception “soul”
supposes knowing and willing in inseparable connection and yet independent
of the animal organism, it is not to be justified, and therefore not to be
used. The word should never be applied except in a metaphorical sense, for
it is much more insidious than ψυχη or anima, which signify breath.

Much more unsuitable, however, is the way in which so‐called pantheists
express themselves, whose whole philosophy consists chiefly in this, that
they call the inner nature of the world, which is unknown to them, “God;”
by which indeed they imagine they have achieved much. According to this,
then, the world would be a theophany. But let one only look at it: this
world of constantly needy creatures, who continue for a time only by
devouring one another, fulfil their existence in anxiety and want, and
often suffer terrible miseries, till at last they fall into the arms of
death; whoever distinctly looks upon this will allow that Aristotle was
right in saying: “ἡ φυσις δαιομονια, αλλ᾽ ου θεια εστι” (_Natura dæmonia
est, non divina_), _De divinat._, c. 2, p. 463; nay, he will be obliged to
confess that a God who could think of changing Himself into such a world
as this must certainly have been tormented by the devil. I know well that
the pretended philosophers of this century follow Spinoza in this, and
think themselves thereby justified. But Spinoza had special reasons for
thus naming his one substance, in order, namely, to preserve at least the
word, although not the thing. The stake of Giordano Bruno and of Vanini
was still fresh in the memory; they also had been sacrificed to that God
for whose honour incomparably more human sacrifices have bled than on the
altars of all heathen gods of both hemispheres together. If, then, Spinoza
calls the world God, it is exactly the same thing as when Rousseau in the
“_Contrat social_,” constantly and throughout denotes the people by the
word _le souverain_; we might also compare it with this, that once a
prince who intended to abolish the nobility in his land, in order to rob
no one of his own, hit upon the idea of ennobling all his subjects. Those
philosophers of our day have certainly one other ground for the
nomenclature we are speaking of, but it is no more substantial. In their
philosophising they all start, not from the world or our consciousness of
it, but from God, as something given and known; He is not their
_quæsitum_, but their _datum_. If they were boys I would then explain to
them that this is a _petitio principii_, but they know this as well as I
do. But since Kant has shown that the path of the earlier dogmatism, which
proceeded honestly, the path from the world to a God, does not lead there,
these gentlemen now imagine they have found a fine way of escape and made
it cunningly. Will the reader of a later age pardon me for detaining him
with persons of whom he has never heard.

Every glance at the world, to explain which is the task of the
philosopher, confirms and proves that _will to live_, far from being an
arbitrary hypostasis or an empty word, is the only true expression of its
inmost nature. Everything presses and strives towards _existence_, if
possible _organised existence_, _i.e._, _life_, and after that to the
highest possible grade of it. In animal nature it then becomes apparent
that _will to live_ is the keynote of its being, its one unchangeable and
unconditioned quality. Let any one consider this universal desire for
life, let him see the infinite willingness, facility, and exuberance with
which the will to live presses impetuously into existence under a million
forms everywhere and at every moment, by means of fructification and of
germs, nay, when these are wanting, by means of _generatio æquivoca_,
seizing every opportunity, eagerly grasping for itself every material
capable of life: and then again let him cast a glance at its fearful alarm
and wild rebellion when in any particular phenomenon it must pass out of
existence; especially when this takes place with distinct consciousness.
Then it is precisely the same as if in this single phenomenon the whole
world would be annihilated for ever, and the whole being of this
threatened living thing is at once transformed into the most desperate
struggle against death and resistance to it. Look, for example, at the
incredible anxiety of a man in danger of his life, the rapid and serious
participation in this of every witness of it, and the boundless rejoicing
at his deliverance. Look at the rigid terror with which a sentence of
death is heard, the profound awe with which we regard the preparations for
carrying it out, and the heartrending compassion which seizes us at the
execution itself. We would then suppose there was something quite
different in question than a few less years of an empty, sad existence,
embittered by troubles of every kind, and always uncertain: we would
rather be amazed that it was a matter of any consequence whether one
attained a few years earlier to the place where after an ephemeral
existence he has billions of years to be. In such phenomena, then, it
becomes visible that I am right in declaring that _the will to live_ is
that which cannot be further explained, but lies at the foundation of all
explanations, and that this, far from being an empty word, like the
absolute, the infinite, the idea, and similar expressions, is the most
real thing we know, nay, the kernel of reality itself.

But if now, abstracting for a while from this interpretation drawn from
our inner being, we place ourselves as strangers over against nature, in
order to comprehend it objectively, we find that from the grade of
organised life upwards it has only one intention—that of the _maintenance
of the species_. To this end it works, through the immense superfluity of
germs, through the urgent vehemence of the sexual instinct, through its
willingness to adapt itself to all circumstances and opportunities, even
to the production of bastards, and through the instinctive maternal
affection, the strength of which is so great that in many kinds of animals
it even outweighs self‐love, so that the mother sacrifices her life in
order to preserve that of the young. The individual, on the contrary, has
for nature only an indirect value, only so far as it is the means of
maintaining the species. Apart from this its existence is to nature a
matter of indifference; indeed nature even leads it to destruction as soon
as it has ceased to be useful for this end. Why the individual exists
would thus be clear; but why does the species itself exist? That is a
question which nature when considered merely objectively cannot answer.
For in vain do we seek by contemplating her for an end of this restless
striving, this ceaseless pressing into existence, this anxious care for
the maintenance of the species. The strength and time of the individuals
are consumed in the effort to procure sustenance for themselves and their
young, and are only just sufficient, sometimes even not sufficient, for
this. Even if here and there a surplus of strength, and therefore of
comfort—in the case of the _one_ rational species also of
knowledge—remains, this is much too insignificant to pass for the end of
that whole process of nature. The whole thing, when regarded thus purely
objectively, and indeed as extraneous to us, looks as if nature was only
concerned that of all her (Platonic) _Ideas_, _i.e._, permanent forms,
none should be lost. Accordingly, as if she had so thoroughly satisfied
herself with the fortunate discovery and combination of these Ideas (for
which the three preceding occasions on which she stocked the earth’s
surface with animals were only the preparation), that now her only fear is
lest any one of these beautiful fancies should be lost, _i.e._, lest any
one of these forms should disappear from time and the causal series. For
the individuals are fleeting as the water in the brook; the Ideas, on the
contrary, are permanent, like its eddies: but the exhaustion of the water
would also do away with the eddies. We would have to stop at this
unintelligible view if nature were known to us only from without, thus
were given us merely _objectively_, and we accepted it as it is
comprehended by knowledge, and also as sprung from knowledge, _i.e._, in
the sphere of the idea, and were therefore obliged to confine ourselves to
this province in solving it. But the case is otherwise, and a glance at
any rate is afforded us into the _interior of nature_; inasmuch as this is
nothing else than _our own inner being_, which is precisely where nature,
arrived at the highest grade to which its striving could work itself up,
is now by the light of knowledge found directly in self‐consciousness.
Here the will shows itself to us as something _toto genere_ different from
the idea, in which nature appears unfolded in all her (Platonic) Ideas;
and it now gives us, at one stroke, the explanation which could never be
found upon the objective path of the idea. Thus the subjective here gives
the key for the exposition of the objective. In order to recognise, as
something original and unconditioned, that exceedingly strong tendency of
all animals and men to retain life and carry it on as long as possible—a
tendency which was set forth above as characteristic of the subjective, or
of the will—it is necessary to make clear to ourselves that this is by no
means the result of any objective _knowledge_ of the worth of life, but is
independent of all knowledge; or, in other words, that those beings
exhibit themselves, not as drawn from in front, but as impelled from
behind.

If with this intention we first of all review the interminable series of
animals, consider the infinite variety of their forms, as they exhibit
themselves always differently modified according to their element and
manner of life, and also ponder the inimitable ingenuity of their
structure and mechanism, which is carried out with equal perfection in
every individual; and finally, if we take into consideration the
incredible expenditure of strength, dexterity, prudence, and activity
which every animal has ceaselessly to make through its whole life; if,
approaching the matter more closely, we contemplate the untiring diligence
of wretched little ants, the marvellous and ingenious industry of the
bees, or observe how a single burying‐beetle (_Necrophorus vespillo_)
buries a mole of forty times its own size in two days in order to deposit
its eggs in it and insure nourishment for the future brood (_Gleditsch,
Physik. Bot. Œkon. Abhandl._, iii. 220), at the same time calling to mind
how the life of most insects is nothing but ceaseless labour to prepare
food and an abode for the future brood which will arise from their eggs,
and which then, after they have consumed the food and passed through the
chrysalis state, enter upon life merely to begin again from the beginning
the same labour; then also how, like this, the life of the birds is for
the most part taken up with their distant and laborious migrations, then
with the building of their nests and the collecting of food for the brood,
which itself has to play the same rôle the following year; and so all work
constantly for the future, which afterwards makes bankrupt;—then we cannot
avoid looking round for the reward of all this skill and trouble, for the
end which these animals have before their eyes, which strive so
ceaselessly—in short, we are driven to ask: What is the result? what is
attained by the animal existence which demands such infinite preparation?
And there is nothing to point to but the satisfaction of hunger and the
sexual instinct, or in any case a little momentary comfort, as it falls to
the lot of each animal individual, now and then in the intervals of its
endless need and struggle. If we place the two together, the indescribable
ingenuity of the preparations, the enormous abundance of the means, and
the insufficiency of what is thereby aimed at and attained, the insight
presses itself upon us that life is a business, the proceeds of which are
very far from covering the cost of it. This becomes most evident in some
animals of a specially simple manner of life. Take, for example, the mole,
that unwearied worker. To dig with all its might with its enormous shovel
claws is the occupation of its whole life; constant night surrounds it;
its embryo eyes only make it avoid the light. It alone is truly an _animal
nocturnum_; not cats, owls, and bats, who see by night. But what, now,
does it attain by this life, full of trouble and devoid of pleasure? Food
and the begetting of its kind; thus only the means of carrying on and
beginning anew the same doleful course in new individuals. In such
examples it becomes clear that there is no proportion between the cares
and troubles of life and the results or gain of it. The consciousness of
the world of perception gives a certain appearance of objective worth of
existence to the life of those animals which can see, although in their
case this consciousness is entirely subjective and limited to the
influence of motives upon them. But the _blind_ mole, with its perfect
organisation and ceaseless activity, limited to the alternation of insect
larvæ and hunger, makes the disproportion of the means to the end
apparent. In this respect the consideration of the animal world left to
itself in lands uninhabited by men is also specially instructive. A
beautiful picture of this, and of the suffering which nature prepares for
herself without the interference of man, is given by Humboldt in his
“_Ansichten der Natur_” (second edition, p. 30 _et seq._); nor does he
neglect to cast a glance (p. 44) at the analogous suffering of the human
race, always and everywhere at variance with itself. Yet in the simple and
easily surveyed life of the brutes the emptiness and vanity of the
struggle of the whole phenomenon is more easily grasped. The variety of
the organisations, the ingenuity of the means, whereby each is adapted to
its element and its prey contrasts here distinctly with the want of any
lasting final aim; instead of which there presents itself only momentary
comfort, fleeting pleasure conditioned by wants, much and long suffering,
constant strife, _bellum omnium_, each one both a hunter and hunted,
pressure, want, need, and anxiety, shrieking and howling; and this goes on
_in secula seculorum_, or till once again the crust of the planet breaks.
Yunghahn relates that he saw in Java a plain far as the eye could reach
entirely covered with skeletons, and took it for a battlefield; they were,
however, merely the skeletons of large turtles, five feet long and three
feet broad, and the same height, which come this way out of the sea in
order to lay their eggs, and are then attacked by wild dogs (_Canis
rutilans_), who with their united strength lay them on their backs, strip
off their lower armour, that is, the small shell of the stomach, and so
devour them alive. But often then a tiger pounces upon the dogs. Now all
this misery repeats itself thousands and thousands of times, year out,
year in. For this, then, these turtles are born. For whose guilt must they
suffer this torment? Wherefore the whole scene of horror? To this the only
answer is: it is thus that the will to live objectifies itself.(7) Let one
consider it well and comprehend it in all its objectifications; and then
one will arrive at an understanding of its nature and of the world; but
not if one frames general conceptions and builds card houses out of them.
The comprehension of the great drama of the objectification of the will to
live, and the characterisation of its nature, certainly demands somewhat
more accurate consideration and greater thoroughness than the dismissal of
the world by attributing to it the title of God, or, with a silliness
which only the German fatherland offers and knows how to enjoy, explaining
it as the “Idea in its other being,” in which for twenty years the
simpletons of my time have found their unutterable delight. Certainly,
according to pantheism or Spinozism, of which the systems of our century
are mere travesties, all that sort of thing reels itself off actually
without end, straight on through all eternity. For then the world is a
God, _ens perfectissimum_, _i.e._, nothing better can be or be conceived.
Thus there is no need of deliverance from it; and consequently there is
none. But why the whole tragi‐comedy exists cannot in the least be seen;
for it has no spectators, and the actors themselves undergo infinite
trouble, with little and merely negative pleasure.

Let us now add the consideration of the human race. The matter indeed
becomes more complicated, and assumes a certain seriousness of aspect; but
the fundamental character remains unaltered. Here also life presents
itself by no means as a gift for enjoyment, but as a task, a drudgery to
be performed; and in accordance with this we see, in great and small,
universal need, ceaseless cares, constant pressure, endless strife,
compulsory activity, with extreme exertion of all the powers of body and
mind. Many millions, united into nations, strive for the common good, each
individual on account of his own; but many thousands fall as a sacrifice
for it. Now senseless delusions, now intriguing politics, incite them to
wars with each other; then the sweat and the blood of the great multitude
must flow, to carry out the ideas of individuals, or to expiate their
faults. In peace industry and trade are active, inventions work miracles,
seas are navigated, delicacies are collected from all ends of the world,
the waves engulf thousands. All strive, some planning, others acting; the
tumult is indescribable. But the ultimate aim of it all, what is it? To
sustain ephemeral and tormented individuals through a short span of time
in the most fortunate case with endurable want and comparative freedom
from pain, which, however, is at once attended with ennui; then the
reproduction of this race and its striving. In this evident disproportion
between the trouble and the reward, the will to live appears to us from
this point of view, if taken objectively, as a fool, or subjectively, as a
delusion, seized by which everything living works with the utmost exertion
of its strength for something that is of no value. But when we consider it
more closely, we shall find here also that it is rather a blind pressure,
a tendency entirely without ground or motive.

The law of motivation, as was shown in § 29 of the first volume, only
extends to the particular actions, not to willing _as a whole and in
general_. It depends upon this, that if we conceive of the human race and
its action _as a whole and universally_, it does not present itself to us,
as when we contemplate the particular actions, as a play of puppets who
are pulled after the ordinary manner by threads outside them; but from
this point of view, as puppets which are set in motion by internal
clockwork. For if, as we have done above, one compares the ceaseless,
serious, and laborious striving of men with what they gain by it, nay,
even with what they ever can gain, the disproportion we have pointed out
becomes apparent, for one recognises that that which is to be gained,
taken as the motive‐power, is entirely insufficient for the explanation of
that movement and that ceaseless striving. What, then, is a short
postponement of death, a slight easing of misery or deferment of pain, a
momentary stilling of desire, compared with such an abundant and certain
victory over them all as death? What could such advantages accomplish
taken as actual moving causes of a human race, innumerable because
constantly renewed, which unceasingly moves, strives, struggles, grieves,
writhes, and performs the whole tragi‐comedy of the history of the world,
nay, what says more than all, _perseveres_ in such a mock‐existence as
long as each one possibly can? Clearly this is all inexplicable if we seek
the moving causes outside the figures and conceive the human race as
striving, in consequence of rational reflection, or something analogous to
this (as moving threads), after those good things held out to it, the
attainment of which would be a sufficient reward for its ceaseless cares
and troubles. The matter being taken thus, every one would rather have
long ago said, “_Le jeu ne vaut pas la chandelle_,” and have gone out.
But, on the contrary, every one guards and defends his life, like a
precious pledge intrusted to him under heavy responsibility, under
infinite cares and abundant misery, even under which life is tolerable.
The wherefore and the why, the reward for this, certainly he does not see;
but he has accepted the worth of that pledge without seeing it, upon trust
and faith, and does not know what it consists in. Hence I have said that
these puppets are not pulled from without, but each bears in itself the
clockwork from which its movements result. This is _the will to live_,
manifesting itself as an untiring machine, an irrational tendency, which
has not its sufficient reason in the external world. It holds the
individuals firmly upon the scene, and is the _primum mobile_ of their
movements; while the external objects, the motives, only determine their
direction in the particular case; otherwise the cause would not be at all
suitable to the effect. For, as every manifestation of a force of nature
has a cause, but the force of nature itself none, so every particular act
of will has a motive, but the will in general has none: indeed at bottom
these two are one and the same. The will, as that which is metaphysical,
is everywhere the boundary‐stone of every investigation, beyond which it
cannot go. From the original and unconditioned nature of the will, which
has been proved, it is explicable that man loves beyond everything else an
existence full of misery, trouble, pain, and anxiety, and, again, full of
ennui, which, if he considered and weighed it purely objectively, he would
certainly abhor, and fears above all things the end of it, which is yet
for him the one thing certain.(8) Accordingly we often see a miserable
figure, deformed and shrunk with age, want, and disease, implore our help
from the bottom of his heart for the prolongation of an existence, the end
of which would necessarily appear altogether desirable if it were an
objective judgment that determined here. Thus instead of this it is the
blind will, appearing as the tendency to life, the love of life, and the
sense of life; it is the same which makes the plants grow. This sense of
life may be compared to a rope which is stretched above the puppet‐show of
the world of men, and on which the puppets hang by invisible threads,
while apparently they are supported only by the ground beneath them (the
objective value of life). But if the rope becomes weak the puppet sinks;
if it breaks the puppet must fall, for the ground beneath it only seemed
to support it: _i.e._, the weakening of that love of life shows itself as
hypochondria, spleen, melancholy: its entire exhaustion as the inclination
to suicide, which now takes place on the slightest occasion, nay, for a
merely imaginary reason, for now, as it were, the man seeks a quarrel with
himself, in order to shoot himself dead, as many do with others for a like
purpose;—indeed, upon necessity, suicide is resorted to without any
special occasion. (Evidence of this will be found in Esquirol, _Des
maladies mentales_, 1838.) And as with the persistence in life, so is it
also with its action and movement. This is not something freely chosen;
but while every one would really gladly rest, want and ennui are the whips
that keep the top spinning. Therefore the whole and every individual bears
the stamp of a forced condition; and every one, in that, inwardly weary,
he longs for rest, but yet must press forward, is like his planet, which
does not fall into the sun only because a force driving it forward
prevents it. Therefore everything is in continual strain and forced
movement, and the course of the world goes on, to use an expression of
Aristotle’s (_De cœlo_, ii. 13), “ου φυσει, αλλα βιᾳ” (_Motu, non naturali
sed violento_). Men are only apparently drawn from in front; really they
are pushed from behind; it is not life that tempts them on, but necessity
that drives them forward. The law of motivation is, like all causality,
merely the form of the phenomenon. We may remark in passing that this is
the source of the comical, the burlesque, the grotesque, the ridiculous
side of life; for, urged forward against his will, every one bears himself
as best he can, and the straits that thus arise often look comical enough,
serious as is the misery which underlies them.

In all these considerations, then, it becomes clear to us that the will to
live is not a consequence of the knowledge of life, is in no way a
_conclusio ex præmissis_, and in general is nothing secondary. Rather, it
is that which is first and unconditioned, the premiss of all premisses,
and just on that account that from which philosophy must _start_, for the
will to live does not appear in consequence of the world, but the world in
consequence of the will to live.

I scarcely need to draw attention to the fact that the considerations with
which we now conclude the second book already point forcibly to the
serious theme of the fourth book, indeed would pass over into it directly
if it were not that my architectonic symmetry makes it necessary that the
third book, with its fair contents, should come between, as a second
consideration of _the world as idea_, the conclusion of which, however,
again points in the same direction.





SUPPLEMENTS TO THE THIRD BOOK.


    “_Et is similis spectatori est, quad ab omni separatus spectaculum
    videt._”

    —OUPNEKHAT, vol. i. p. 304.




Chapter XXIX.(9) On The Knowledge Of The Ideas.


The intellect, which has hitherto only been considered in its original and
natural condition of servitude under the will, appears in the third book
in its deliverance from that bondage; with regard to which, however, it
must at once be observed that we have not to do here with a lasting
emancipation, but only with a brief hour of rest, an exceptional and
indeed only momentary release from the service of the will. As this
subject has been treated with sufficient fulness in the first volume, I
have here only to add a few supplementary remarks.

As, then, was there explained, the intellect in its activity in the
service of the will, thus in its natural function, knows only the mere
_relations_ of things; primarily to the will itself, to which it belongs,
whereby they become motives of the will; but then also, just for the sake
of the completeness of this knowledge, the relations of things to each
other. This last knowledge first appears in some extent and importance in
the human intellect; in the case of the brutes, on the other hand, even
where the intellect is considerably developed, only within very narrow
limits. Clearly even the apprehension of the relations which things have
to each other only takes place, _indirectly_, in the service of the will.
It therefore forms the transition to the purely objective knowledge, which
is entirely independent of the will; it is scientific knowledge, the
latter is artistic knowledge. If many and various relations of an object
are immediately apprehended, from these the peculiar and proper nature of
the object appears ever more distinctly, and gradually constructs itself
out of mere relations: although it itself is entirely different from them.
In this mode of apprehension the subjection of the intellect to the will
at once becomes ever more indirect and less. If the intellect has strength
enough to gain the preponderance, and let go altogether the relations of
things to the will, in order to apprehend, instead of them, the purely
objective nature of a phenomenon, which expresses itself through all
relations, it also forsakes, along with the service of the will, the
apprehension of mere relations, and thereby really also that of the
individual thing as such. It then moves freely, no longer belonging to a
will. In the individual thing it knows only the _essential_, and therefore
its whole _species_; consequently it now has for its object the _Ideas_,
in my sense, which agrees with the original, Platonic meaning of this
grossly misused word; thus the permanent, unchanging forms, independent of
the temporal existence of the individuals, the _species rerum_, which
really constitute what is purely objective in the phenomena. An Idea so
apprehended is not yet indeed the essence of the thing in itself, just
because it has sprung from knowledge of mere relations; yet, as the result
of the sum of all the relations, it is the peculiar _character_ of the
thing, and thereby the complete expression of the essence which exhibits
itself as an object of perception, comprehended, not in relation to an
individual will, but as it expresses itself spontaneously, whereby indeed
it determines all its relations, which till then alone were known. The
Idea is the root point of all these relations, and thereby the complete
and perfect phenomenon, or, as I have expressed it in the text, the
adequate objectivity of the will at this grade of its manifestation. Form
and colour, indeed, which in the apprehension of the Idea by perception
are what is immediate, belong at bottom not to the Idea itself, but are
merely the medium of its expression; for, strictly speaking, space is as
foreign to it as time. In this sense the Neo‐Platonist Olympiodorus
already says in his commentary on Plato’s Alcibiades (Kreuzer’s edition of
Proclus and Olympiodorus, vol. ii. p. 82): “το ειδος μεταδεδωκε μεν της
μορφης τῃ ὑλῃ αμερες δε ον μετελαβεν εξ αυτης του δεαστατου:” _i.e._, the
Idea, in itself unextended, imparted certainly the form to the matter, but
first assumed extension from it. Thus, as was said, the Ideas reveal not
the thing in itself, but only the objective character of things, thus
still only the phenomenon; and we would not even understand this character
if the inner nature of things were not otherwise known to us at least
obscurely and in feeling. This nature itself cannot be understood from the
Ideas, nor in general through any merely _objective_ knowledge; therefore
it would remain an eternal secret if we were not able to approach it from
an entirely different side. Only because every knowing being is also an
individual, and thereby a part of nature, does the approach to the inner
being of nature stand open to him in his own self‐consciousness, where, as
we have found, it makes itself known in the most immediate manner as will.

Now what the Platonic Idea is, regarded as a merely objective image, mere
form, and thereby lifted out of time and all relations—that, taken
empirically and in time, is the _species_ or kind. This, then, is the
empirical correlative of the Idea. The Idea is properly eternal, but the
species is of endless duration, although its appearance upon one planet
may become extinct. Even the names of the two pass over into each other:
ιδεα, ειδος, _species_, kind. The Idea is the species, but not the genus:
therefore the _species_ are the work of nature, the _genera_ the work of
man; they are mere conceptions. There are _species __ naturales_, but only
_genera logica_. Of manufactured articles there are no Ideas, but only
conceptions; thus _genera logica_, and their subordinate classes are
_species logicæ_. To what is said in this reference in vol. i. § 41, I
will add here that Aristotle also (_Metaph._ i. 9 and xiii. 5) says that
the Platonists admitted no ideas of manufactured articles: “ὁιον οικια,
και δακτυλιος, ὡν ου φασιν ειναι ειδη” (_Ut domus et annulus, quorum ideas
dari negant_). With which compare the Scholiast, p. 562, 563 of the Berlin
quarto edition. Aristotle further says (_Metaph._ xi. 3): “αλλ ειπερ
(Supple., ειδῃ εστι) επι των φυσει (εστι) διο δη ου κακως ὁ Πλατων εφη,
ὁτι ειδη εστι ὁποσα φυσει” (_Si quidem ideæ sunt, in iis sunt, quæ natura
fiunt: propter quod non male Plato dixit, quod species eorum sunt, quæ
natura sunt_). On which the Scholiast remarks, p. 800: “και τουτο αρεσκει
και αυτοις τοις τας ιδεας θεμενοις; των γαρ ὑπο τεχνης γινομενων ιδεας
ειναι ουκ ελεγον, αλλα των ὑπο φυσεως” (_Hoc etiam ipsis ideas
statuentibus placet: non enim arte factorum ideas dari ajebant, sed natura
procreatorum_). For the rest, the doctrine of Ideas originated with the
Pythagoreans, unless we distrust the assertion of Plutarch in the book,
_De placitis philosophorum_, L. i. c. 3.

The individual is rooted in the species, and time in eternity. And as
every individual is so only because it has the nature of its species in
itself, so also it has only temporal existence because it is in eternity.
In the following book a special chapter is devoted to the life of the
species.

In § 49 of the first volume I have sufficiently brought out the difference
between the Idea and the conception. Their resemblance, on the other hand,
rests upon the following ground: The original and essential unity of an
Idea becomes broken up into the multiplicity of individual things through
the perception of the knowing individual, which is subject to sensuous and
cerebral conditions. But that unity is then restored through the
reflection of the reason, yet only _in abstracto_, as a concept,
_universale_, which indeed is equal to the Idea in extension, but has
assumed quite a different _form_, and has thereby lost its perceptible
nature, and with this its thorough determinateness. In this sense (but in
no other) we might, in the language of the Scholastics, describe the Ideas
as _universalia ante rem_, the conceptions as _universalia post rem_.
Between the two stand the individual things, the knowledge of which is
possessed also by the brutes. Without doubt the realism of the Scholastics
arose from the confusion of the Platonic Ideas, to which, since they are
also the species, an objective real being can certainly be attributed,
with the mere concepts to which the Realists now wished to attribute such
a being, and thereby called forth the victorious opposition of Nominalism.




Chapter XXX.(10) On The Pure Subject Of Knowledge.


The comprehension of an Idea, the entrance of it into our consciousness,
is only possible by means of a change in us, which might also be regarded
as an act of self‐denial; for it consists in this, that knowledge turns
away altogether from our own will, thus now leaves out of sight entirely
the valuable pledge intrusted to it, and considers things as if they could
never concern the will at all. For thus alone does knowledge become a pure
mirror of the objective nature of things. Knowledge conditioned in this
way must lie at the foundation of every genuine work of art as its origin.
The change in the subject which is required for this cannot proceed from
the will, just because it consists in the elimination of all volition;
thus it can be no act of the will, _i.e._, it cannot lie in our choice. On
the contrary, it springs only from a temporary preponderance of the
intellect over the will, or, physiologically considered, from a strong
excitement of the perceptive faculty of the brain, without any excitement
of the desires or emotions. To explain this somewhat more accurately I
remind the reader that our consciousness has two sides; partly, it is a
consciousness of our _own selves_, which is the will; partly a
consciousness of other things, and as such primarily, knowledge, _through
perception_, of the external world, the apprehension of objects. Now the
more one side of the whole consciousness comes to the front, the more the
other side withdraws. Accordingly, the consciousness of _other things_,
thus knowledge of perception, becomes the more perfect, _i.e._, the more
objective, the less we are conscious of ourselves at the time. Here exists
an actual antagonism. The more we are conscious of the object, the less we
are conscious of the subject; the more, on the other hand, the latter
occupies our consciousness, the weaker and more imperfect is our
perception of the external world. The state which is required for pure
objectivity of perception has partly permanent conditions in the
perfection of the brain and the general physiological qualities favourable
to its activity, partly temporary conditions, inasmuch as such a state is
favoured by all that increases the attention and heightens the
susceptibility of the cerebral nervous system, yet without exciting any
passion. One must not think here of spirituous drinks or opium; what is
rather required is a night of quiet sleep, a cold bath, and all that
procures for the brain activity an unforced predominance by quieting the
circulation and calming the passions. It is especially these natural means
of furthering the cerebral nervous activity which bring it about,
certainly so much the better the more developed and energetic in general
the brain is, that the object separates itself ever more from the subject,
and finally introduces the state of pure objectivity of perception, which
of itself eliminates the will from consciousness, and in which all things
stand before us with increased clearness and distinctness, so that we are
conscious almost only of them and scarcely at all of ourselves; thus our
whole consciousness is almost nothing more than the medium through which
the perceived object appears in the world as an idea. Thus it is necessary
for pure, will‐less knowledge that the consciousness of ourselves should
vanish, since the consciousness of other things is raised to such a pitch.
For we only apprehend the world in a purely objective manner when we no
longer know that we belong to it; and all things appear the more beautiful
the more we are conscious merely of them and the less we are conscious of
ourselves. Since now all suffering proceeds from the will, which
constitutes the real self, with the withdrawal of this side of
consciousness all possibility of suffering is also abolished; therefore
the condition of the pure objectivity of perception is one which
throughout gives pleasure; and hence I have shown that in it lies one of
the two constituent elements of æsthetic satisfaction. As soon, on the
other hand, as the consciousness of our own self, thus subjectivity,
_i.e._, the will, again obtains the upper hand, a proportional degree of
discomfort or unrest also enters; of discomfort, because our corporealness
(the organism which in itself is the will) is again felt; of unrest,
because the will, on the path of thought, again fills the consciousness
through wishes, emotions, passions, and cares. For the will, as the
principle of subjectivity, is everywhere the opposite, nay, the antagonist
of knowledge. The greatest concentration of subjectivity consists in the
_act of will_ proper, in which therefore we have the most distinct
consciousness of our own self. All other excitements of the will are only
preparations for this; the act of will itself is for subjectivity what for
the electric apparatus is the passing of the spark. Every bodily sensation
is in itself an excitement of the will, and indeed oftener of the
_noluntas_ than of the _voluntas_. The excitement of the will on the path
of thought is that which occurs by means of motives; thus here the
subjectivity is awakened and set in play by the objectivity itself. This
takes place whenever any object is apprehended no longer in a purely
objective manner, thus without participation in it, but, directly or
indirectly, excites desire or aversion, even if it is only by means of a
recollection, for then it acts as a motive in the widest sense of the
word.

I remark here that abstract thinking and reading, which are connected with
words, belong indeed in the wider sense to the consciousness _of other
things_, thus to the objective employment of the mind; yet only
indirectly, by means of conceptions. But the latter are the artificial
product of the reason, and are therefore already a work of intention.
Moreover, the will is the ruler of all abstract exercise of the mind, for,
according to its aims, it imparts the direction, and also fixes the
attention; therefore such mental activity is always accompanied by some
effort; and this presupposes the activity of the will. Thus complete
objectivity of consciousness does not exist with this kind of mental
activity, as it accompanies the æsthetic apprehension, _i.e._, the
knowledge of the Ideas, as a condition.

In accordance with the above, the pure objectivity of perception, by
virtue of which no longer the individual thing as such, but the Idea of
its species is known, is conditioned by the fact that one is no longer
conscious of oneself, but only of the perceived objects, so that one’s own
consciousness only remains as the supporter of the objective existence of
these objects. What increases the difficulty of this state, and therefore
makes it more rare, is, that in it the accident (the intellect) overcomes
and annuls the substance (the will), although only for a short time. Here
also lies the analogy and, indeed, the relationship of this with the
denial of the will expounded at the end of the following book. Although
knowledge, as was shown in the preceding book, is sprung from the will and
is rooted in the manifestation of the will, the organism, yet it is just
by the will that its purity is disturbed, as the flame is by the fuel and
its smoke. It depends upon this that we can only apprehend the purely
objective nature of things, the Ideas which appear in them, when we have
ourselves no interest in them, because they stand in no relation to our
will. From this, again, it arises that the Ideas of anything appeal to us
more easily from a work of art than from reality. For what we behold only
in a picture or in poetry stands outside all possibility of having any
relation to our will; for in itself it exists only for knowledge and
appeals immediately to knowledge alone. On the other hand, the
apprehension of Ideas from reality assumes some measure of abstraction
from our own volition, arising above its interests which demands a special
power of the intellect. In a high degree, and for some duration, this
belongs only to genius, which consists indeed in this, that a greater
measure of the power of knowledge exists than is required for the service
of an individual will, and this surplus becomes free, and now comprehends
the world without reference to the will. Thus that the work of art
facilitates so greatly the apprehension of the Ideas, in which æsthetic
satisfaction consists, depends not merely upon the fact that art, by
giving prominence to what is essential and eliminating what is
unessential, presents the things more distinctly and characteristically,
but just as much on the fact that the absolute silence of the will, which
is demanded for the purely objective comprehension of the nature of the
things, is attained with the greatest certainty when the perceived object
itself lies entirely outside the province of things which are capable of
having a relation to the will, because it is nothing real, but a mere
picture. Now this holds good, not only of the works of plastic and
pictorial art, but also of poetry; the effect of which is also conditioned
by indifferent, will‐less, and thereby purely objective apprehension. It
is exactly this which makes a perceived object _picturesque_, an event of
actual life _poetical_; for it is only this that throws over the objects
of the real world that magic gleam which in the case of sensibly perceived
objects is called the picturesque, and in the case of those which are only
perceived in imagination is called the poetical. If poets sing of the
blithe morning, the beautiful evening, the still moonlight night, and many
such things, the real object of their praise is, unknown to themselves,
the pure subject of knowledge which is called forth by those beauties of
nature, and on the appearance of which the will vanishes from
consciousness, and so that peace of heart enters which, apart from this,
is unattainable in the world. How otherwise, for example, could the verse—


    “_Nox erat, at cœlo fulgebat luna sereno,_
          _Inter minora sidera_,”


affect us so beneficently, nay, so magically? Further, that the stranger
or the mere passing traveller feels the picturesque or poetical effect of
objects which are unable to produce this effect upon those who live among
them may be explained from the fact that the novelty and complete
strangeness of the objects of such an indifferent, purely objective
apprehension are favourable to it. Thus, for example, the sight of an
entirely strange town often makes a specially agreeable impression upon
the traveller, which it by no means produces in the inhabitant of it; for
it arises from the fact that the former, being out of all relation to this
town and its inhabitants, perceives it purely objectively. Upon this
depends partly the pleasure of travelling. This seems also to be the
reason why it is sought to increase the effect of narrative or dramatic
works by transferring the scene to distant times or lands: in Germany, to
Italy or Spain; in Italy, to Germany, Poland, or even Holland. If now
perfectly objective, intuitive apprehension, purified from all volition,
is the condition of the _enjoyment_ of æsthetic objects, so much the more
is it the condition of their _production_. Every good picture, every
genuine poem, bears the stamp of the frame of mind described. For only
what has sprung from perception, and indeed from purely objective
perception, or is directly excited by it, contains the living germ from
which genuine and original achievements can grow up: not only in plastic
and pictorial art, but also in poetry, nay, even in philosophy. The
_punctum saliens_ of every beautiful work, of every great or profound
thought, is a purely objective perception. Such perception, however, is
absolutely conditioned by the complete silence of the will, which leaves
the man simply the pure subject of knowledge. The natural disposition for
the predominance of this state is genius.

With the disappearance of volition from consciousness, the individuality
also, and with it its suffering and misery, is really abolished. Therefore
I have described the pure subject of knowledge which then remains over as
the eternal eye of the world, which, although with very different degrees
of clearness, looks forth from all living creatures, untouched by their
appearing and passing away, and thus, as identical with itself, as
constantly one and the same, is the supporter of the world of permanent
Ideas, _i.e._, of the adequate objectivity of the will; while the
individual subject, whose knowledge is clouded by the individuality which
springs from the will, has only particular things as its object, and is
transitory as these themselves. In the sense here indicated a double
existence may be attributed to every one. As will, and therefore as
individual, he is only one, and this one exclusively, which gives him
enough to do and to suffer. As the purely objective perceiver, he is the
pure subject of knowledge in whose consciousness alone the objective world
has its existence; as such he is _all things_ so far as he perceives them.
and in him is their existence without burden or inconvenience. It is _his_
existence, so far as it exists in _his_ idea; but it is there without
will. So far, on the other hand, as it is will, it is not in him. It is
well with every one when he is in that state in which he is all things; it
is ill with him when in the state in which he is exclusively one. Every
state, every man, every scene of life, requires only to be purely
objectively apprehended and be made the subject of a sketch, whether with
pencil or with words, in order to appear interesting, charming, and
enviable; but if one is in it, if one is it oneself, then (it is often a
case of) may the devil endure it. Therefore Goethe says—


    “What in life doth only grieve us,
    That in art we gladly see.”


There was a period in the years of my youth when I was always trying to
see myself and my action from without, and picture it to myself; probably
in order to make it more enjoyable to me.

As I have never spoken before on the subject I have just been considering,
I wish to add a psychological illustration of it.

In the immediate perception of the world and of life we consider things,
as a rule, merely in their relations, consequently according to their
relative and not their absolute nature and existence. For example, we will
regard houses, ships, machines, and the like with the thought of their end
and their adaptation to it; men, with the thought of their relation to us,
if they have any such; and then with that of their relations to each
other, whether in their present action or with regard to their position
and business, judging perhaps their fitness for it, &c. Such a
consideration of the relations we can follow more or less far to the most
distant links of their chain: the consideration will thereby gain in
accuracy and extent, but in its quality and nature it remains the same. It
is the consideration of things in their relations, nay, _by means of
these_, thus according to the principle of sufficient reason. Every one,
for the most part and as a rule, is given up to this method of
consideration; indeed I believe that most men are capable of no other. But
if, as an exception, it happens that we experience a momentary heightening
of the intensity of our intuitive intelligence, we at once see things with
entirely different eyes, in that we now apprehend them no longer according
to their relations, but according to that which they are in and for
themselves, and suddenly perceive their absolute existence apart from
their relative existence. At once every individual represents its species;
and accordingly we now apprehend the universal of every being. Now what we
thus know are the _Ideas of things_; but out of these there now speaks a
higher wisdom than that which knows of mere relations. And we also have
then passed out of the relations, and have thus become the pure subject of
knowledge. But what now exceptionally brings about this state must be
internal physiological processes, which purify the activity of the brain,
and heighten it to such a degree that a sudden spring‐tide of activity
like this ensues. The external conditions of this are that we remain
completely strange to the scene to be considered, and separated from it,
and are absolutely not actively involved in it.

In order to see that a purely objective, and therefore correct,
comprehension of things is only possible when we consider them without any
personal participation in them, thus when the will is perfectly silent,
let one call to mind how much every emotion or passion disturbs and
falsifies our knowledge, indeed how every inclination and aversion alters,
colours, and distorts not only the judgment, but even the original
perception of things. Let one remember how when we are gladdened by some
fortunate occurrence the whole world at once assumes a bright colour and a
smiling aspect, and, on the contrary, looks gloomy and sad when we are
pressed with cares; also, how even a lifeless thing, if it is to be made
use of in doing something which we abhor, seems to have a hideous
physiognomy; for example, the scaffold, the fortress, to which we have
been brought, the surgeon’s cases of instruments; the travelling carriage
of our loved one, &c., nay, numbers, letters, seals, may seem to grin upon
us horribly and affect us as fearful monstrosities. On the other hand, the
tools for the accomplishment of our wishes at once appear to us agreeable
and pleasing; for example, the hump‐backed old woman with the love‐letter,
the Jew with the louis d’ors, the rope‐ladder to escape by, &c. As now
here the falsification of the idea through the will in the case of special
abhorrence or love is unmistakable, so is it present in a less degree in
every object which has any even distant relation to our will, that is, to
our desire or aversion. Only when the will with its interests has left
consciousness, and the intellect freely follows its own laws, and as pure
subject mirrors the objective world, yet in doing so, although spurred on
by no volition, is of its own inclination in the highest state of tension
and activity, do the colours and forms of things appear in their true and
full significance. Thus it is from such comprehension alone that genuine
works of art can proceed whose permanent worth and ever renewed approval
arises simply from the fact that they express the purely objective
element, which lies at the foundation of and shines through the different
subjective, and therefore distorted, perceptions, as that which is common
to them all and alone stands fast; as it were the common theme of all
those subjective variations. For certainly the nature which is displayed
before our eyes exhibits itself very differently in different minds; and
as each one sees it so alone can he repeat it, whether with the pencil or
the chisel, or with words and gestures on the stage. Objectivity alone
makes one capable of being an artist; but objectivity is only possible in
this way, that the intellect, separated from its root the will, moves
freely, and yet acts with the highest degree of energy.

To the youth whose perceptive intellect still acts with fresh energy
nature often exhibits itself with complete objectivity, and therefore with
perfect beauty. But the pleasure of such a glance is sometimes disturbed
by the saddening reflection that the objects present which exhibit
themselves in such beauty do not stand in a personal relation to this
will, by virtue of which they could interest and delight him; he expects
his life in the form of an interesting romance. “Behind that jutting cliff
the well‐mounted band of friends should await me,—beside that waterfall my
love should rest; this beautifully lighted building should be her
dwelling, and that vine‐clad window hers;—but this beautiful world is for
me a desert!” and so on. Such melancholy youthful reveries really demand
something exactly contradictory to themselves; for the beauty with which
those objects present themselves depends just upon the pure objectivity,
_i.e._, disinterestedness of their perception, and would therefore at once
be abolished by the relation to his own will which the youth painfully
misses, and thus the whole charm which now affords him pleasure, even
though alloyed with a certain admixture of pain, would cease to exist. The
same holds good, moreover, of every age and every relation; the beauty of
the objects of a landscape which now delights us would vanish if we stood
in personal relations to them, of which we remained always conscious.
Everything is beautiful only so long as it does not concern us. (We are
not speaking here of sensual passion, but of æsthetic pleasure.) Life is
never beautiful, but only the pictures of life are so in the transfiguring
mirror of art or poetry; especially in youth, when we do not yet know it.
Many a youth would receive great peace of mind if one could assist him to
this knowledge.

Why has the sight of the full moon such a beneficent, quieting, and
exalting effect? Because the moon is an object of perception, but never of
desire:


    “The stars we yearn not after
    Delight us with their glory.”—G.


Further, it is sublime, _i.e._, it induces a lofty mood in us, because,
without any relation to us, it moves along for ever strange to earthly
doings, and sees all while it takes part in nothing. Therefore, at the
sight of it the will, with its constant neediness, vanishes from
consciousness, and leaves a purely knowing consciousness behind. Perhaps
there is also mingled here a feeling that we share this sight with
millions, whose individual differences are therein extinguished, so that
in this perception they are one, which certainly increases the impression
of the sublime. Finally, this is also furthered by the fact that the moon
lights without heating, in which certainly lies the reason why it has been
called chaste and identified with Diana. In consequence of this whole
beneficent impression upon our feeling, the moon becomes gradually our
bosom friend. The sun, again, never does so; but is like an over‐plenteous
benefactor whom we can never look in the face.

The following remark may find room here as an addition to what is said in
§ 38 of the first volume on the æsthetic pleasure afforded by light,
reflection, and colours. The whole immediate, thoughtless, but also
unspeakable, pleasure which is excited in us by the impression of colours,
strengthened by the gleam of metal, and still more by transparency, as,
for example, in coloured windows, and in a greater measure by means of the
clouds and their reflection at sunset,—ultimately depends upon the fact
that here in the easiest manner, almost by a physical necessity, our whole
interest is won for knowledge, without any excitement of our will, so that
we enter the state of pure knowing, although for the most part this
consists here in a mere sensation of the affection of the retina, which,
however, as it is in itself perfectly free from pain or pleasure, and
therefore entirely without direct influence on the will, thus belongs to
pure knowledge.




Chapter XXXI.(11) On Genius.


What is properly denoted by the name genius is the predominating capacity
for that kind of knowledge which has been described in the two preceding
chapters, the knowledge from which all genuine works of art and poetry,
and even of philosophy, proceed. Accordingly, since this has for its
objects the Platonic Ideas, and these are not comprehended in the
abstract, but _only perceptibly_, the essence of genius must lie in the
perfection and energy of the knowledge of _perception_. Corresponding to
this, the works which we hear most decidedly designated works of genius
are those which start immediately from perception and devote themselves to
perception; thus those of plastic and pictorial art, and then those of
poetry, which gets its perceptions by the assistance of the imagination.
The difference between genius and mere talent makes itself noticeable even
here. For talent is an excellence which lies rather in the greater
versatility and acuteness of discursive than of intuitive knowledge. He
who is endowed with talent thinks more quickly and more correctly than
others; but the genius beholds another world from them all, although only
because he has a more profound perception of the world which lies before
them also, in that it presents itself in his mind more objectively, and
consequently in greater purity and distinctness.

The intellect is, according to its destination, merely the medium of
motives; and in accordance with this it originally comprehends nothing in
things but their relations to the will, the direct, the indirect, and the
possible. In the case of the brutes, where it is almost entirely confined
to the direct relations, the matter is just on that account most apparent:
what has no relation to their will does not exist for them. Therefore we
sometimes see with surprise that even clever animals do not observe at all
something conspicuous to them; for example, they show no surprise at
obvious alterations in our person and surroundings. In the case of normal
men the indirect, and even the possible, relations to the will are added,
the sum of which make up the total of useful knowledge; but here also
knowledge remains confined to the relations. Therefore the normal mind
does not attain to an absolutely pure, objective picture of things,
because its power of perception, whenever it is not spurred on by the will
and set in motion, at once becomes tired and inactive, because it has not
enough energy of its own elasticity and without an end in view to
apprehend the world in a purely objective manner. Where, on the other
hand, this takes place—where the brain has such a surplus of the power of
ideation that a pure, distinct, objective image of the external world
exhibits itself _without any aim_; an image which is useless for the
intentions of the will, indeed, in the higher degrees, disturbing, and
even injurious to them—there, the natural disposition, at least, is
already present for that abnormity which the name genius denotes, which
signifies that here a _genius_ foreign to the will, _i.e._, to the I
proper, as it were coming from without, seems to be active. But to speak
without a figure: genius consists in this, that the knowing faculty has
received a considerably greater development than the _service of the
will_, for which alone it originally appeared, demands. Therefore,
strictly speaking, physiology might to a certain extent class such a
superfluity of brain activity, and with it of brain itself, among the
_monstra per excessum_, which, it is well known, it co‐ordinates with
_monstra per defectum_ and those _per situm mutatum_. Thus genius consists
in an abnormally large measure of intellect, which can only find its use
by being applied to the universal of existence, whereby it then devotes
itself to the service of the whole human race, as the normal intellect to
that of the individual. In order to make this perfectly comprehensible one
might say: if the normal man consists of two‐thirds will and one‐third
intellect, the genius, on the contrary, has two‐thirds intellect and one‐
third will. This might, then, be further illustrated by a chemical simile:
the base and the acid of a neutral salt are distinguished by the fact that
in each of the two the radical has the converse relation to oxygen to that
which it has in the other. The base or the alkali is so because in it the
radical predominates with reference to oxygen, and the acid is so because
in it oxygen predominates. In the same way now the normal man and the
genius are related in respect of will and intellect. From this arises a
thorough distinction between them, which is visible even in their whole
nature and behaviour, but comes out most clearly in their achievements.
One might add the difference that while that total opposition between the
chemical materials forms the strongest affinity and attraction between
them, in the human race the opposite is rather wont to be found.

The first manifestation which such a superfluity of the power of knowledge
calls forth shows itself for the most part in the most original and
fundamental knowledge, _i.e._, in knowledge of _perception_, and occasions
the repetition of it in an image; hence arises the painter and the
sculptor. In their case, then, the path between the apprehension of genius
and the artistic production is the shortest; therefore the form in which
genius and its activity here exhibits itself is the simplest and its
description the easiest. Yet here also the source is shown from which all
genuine productions in every art, in poetry, and indeed in philosophy,
have their origin, although in the case of these the process is not so
simple.

Let the result arrived at in the first book be here borne in mind, that
all perception is intellectual and not merely sensuous. If one now adds
the exposition given here, and, at the same time, in justice considers
that the philosophy of last century denoted the perceptive faculty of
knowledge by the name “lower powers of the soul,” we will not think it so
utterly absurd nor so deserving of the bitter scorn with which Jean Paul
quotes it in his “_Vorschule der Æsthetik_,” that Adelung, who had to
speak the language of his age, placed genius in “a remarkable strength of
the lower powers of the soul.” The work just referred to of this author,
who is so worthy of our admiration, has great excellences, but yet I must
remark that all through, whenever a theoretical explanation and, in
general, instruction is the end in view, a style of exposition which is
constantly indulging in displays of wit and hurrying along in mere similes
cannot be well adapted to the purpose.

It is, then, _perception_ to which primarily the peculiar and true nature
of things, although still in a conditioned manner, discloses and reveals
itself. All conceptions and everything thought are mere abstractions,
consequently partial ideas taken from perception, and have only arisen by
thinking away. All profound knowledge, even wisdom properly so called, is
rooted in the _perceptive_ apprehension of things, as we have fully
considered in the supplements to the first book. A _perceptive_
apprehension has always been the generative process in which every genuine
work of art, every immortal thought, received the spark of life. All
primary thought takes place in pictures. From conceptions, on the other
hand, arise the works of mere talent, the merely rational thoughts,
imitations, and indeed all that is calculated merely with reference to the
present need and contemporary conditions.

But if now our perception were constantly bound to the real present of
things, its material would be entirely under the dominion of chance, which
seldom produces things at the right time, seldom arranges them for an end
and for the most part presents them to us in very defective examples.
Therefore the _imagination_ is required in order to complete, arrange,
give the finishing touches to, retain, and repeat at pleasure all those
significant pictures of life, according as the aims of a profoundly
penetrating knowledge and of the significant work whereby they are to be
communicated may demand. Upon this rests the high value of imagination,
which is an indispensable tool of genius. For only by virtue of
imagination can genius ever, according to the requirements of the
connection of its painting or poetry or thinking, call up to itself each
object or event in a lively image, and thus constantly draw fresh
nourishment from the primary source of all knowledge, perception. The man
who is endowed with imagination is able, as it were, to call up spirits,
who at the right time reveal to him the truths which the naked reality of
things exhibits only weakly, rarely, and then for the most part at the
wrong time. Therefore the man without imagination is related to him, as
the mussel fastened to its rock, which must wait for what chance may bring
it, is related to the freely moving or even winged animal. For such a man
knows nothing but the actual perception of the senses: till it comes he
gnaws at conceptions and abstractions which are yet mere shells and husks,
not the kernel of knowledge. He will never achieve anything great, unless
it be in calculating and mathematics. The works of plastic and pictorial
art and of poetry, as also the achievements of mimicry, may also be
regarded as means by which those who have no imagination may make up for
this defect as far as possible, and those who are gifted with it may
facilitate the use of it.

Thus, although the kind of knowledge which is peculiar and essential to
genius is knowledge of _perception_, yet the special object of this
knowledge by no means consists of the particular things, but of the
Platonic Ideas which manifest themselves in these, as their apprehension
was analysed in chapter 29. Always to see the universal in the particular
is just the fundamental characteristic of genius, while the normal man
knows in the particular only the particular as such, for only as such does
it belong to the actual which alone has interests for him, _i.e._,
relations to his _will_. The degree in which every one not merely thinks,
but actually perceives, in the particular thing, only the particular, or a
more or less universal up to the most universal of the species, is the
measure of his approach to genius. And corresponding to this, only the
nature of things generally, the universal in them, the whole, is the
special object of genius. The investigation of the particular phenomena is
the field of the talents, in the real sciences, whose special object is
always only the relations of things to each other.

What was fully shown in the preceding chapter, that the apprehension of
the Ideas is conditioned by the fact that the knower is the _pure subject_
of knowledge, _i.e._, that the will entirely vanishes from consciousness,
must be borne in mind here. The pleasure which we have in many of Goethe’s
songs which bring the landscape before our eyes, or in Jean Paul’s
sketches of nature, depends upon the fact that we thereby participate in
the objectivity of those minds, _i.e._, the purity with which in them the
world as idea separated from the world as will, and, as it were, entirely
emancipated itself from it. It also follows from the fact that the kind of
knowledge peculiar to genius is essentially that which is purified from
all will and its relations, that the works of genius do not proceed from
intention or choice, but it is guided in them by a kind of instinctive
necessity. What is called the awaking of genius, the hour of initiation,
the moment of inspiration, is nothing but the attainment of freedom by the
intellect, when, delivered for a while from its service under the will, it
does not now sink into inactivity or lassitude, but is active for a short
time entirely alone and spontaneously. Then it is of the greatest purity,
and becomes the clear mirror of the world; for, completely severed from
its origin, the will, it is now the world as idea itself, concentrated in
_one_ consciousness. In such moments, as it were, the souls of immortal
works are begotten. On the other hand, in all intentional reflection the
intellect is not free, for indeed the will guides it and prescribes it its
theme.

The stamp of commonness, the expression of vulgarity, which is impressed
on the great majority of countenances consists really in this, that in
them becomes visible the strict subordination of their knowledge to their
will, the firm chain which binds these two together, and the impossibility
following from this of apprehending things otherwise than in their
relation to the will and its aims. On the other hand, the expression of
genius which constitutes the evident family likeness of all highly gifted
men consists in this, that in it we distinctly read the liberation, the
manumission of the intellect from the service of the will, the
predominance of knowledge over volition; and because all anxiety proceeds
from the will, and knowledge, on the contrary, is in and for itself
painless and serene, this gives to their lofty brow and clear, perceiving
glance, which are not subject to the service of the will and its wants,
that look of great, almost supernatural serenity which at times breaks
through, and consists very well with the melancholy of their other
features, especially the mouth, and which in this relation may be aptly
described by the motto of Giordano Bruno: _In tristitia hilaris, in
hilaritate tristis_.

The will, which is the root of the intellect, opposes itself to any
activity of the latter which is directed to anything else but its own
aims. Therefore the intellect is only capable of a purely objective and
profound comprehension of the external world when it has freed itself at
least for a while from this its root. So long as it remains bound to the
will, it is of its own means capable of no activity, but sleeps in a
stupor, whenever the will (the interests) does not awake it, and set it in
motion. If, however, this happens, it is indeed very well fitted to
recognise the relations of things according to the interest of the will,
as the prudent mind does, which, however, must always be an awakened mind,
_i.e._, a mind actively aroused by volition; but just on this account it
is not capable of comprehending the purely objective nature of things. For
the willing and the aims make it so one‐sided that it sees in things only
that which relates to these, and the rest either disappears or enters
consciousness in a falsified form. For example, the traveller in anxiety
and haste will see the Rhine and its banks only as a line, and the bridges
over it only as lines cutting it. In the mind of the man who is filled
with his own aims the world appears as a beautiful landscape appears on
the plan of a battlefield. Certainly these are extremes, taken for the
sake of distinctness; but every excitement of the will, however slight,
will have as its consequence a slight but constantly proportionate
falsification of knowledge. The world can only appear in its true colour
and form, in its whole and correct significance, when the intellect,
devoid of willing, moves freely over the objects, and without being driven
on by the will is yet energetically active. This is certainly opposed to
the nature and determination of the intellect, thus to a certain extent
unnatural, and just on this account exceedingly rare; but it is just in
this that the essential nature of genius lies, in which alone that
condition takes place in a high degree and is of some duration, while in
others it only appears approximately and exceptionally. I take it to be in
the sense expounded here that Jean Paul (_Vorschule der Æsthetik_, § 12)
places the essence of genius in _reflectiveness_. The normal man is sunk
in the whirl and tumult of life, to which he belongs through his will; his
intellect is filled with the things and events of life; but he does not
know these things nor life itself in their objective significance; as the
merchant on ’Change in Amsterdam apprehends perfectly what his neighbour
says, but does not hear the hum of the whole Exchange, like the sound of
the sea, which astonishes the distant observer. From the genius, on the
contrary, whose intellect is delivered from the will, and thus from the
person, what concerns these does not conceal the world and things
themselves; but he becomes distinctly conscious of them, he apprehends
them in and for themselves in objective perception; in this sense he is
_reflective_.

It is _reflectiveness_ which enables the painter to repeat the natural
objects which he contemplates faithfully upon the canvas, and the poet
accurately to call up again the concrete present, by means of abstract
conceptions, by giving it utterance and so bringing it to distinct
consciousness, and also to express everything in words which others only
feel. The brute lives entirely without reflection. It has consciousness,
_i.e._, it knows itself and its good and ill, also the objects which
occasion these. But its knowledge remains always subjective, never becomes
objective; everything that enters it seems a matter of course, and
therefore can never become for it a theme (an object of exposition) nor a
problem (an object of meditation). Its consciousness is thus entirely
_immanent_. Not certainly the same, but yet of kindred nature, is the
consciousness of the common type of man, for his apprehension also of
things and the world is predominantly subjective and remains prevalently
immanent. It apprehends the things in the world, but not the world; its
own action and suffering, but not itself. As now in innumerable gradations
the distinctness of consciousness rises, reflectiveness appears more and
more; and thus it is brought about little by little that sometimes, though
rarely, and then again in very different degrees of distinctness, the
question passes through the mind like a flash, “What is all this?” or
again, “How is it really fashioned?” The first question, if it attains
great distinctness and continued presence, will make the philosopher, and
the other, under the same conditions, the artist or the poet. Therefore,
then, the high calling of both of these has its root in the reflectiveness
which primarily springs from the distinctness with which they are
conscious of the world and their own selves, and thereby come to reflect
upon them. But the whole process springs from the fact that the intellect
through its preponderance frees itself for a time from the will, to which
it is originally subject.

The considerations concerning genius here set forth are connected by way
of supplement with the exposition contained in chapter 21, of the _ever
wider separation of the will and the intellect_, which can be traced in
the whole series of existences. This reaches its highest grade in genius,
where it extends to the entire liberation of the intellect from its root
the will, so that here the intellect becomes perfectly free, whereby the
_world as idea_ first attains to complete objectification.

A few remarks now concerning the individuality of genius. Aristotle has
already said, according to Cicero (_Tusc._, i. 33), “_Omnes ingeniosos
melancholicos esse_;” which without doubt is connected with the passage of
Aristotle’s “_Problemata_,” xxx. 1. Goethe also says: “My poetic rapture
was very small, so long as I only encountered good; but it burnt with a
bright flame when I fled from threatening evil. The tender poem, like the
rainbow, is only drawn on a dark ground; hence the genius of the poet
loves the element of melancholy.”

This is to be explained from the fact that since the will constantly re‐
establishes its original sway over the intellect, the latter more easily
withdraws from this under unfavourable personal relations; because it
gladly turns from adverse circumstances, in order to a certain extent to
divert itself, and now directs itself with so much the greater energy to
the foreign external world, thus more easily becomes purely objective.
Favourable personal relations act conversely. Yet as a whole and in
general the melancholy which accompanies genius depends upon the fact that
the brighter the intellect which enlightens the will to live, the more
distinctly does it perceive the misery of its condition. The melancholy
disposition of highly gifted minds which has so often been observed has
its emblem in Mont Blanc, the summit of which is for the most part lost in
clouds; but when sometimes, especially in the early morning, the veil of
clouds is rent and now the mountain looks down on Chamounix from its
height in the heavens above the clouds, then it is a sight at which the
heart of each of us swells from its profoundest depths. So also the
genius, for the most part melancholy, shows at times that peculiar
serenity already described above, which is possible only for it, and
springs from the most perfect objectivity of the mind. It floats like a
ray of light upon his lofty brow: _In tristitia hilaris, in hilaritate
tristis_.

All bunglers are so ultimately because their intellect, still too firmly
bound to the will, only becomes active when spurred on by it, and
therefore remains entirely in its service. They are accordingly only
capable of personal aims. In conformity with these they produce bad
pictures, insipid poems, shallow, absurd, and very often dishonest
philosophemes, when it is to their interest to recommend themselves to
high authorities by a pious disingenuousness. Thus all their action and
thought is personal. Therefore they succeed at most in appropriating what
is external, accidental, and arbitrary in the genuine works of others as
mannerisms, in doing which they take the shell instead of the kernel, and
yet imagine they have attained to everything, nay, have surpassed those
works. If, however, the failure is patent, yet many hope to attain success
in the end through their good intentions. But it is just this good will
which makes success impossible; because this only pursues personal ends,
and with these neither art nor poetry nor philosophy can ever be taken
seriously. Therefore the saying is peculiarly applicable to such persons:
“They stand in their own light.” They have no idea that it is only the
intellect delivered from the government of the will and all its projects,
and therefore freely active, that makes one capable of genuine
productions, because it alone imparts true seriousness; and it is well for
them that they have not, otherwise they would leap into the water. The
_good will_ is in _morality_ everything; but in art it is nothing. In art,
as the word itself indicates (_Kunst_), what alone is of consequence is
ability (_Können_). It all amounts ultimately to this, where the true
_seriousness_ of the man lies. In almost all it lies exclusively in their
own well‐being and that of their families; therefore they are in a
position to promote this and nothing else; for no purpose, no voluntary
and intentional effort, imparts the true, profound, and proper
seriousness, or makes up for it, or more correctly, takes its place. For
it always remains where nature has placed it; and without it everything is
only half performed. Therefore, for the same reason, persons of genius
often manage so badly for their own welfare. As a leaden weight always
brings a body back to the position which its centre of gravity thereby
determined demands, so the true seriousness of the man always draws the
strength and attention of the intellect back to that in which it lies;
everything else the man does _without true seriousness_. Therefore only
the exceedingly rare and abnormal men whose true seriousness does not lie
in the personal and practical, but in the objective and theoretical, are
in a position to apprehend what is essential in the things of the world,
thus the highest truths, and reproduce them in any way. For such a
seriousness of the individual, falling outside himself in the objective,
is something foreign to the nature of man, something unnatural, or really
supernatural: yet on account of this alone is the man _great_; and
therefore what he achieves is then ascribed to a _genius_ different from
himself, which takes possession of him. To such a man his painting,
poetry, or thinking is an _end_; to others it is a _means_. The latter
thereby seek their own things, and, as a rule, they know how to further
them, for they flatter their contemporaries, ready to serve their wants
and humours; therefore for the most part they live in happy circumstances;
the former often in very miserable circumstances. For he sacrifices his
personal welfare to his _objective end_; he cannot indeed do otherwise,
because his seriousness lies there. They act conversely; therefore they
are _small_, but he is _great_. Accordingly his work is for all time, but
the recognition of it generally only begins with posterity: they live and
die with their time. In general he only is great who in his work, whether
it is practical or theoretical, seeks _not his own concerns_, but pursues
an _objective end_ alone; he is so, however, even when in the practical
sphere this end is a misunderstood one, and even if in consequence of this
it should be a crime. _That he seeks not himself and his own concerns_,
this makes him under all circumstances _great_. _Small_, on the other
hand, is all action which is directed to personal ends; for whoever is
thereby set in activity knows and finds himself only in his own transient
and insignificant person. He who is great, again, finds himself in all,
and therefore in the whole: he lives not, like others, only in the
microcosm, but still more in the macrocosm. Hence the whole interests him,
and he seeks to comprehend it in order to represent it, or to explain it,
or to act practically upon it. For it is not strange to him; he feels that
it concerns him. On account of this extension of his sphere he is called
_great_. Therefore that lofty predicate belongs only to the true hero, in
some sense, and to genius: it signifies that they, contrary to human
nature, have not sought their own things, have not lived for themselves,
but for all. As now clearly the great majority must _constantly_ be small,
and can _never_ become great, the converse of this, that one should be
great throughout, that is, constantly and every moment, is yet not
possible—


    “For man is made of common clay,
    And custom is his nurse.”


Every great man must often be only the individual, have only himself in
view, and that means he must be small. Upon this depends the very true
remark, that no man is a hero to his valet, and not upon the fact that the
valet cannot appreciate the hero; which Goethe, in the
“_Wahlverwandhschaften_” (vol. ii. chap. 5), serves up as an idea of
Ottilie’s.

Genius is its own reward: for the best that one is, one must necessarily
be for oneself. “Whoever is born with a talent, to a talent, finds in this
his fairest existence,” says Goethe. When we look back at a great man of
former times, we do not think, “How happy is he to be still admired by all
of us!” but, “How happy must he have been in the immediate enjoyment of a
mind at the surviving traces of which centuries revive themselves!” Not in
the fame, but in that whereby it is attained, lies the value, and in the
production of immortal children the pleasure. Therefore those who seek to
show the vanity of posthumous fame from the fact that he who obtains it
knows nothing of it, may be compared to the wiseacre who very learnedly
tried to demonstrate to the man who cast envious glances at a heap of
oyster‐shells in his neighbour’s yard the absolute uselessness of them.

According to the exposition of the nature of genius which has been given,
it is so far contrary to nature, inasmuch as it consists in this, that the
intellect, whose real destination is the service of the will, emancipates
itself from this service in order to be active on its own account.
Accordingly genius is an intellect which has become untrue to its
destination. Upon this depend the _disadvantages_ connected with it, for
the consideration of which we shall now prepare the way by comparing
genius with the less decided predominance of the intellect.

The intellect of the normal man, strictly bound to the service of the
will, and therefore really only occupied with the apprehension of motives,
may be regarded as a complex system of wires, by means of which each of
these puppets is set in motion in the theatre of the world. From this
arises the dry, grave seriousness of most people, which is only surpassed
by that of the brutes, who never laugh. On the other hand, we might
compare the genius, with his unfettered intellect, to a living man playing
along with the large puppets of the famous puppet‐show at Milan, who would
be the only one among them who would understand everything, and would
therefore gladly leave the stage for a while to enjoy the play from the
boxes;—that is the reflectiveness of genius. But even the man of great
understanding and reason, whom one might almost call wise, is very
different from the genius, and in this way, that his intellect retains a
_practical_ tendency, is concerned with the choice of the best ends and
means, therefore remains in the service of the will, and accordingly is
occupied in a manner that is thoroughly in keeping with nature. The firm,
practical seriousness of life which the Romans denoted _gravitas_
presupposes that the intellect does not forsake the service of the will in
order to wander away after that which does not concern the will; therefore
it does not admit of that separation of the will and the intellect which
is the condition of genius. The able, nay, eminent man, who is fitted for
great achievements in the practical sphere, is so precisely because
objects rouse his will in a lively manner, and spur him on to the
ceaseless investigation of their relations and connections. Thus his
intellect has grown up closely connected with his will. Before the man of
genius, on the contrary, there floats in his objective comprehension the
phenomenon of the world, as something foreign to him, an object of
contemplation, which expels his will from consciousness. Round this point
turns the distinction between the capacity for _deeds_ and for _works_.
The latter demand objectivity and depth of knowledge, which presupposes
entire separation of the intellect from the will; the former, on the other
hand, demands the application of knowledge, presence of mind, and
decision, which required that the intellect should uninterruptedly attend
to the service of the will. Where the bond between the intellect and the
will is loosened, the intellect, turned away from its natural destination,
will neglect the service of the will; it will, for example, even in the
need of the moment, preserve its emancipation, and perhaps be unable to
avoid taking in the picturesque impression of the surroundings, from which
danger threatens the individual. The intellect of the reasonable and
understanding man, on the other hand, is constantly at its post, is
directed to the circumstances and their requirements. Such a man will
therefore in all cases determine and carry out what is suitable to the
case, and consequently will by no means fall into those eccentricities,
personal slips, nay, follies, to which the genius is exposed, because his
intellect does not remain exclusively the guide and guardian of his will,
but sometimes more, sometimes less, is laid claim to by the purely
objective. In the contrast of Tasso and Antonio, Goethe has illustrated
the opposition, here explained in the abstract, in which these two
entirely different kinds of capacity stand to each other. The kinship of
genius and madness, so often observed, depends chiefly upon that
separation of the intellect from the will which is essential to genius,
but is yet contrary to nature. But this separation itself is by no means
to be attributed to the fact that genius is accompanied by less intensity
of will; for it is rather distinguished by a vehement and passionate
character; but it is to be explained from this, that the practically
excellent person, the man of deeds, has merely the whole, full measure of
intellect required for an energetic will while most men lack even this;
but genius consists in a completely abnormal, actual superfluity of
intellect, such as is required for the service of no will. On this account
the men of genuine works are a thousand times rarer than the men of deeds.
It is just that abnormal superfluity of intellect by virtue of which it
obtains the decided preponderance, sets itself free from the will, and
now, forgetting its origin, is freely active from its own strength and
elasticity; and from this the creations of genius proceed.

Now further, just this, that genius in working consists of the free
intellect, _i.e._, of the intellect emancipated from the service of the
will, has as a consequence that its productions serve no useful ends. The
work of genius is music, or philosophy, or paintings, or poetry; it is
nothing to use. To be of no use belongs to the character of the works of
genius; it is their patent of nobility. All other works of men are for the
maintenance or easing of our existence; only those we are speaking of are
not; they alone exist for their own sake, and are in this sense to be
regarded as the flower or the net profit of existence. Therefore our heart
swells at the enjoyment of them, for we rise out of the heavy earthly
atmosphere of want. Analogous to this, we see the beautiful, even apart
from these, rarely combined with the useful. Lofty and beautiful trees
bear no fruit; the fruit‐trees are small, ugly cripples. The full garden
rose is not fruitful, but the small, wild, almost scentless roses are. The
most beautiful buildings are not the useful ones; a temple is no dwelling‐
house. A man of high, rare mental endowments compelled to apply himself to
a merely useful business, for which the most ordinary man would be fitted,
is like a costly vase decorated with the most beautiful painting which is
used as a kitchen pot; and to compare useful people with men of genius is
like comparing building‐stone with diamonds.

Thus the merely practical man uses his intellect for that for which nature
destined it, the comprehension of the relations of things, partly to each
other, partly to the will of the knowing individual. The genius, on the
other hand, uses it, contrary to its destination, for the comprehension of
the objective nature of things. His mind, therefore, belongs not to
himself, but to the world, to the illumination of which, in some sense, it
will contribute. From this must spring manifold _disadvantages_ to the
individual favoured with genius. For his intellect will in general show
those faults which are rarely wanting in any tool which is used for that
for which it has not been made. First of all, it will be, as it were, the
servant of two masters, for on every opportunity it frees itself from the
service to which it was destined in order to follow its own ends, whereby
it often leaves the will very inopportunely in a fix, and thus the
individual so gifted becomes more or less useless for life, nay, in his
conduct sometimes reminds us of madness. Then, on account of its highly
developed power of knowledge, it will see in things more the universal
than the particular; while the service of the will principally requires
the knowledge of the particular. But, again, when, as opportunity offers,
that whole abnormally heightened power of knowledge directs itself with
all its energy to the circumstances and miseries of the will, it will be
apt to apprehend these too vividly, to behold all in too glaring colours,
in too bright a light, and in a fearfully exaggerated form, whereby the
individual falls into mere extremes. The following may serve to explain
this more accurately. All great theoretical achievements, in whatever
sphere they may be, are brought about in this way: Their author directs
all the forces of his mind upon one point, in which he lets them unite and
concentrate so strongly, firmly, and exclusively that now the whole of the
rest of the world vanishes for him, and his object fills all reality. Now
this great and powerful concentration which belongs to the privileges of
genius sometimes appears for it also in the case of objects of the real
world and the events of daily life, which then, brought under such a
focus, are magnified to such a monstrous extent that they appear like the
flea, which under the solar microscope assumes the stature of an elephant.
Hence it arises that highly gifted individuals sometimes are thrown by
trifles into violent emotions of the most various kinds, which are
incomprehensible to others, who see them transported with grief, joy,
care, fear, anger, &c., by things which leave the every‐day man quite
composed. Thus, then, the genius lacks _soberness_, which simply consists
in this, that one sees in things nothing more than actually belongs to
them, especially with reference to our possible ends; therefore no sober‐
minded man can be a genius. With the disadvantages which have been
enumerated there is also associated hyper‐sensibility, which an abnormally
developed nervous and cerebral system brings with it, and indeed in union
with the vehemence and passionateness of will which is certainly
characteristic of genius, and which exhibits itself physically as energy
of the pulsation of the heart. From all this very easily arises that
extravagance of disposition, that vehemence of the emotions, that quick
change of mood under prevailing melancholy, which Goethe has presented to
us in Tasso. What reasonableness, quiet composure, finished surveyal,
certainty and proportionateness of behaviour is shown by the well‐endowed
normal man in comparison with the now dreamy absentness, and now
passionate excitement of the man of genius, whose inward pain is the
mother’s lap of immortal works! To all this must still be added that
genius lives essentially alone. It is too rare to find its like with ease,
and too different from the rest of men to be their companion. With them it
is the will, with him it is knowledge, that predominates; therefore their
pleasures are not his, and his are not theirs. They are merely moral
beings, and have merely personal relations; he is at the same time a pure
intellect, and as such belongs to the whole of humanity. The course of
thought of the intellect which is detached from its mother soil, the will,
and only returns to it periodically, will soon show itself entirely
different from that of the normal intellect, still cleaving to its stem.
For this reason, and also on account of the dissimilarity of the pace, the
former is not adapted for thinking in common, _i.e._, for conversation
with the others: they will have as little pleasure in him and his
oppressive superiority as he will in them. They will therefore feel more
comfortable with their equals, and he will prefer the entertainment of his
equals, although, as a rule, this is only possible through the works they
have left behind them. Therefore Chamfort says very rightly: “_Il y a peu
de vices qui empêchent un homme d’avoir beaucoup d’amis, autant que
peuvent le faire de trop grandes qualités_.” The happiest lot that can
fall to the genius is release from action, which is not his element, and
leisure for production. From all this it results that although genius may
highly bless him who is gifted with it, in the hours in which, abandoned
to it, he revels unhindered in its delight, yet it is by no means fitted
to procure for him a happy course of life; rather the contrary. This is
also confirmed by the experience recorded in biographies. Besides this
there is also an external incongruity, for the genius, in his efforts and
achievements themselves, is for the most part in contradiction and
conflict with his age. Mere men of talent come always at the right time;
for as they are roused by the spirit of their age, and called forth by its
needs, they are also capable only of satisfying these. They therefore go
hand in hand with the advancing culture of their contemporaries or with
the gradual progress of a special science: for this they reap reward and
approval. But to the next generation their works are no longer enjoyable;
they must be replaced by others, which again are not permanent. The
genius, on the contrary, comes into his age like a comet into the paths of
the planets, to whose well‐regulated and comprehensible order its entirely
eccentric course is foreign. Accordingly he cannot go hand in hand with
the existing, regular progress of the culture of the age, but flings his
works far out on to the way in front (as the dying emperor flung his spear
among the enemy), upon which time has first to overtake them. His relation
to the culminating men of talent of his time might be expressed in the
words of the Evangelist: “Ὁ καιρος ὁ εμος ουπω παρεστιν; ὁ δε καιρος ὁ
ὑμετερος παντοτε εστιν ἑτοιμος” (John vii. 6). The man of talent can
achieve what is beyond the power of achievement of other men, but not what
is beyond their power of apprehension: therefore he at once finds those
who prize him. But the achievement of the man of genius, on the contrary,
transcends not only the power of achievement, but also the power of
apprehension of others; therefore they do not become directly conscious of
him. The man of talent is like the marksman who hits a mark the others
cannot hit; the man of genius is like the marksman who hits a mark they
cannot even see to; therefore they only get news of him indirectly, and
thus late; and even this they only accept upon trust and faith.
Accordingly Goethe says in one of his letters, “Imitation is inborn in us;
what to imitate is not easily recognised. Rarely is what is excellent
found; still more rarely is it prized.” And Chamfort says: “_Il en est de
la valeur des hommes comme de celle des diamans, qui à une certaine mesure
de grosseur, de pureté, de perfection, ont un prix fixe et marqué, mais
qui, par‐delà cette mesure, restent sans prix, et ne trouvent point
d’acheteurs_.” And Bacon of Verulam has also expressed it: “_Infimarum
virtutum, apud vulgus, laus est, mediarum admiratio, supremarum sensus
nullus_” (_De augm. sc._, L. vi. c. 3). Indeed, one might perhaps reply,
_Apud vulgus!_ But I must then come to his assistance with Machiavelli’s
assurance: “_Nel mondo non è se non volgo_;”(12) as also Thilo (_Ueber den
Ruhm_) remarks, that to the vulgar herd there generally belongs one more
than each of us believes. It is a consequence of this late recognition of
the works of the man of genius that they are rarely enjoyed by their
contemporaries, and accordingly in the freshness of colour which
synchronism and presence imparts, but, like figs and dates, much more in a
dry than in a fresh state.

If, finally, we consider genius from the somatic side, we find it
conditioned by several anatomical and physiological qualities, which
individually are seldom present in perfection, and still more seldom
perfect together, but which are yet all indispensably required; so that
this explains why genius only appears as a perfectly isolated and almost
portentous exception. The fundamental condition is an abnormal
predominance of sensibility over irritability and reproductive power; and
what makes the matter more difficult, this must take place in a male body.
(Women may have great talent, but no genius, for they always remain
subjective.) Similarly the cerebral system must be perfectly separated
from the ganglion system by complete isolation, so that it stands in
complete opposition to the latter; and thus the brain pursues its
parasitic life on the organism in a very decided, isolated, powerful, and
independent manner. Certainly it will thereby very easily affect the rest
of the organism injuriously, and through its heightened life and ceaseless
activity wear it out prematurely, unless it is itself possessed of
energetic vital force and a good constitution: thus the latter belong to
the conditions of genius. Indeed even a good stomach is a condition on
account of the special and close agreement of this part with the brain.
But chiefly the brain must be of unusual development and magnitude,
especially broad and high. On the other hand, its depth will be inferior,
and the cerebrum will abnormally preponderate in proportion to the
cerebellum. Without doubt much depends upon the configuration of the brain
as a whole and in its parts; but our knowledge is not yet sufficient to
determine this accurately, although we easily recognise the form of skull
that indicates a noble and lofty intelligence. The texture of the mass of
the brain must be of extreme fineness and perfection, and consist of the
purest, most concentrated, tenderest, and most excitable nerve‐substance;
certainly the quantitative proportion of the white to the grey matter has
a decided influence, which, however, we are also unable as yet to specify.
However, the report of the _post‐mortem_ on the body of Byron(13) shows
that in his case the white matter was in unusually large proportion to the
grey, and also that his brain weighed six pounds. Cuvier’s brain weighed
five pounds; the normal weight is three pounds. In contrast to the
superior size of the brain, the spinal cord and nerves must be unusually
thin. A beautifully arched, high and broad skull of thin bone must protect
the brain without in any way cramping it. This whole quality of the brain
and nervous system is the inheritance from the mother, to which we shall
return in the following book. But it is quite insufficient to produce the
phenomenon of genius if the inheritance from the father is not added, a
lively, passionate temperament, which exhibits itself somatically as
unusual energy of the heart, and consequently of the circulation of the
blood, especially towards the head. For, in the first place, that
turgescence peculiar to the brain on account of which it presses against
its walls is increased by this; therefore it forces itself out of any
opening in these which has been occasioned by some injury; and secondly,
from the requisite strength of the heart the brain receives that internal
movement different from its constant rising and sinking at every breath,
which consists in a shaking of its whole mass at every pulsation of the
four cerebral arteries, and the energy of which must correspond to the
here increased quantity of the brain, as this movement in general is an
indispensable condition of its activity. To this, therefore, small stature
and especially a short neck is favourable, because by the shorter path the
blood reaches the brain with more energy; and on this account great minds
have seldom large bodies. Yet that shortness of the distance is not
indispensable; for example, Goethe was of more than middle height. If,
however, the whole condition connected with the circulation of the blood,
and therefore coming from the father is wanting, the good quality of the
brain coming from the mother, will at most produce a man of talent, a fine
understanding, which the phlegmatic temperament thus introduced supports;
but a phlegmatic genius is impossible. This condition coming from the
father explains many faults of temperament described above. But, on the
other hand, if this condition exists without the former, thus with an
ordinarily or even badly constructed brain, it gives vivacity without
mind, heat without light, hot‐headed persons, men of unsupportable
restlessness and petulance. That of two brothers only one has genius, and
that one generally the elder, as, for example, in Kant’s case, is
primarily to be explained from the fact that the father was at the age of
strength and passion only when he was begotten; although also the other
condition originating with the mother may be spoiled by unfavourable
circumstances.

I have further to add here a special remark on the _childlike_ character
of the genius, _i.e._, on a certain resemblance which exists between
genius and the age of childhood. In childhood, as in the case of genius,
the cerebral and nervous system decidedly preponderates, for its
development hurries far in advance of that of the rest of the organism; so
that already at the seventh year the brain has attained its full extension
and mass. Therefore, Bichat says: “_Dans l’enfance le système nerveux,
comparé au musculaire, est proportionellement plus considérable que dans
tous les âges suivans, tandis que par la suite, la pluspart des autres
systèmes prédominent sur celui‐ci. On sait que, pour bien voir les nerfs,
on choisit toujours les enfans_” (_De la vie et de la mort_, art. 8, § 6).
On the other hand, the development of the genital system begins latest,
and irritability, reproduction, and genital function are in full force
only at the age of manhood, and then, as a rule, they predominate over the
brain function. Hence it is explicable that children, in general, are so
sensible, reasonable, desirous of information, and teachable, nay, on the
whole, are more disposed and fitted for all theoretical occupation than
grown‐up people. They have, in consequence of that course of development,
more intellect than will, _i.e._, than inclinations, desire, and passion.
For intellect and brain are one, and so also is the genital system one
with the most vehement of all desires: therefore I have called the latter
the focus of the will. Just because the fearful activity of this system
still slumbers, while that of the brain has already full play, childhood
is the time of innocence and happiness, the paradise of life, the lost
Eden on which we look longingly back through the whole remaining course of
our life. But the basis of that happiness is that in childhood our whole
existence lies much more in knowing than in willing—a condition which is
also supported from without by the novelty of all objects. Hence in the
morning sunshine of life the world lies before us so fresh, so magically
gleaming, so attractive. The small desires, the weak inclinations, and
trifling cares of childhood are only a weak counterpoise to that
predominance of intellectual activity. The innocent and clear glance of
children, at which we revive ourselves, and which sometimes in particular
cases reaches the sublime contemplative expression with which Raphael has
glorified his cherubs, is to be explained from what has been said.
Accordingly the mental powers develop much earlier than the needs they are
destined to serve; and here, as everywhere, nature proceeds very
designedly. For in this time of predominating intelligence the man
collects a great store of knowledge for future wants which at the time are
foreign to him. Therefore his intellect, now unceasingly active, eagerly
apprehends all phenomena, broods over them and stores them up carefully
for the coming time,—like the bees, who gather a great deal more honey
than they can consume, in anticipation of future need. Certainly what a
man acquires of insight and knowledge up to the age of puberty is, taken
as a whole, more than all that he afterwards learns, however learned he
may become; for it is the foundation of all human knowledge. Up till the
same time plasticity predominates in the child’s body, and later, by a
metastasis, its forces throw themselves into the system of generation; and
thus with puberty the sexual passion appears, and now, little by little,
the will gains the upper hand. Then childhood, which is prevailingly
theoretical and desirous of learning, is followed by the restless, now
stormy, now melancholy, period of youth, which afterwards passes into the
vigorous and earnest age of manhood. Just because that impulse pregnant
with evil is wanting in the child is its volition so adapted and
subordinated to knowledge, whence arises that character of innocence,
intelligence, and reasonableness which is peculiar to the age of
childhood. On what, then, the likeness between childhood and genius
depends I scarcely need to express further: upon the surplus of the powers
of knowledge over the needs of the will, and the predominance of the
purely intellectual activity which springs from this. Really every child
is to a certain extent a genius, and the genius is to a certain extent a
child. The relationship of the two shows itself primarily in the naïveté
and sublime simplicity which is characteristic of true genius; and besides
this it appears in several traits, so that a certain childishness
certainly belongs to the character of the genius. In Riemer’s
“_Mittheilungen über Goethe_” (vol. i. p. 184) it is related that Herder
and others found fault with Goethe, saying he was always a big child.
Certainly they were right in what they said, but they were not right in
finding fault with it. It has also been said of Mozart that all his life
he remained a child (Nissen’s Biography of Mozart, p. 2 and 529).
Schlichtegroll’s “_Nekrology_” (for 1791, vol. ii. p. 109) says of him:
“In his art he early became a man, but in all other relations he always
remained a child.” Every genius is even for this reason a big child; he
looks out into the world as into something strange, a play, and therefore
with purely objective interest. Accordingly he has just as little as the
child that dull gravity of ordinary men, who, since they are capable only
of subjective interests, always see in things mere motives for their
action. Whoever does not to a certain extent remain all his life a big
child, but becomes a grave, sober, thoroughly composed, and reasonable
man, may be a very useful and capable citizen of this world; but never a
genius. In fact, the genius is so because that predominance of the
sensible system and of intellectual activity which is natural to childhood
maintains itself in him in an abnormal manner through his whole life, thus
here becomes perennial. A trace of this certainly shows itself in many
ordinary men up to the period of their youth; therefore, for example, in
many students a purely intellectual tendency and an eccentricity
suggestive of genius is unmistakable. But nature returns to her track;
they assume the chrysalis form and reappear at the age of manhood, as
incarnate Philistines, at whom we are startled when we meet them again in
later years. Upon all this that has been expounded here depends Goethe’s
beautiful remark: “Children do not perform what they promise; young people
very seldom; and if they do keep their word, the world does not keep its
word with them” (_Wahlverwandtschaften_, Pt. i. ch. 10)—the world which
afterwards bestows the crowns which it holds aloft for merit on those who
are the tools of its low aims or know how to deceive it. In accordance
with what has been said, as there is a mere beauty of youth, which almost
every one at some time possesses (_beauté du diable_), so there is a mere
intellectuality of youth, a certain mental nature disposed and adapted for
apprehending, understanding, and learning, which every one has in
childhood, and some have still in youth, but which is afterwards lost,
just like that beauty. Only in the case of a very few, the chosen, the
one, like the other, lasts through the whole life; so that even in old age
a trace of it still remains visible: these are the truly beautiful and the
men of true genius.

The predominance of the cerebral nervous system and of intelligence in
childhood, which is here under consideration, together with the decline of
it in riper age, receives important illustration and confirmation from the
fact that in the species of animals which stands nearest to man, the apes,
the same relation is found in a striking degree. It has by degrees become
certain that the highly intelligent orang‐outang is a young pongo, which
when it has grown up loses the remarkable human look of its countenance,
and also its astonishing intelligence, because the lower and brutal part
of its face increases in size, the forehead thereby recedes, large
_cristæ_, muscular developments, give the skull a brutish form, the
activity of the nervous system sinks, and in its place extraordinary
muscular strength develops, which, as it is sufficient for its
preservation, makes the great intelligence now superfluous. Especially
important is what Fréd. Cuvier has said in this reference, and Flourens
has illustrated in a review of the “_Histoire Naturelle_” of the former,
which appeared in the September number of the “_Journal des Savans_” of
1839, and was also separately printed with some additions, under the
title, “_Résumé analytique des observations de Fr. Cuvier sur l’instinct
et l’intelligence des animaux_,” _p. Flourens_, 1841. It is there said, p.
50: “_L’intelligence de l’orang‐outang, cette intelligence si développée,
et développée de si bonne heure, décroit avec l’âge. L’orang‐outang,
lorsqu’il est jeune, nous étonne par sa pénétration, par sa ruse, par son
adresse; l’orang‐outang, devenu adulte, n’est plus qu’un animal grossier,
brutal, intraitable. Et il en est de tous les singes comme de l’orang‐
outang. Dans tous, l’intelligence décroit à mesure que les forces
s’accroissent. L’animal qui a le plus d’intelligence, n’a toute cette
intelligence que dans le jeune âge._” Further, p. 87: “_Les singes de tous
les genres offrent ce rapport inverse de l’âge et de l’intelligence.
Ainsi, par exemple, l’Entelle (espèce de guenon du sous‐genre des Semno‐
pithèques et l’un des singes vénérés dans la religion des Brames) a, dans
le __ jeune âge, le front large, le museau peu saillant, le crâne élevé,
arrondi, etc. Avec l’âge le front disparait, recule, le museau proémine;
et le moral ne change pas moins que le physique: l’apathie, la violence,
le besoin de solitude, remplacent la pénétration, la docilité, la
confiance. __‹ __Ces différences sont si grandes,__ ›__ dit Mr. Fréd.
Cuvier, __‹ __que dans l’habitude où nous sommes de juger des actions des
animaux par les nôtres, nous prendrions le jeune animal pour un individu
de l’âge, où toutes les qualités morales de l’espèce sont acquises, et
l’Entelle adulte pour un individu qui n’aurait encore que ses forces
physiques. Mais la nature n’en agit pas ainsi avec ces animaux, qui ne
doivent pas sortir de la sphère étroite, qui leur est fixée, et à qui il
suffit en quelque sorte de pouvoir veiller à leur conservation. Pour cela
l’intelligence était nécessaire, quand la force n’existait pas, et quand
celle‐ci est acquise, toute autre puissance perd de son utilité.__ ›_” And
p. 118: “_La conservation des espèces ne repose pas moins sur les qualités
intellectuelles des animaux, que sur leurs qualités organiques_.” This
last confirms my principle that the intellect, like the claws and teeth,
is nothing else than a weapon in the service of the will.




Chapter XXXII.(14) On Madness.


The health of the mind properly consists in perfect recollection. Of
course this is not to be understood as meaning that our memory preserves
everything. For the past course of our life shrinks up in time, as the
path of the wanderer looking back shrinks up in space: sometimes it is
difficult for us to distinguish the particular years; the days have for
the most part become unrecognisable. Really, however, only the exactly
similar events, recurring an innumerable number of times, so that their
images, as it were, conceal each other, ought so to run together in the
memory that they are individually unrecognisable; on the other hand, every
event in any way peculiar or significant we must be able to find again in
memory, if the intellect is normal, vigorous, and quite healthy. In the
text I have explained _madness_ as the _broken thread_ of this memory,
which still runs on regularly, although in constantly decreasing fulness
and distinctness. The following considerations may serve to confirm this.

The memory of a healthy man affords a certainty as to an event he has
witnessed, which is regarded as just as firm and sure as his present
apprehension of things; therefore, if sworn to by him, this event is
thereby established in a court of law. On the other hand, the mere
suspicion of madness will at once weaken the testimony of a witness. Here,
then, lies the criterion between the healthy mind and insanity. Whenever I
doubt whether an event which I remember really took place, I throw upon
myself the suspicion of madness: unless it is that I am uncertain whether
it was not a mere dream. If another doubts the reality of an event,
related by me as an eye‐witness, without mistrusting my honesty, then he
regards me as insane. Whoever comes at last, through constantly recounting
an event which originally was fabricated by him, to believe in it himself
is, in this one point, really insane. We may ascribe to an insane person
flashes of wit, single clever thoughts, even correct judgments, but his
testimony as to past events no man will consider valid. In the Lalita‐
vistara, well known to be the history of Buddha Sakya‐Muni, it is related
that at the moment of his birth all the sick became well, all the blind
saw, all the deaf heard, and all mad people “recovered their memory.” This
last is mentioned in two passages.(15)

My own experience of many years has led me to the opinion that madness
occurs proportionally most frequently among actors. But what a misuse they
make of their memory! Daily they have to learn a new part or refresh an
old one; but these parts are entirely without connection, nay, are in
contradiction and contrast with each other, and every evening the actor
strives to forget himself entirely and be some quite different person.
This kind of thing paves the way for madness.

The exposition of the origin of madness given in the text will become more
comprehensible if it is remembered how unwillingly we think of things
which powerfully injure our interests, wound our pride, or interfere with
our wishes; with what difficulty do we determine to lay such things before
our own intellect for careful and serious investigation; how easily, on
the other hand, we unconsciously break away or sneak off from them again;
how, on the contrary, agreeable events come into our minds of their own
accord, and, if driven away, constantly creep in again, so that we dwell
on them for hours together. In that resistance of the will to allowing
what is contrary to it to come under the examination of the intellect lies
the place at which madness can break in upon the mind. Each new adverse
event must be assimilated by the intellect, _i.e._, it must receive a
place in the system of the truths connected with our will and its
interests, whatever it may have to displace that is more satisfactory.
Whenever this has taken place, it already pains us much less; but this
operation itself is often very painful, and also, in general, only takes
place slowly and with resistance. However, the health of the mind can only
continue so long as this is in each case properly carried out. If, on the
contrary, in some particular case, the resistance and struggles of the
will against the apprehension of some knowledge reaches such a degree that
that operation is not performed in its integrity, then certain events or
circumstances become for the intellect completely suppressed, because the
will cannot endure the sight of them, and then, for the sake of the
necessary connection, the gaps that thus arise are filled up at pleasure;
thus madness appears. For the intellect has given up its nature to please
the will: the man now imagines what does not exist. Yet the madness which
has thus arisen is now the lethe of unendurable suffering; it was the last
remedy of harassed nature, _i.e._, of the will.

Let me mention here in passing a proof of my view which is worth noticing.
Carlo Gozzi, in the “_Monstro turchino_,” act i. scene 2, presents to us a
person who has drunk a magic potion which produces forgetfulness, and this
person appears exactly like a madman.

In accordance with the above exposition one may thus regard the origin of
madness as a violent “casting out of the mind” of anything, which,
however, is only possible by “taking into the head” something else. The
converse process is more rare, that the “taking into the head” comes
first, and the “casting out of the mind” second. It takes place, however,
in those cases in which the occasion of insanity is kept constantly
present to the mind and cannot be escaped from; thus, for example, in the
case of many who have gone mad from love, erotomaniacs, where the occasion
of their madness is constantly longed after; also in the case of madness
which has resulted from the fright of some sudden horrible occurrence.
Such patients cling, as it were, convulsively to the thought they have
grasped, so that no other, or at least none opposed to it, can arise. In
both processes, however, what is essential to madness remains the same,
the impossibility of a uniformly connected recollection, such as is the
basis of our healthy and rational reflection. Perhaps the contrast of the
ways in which they arise, set forth here, might, if applied with judgment,
afford a sharp and profound principle of division of delusions proper.

For the rest, I have only considered the physical origin of madness, thus
what is introduced by external, objective occasions. More frequently,
however, it depends upon purely physical causes, upon malformations or
partial disorganisation of the brain or its membranes, also upon the
influence which other parts affected with disease exercise upon the brain.
Principally in the latter kind of madness false sense‐perceptions,
hallucinations, may arise. Yet the two causes of madness will generally
partake of each other, particularly the psychical of the physical. It is
the same as with suicide, which is rarely brought about by an external
occasion alone, but a certain physical discomfort lies at its foundation;
and according to the degree which this attains to a greater or less
external occasion is required; only in the case of the very highest degree
is no external occasion at all required. Therefore there is no misfortune
so great that it would influence every one to suicide, and none so small
that one like it has not already led to it. I have shown the psychical
origin of madness as, at least according to all appearance, it is brought
about in the healthy mind by a great misfortune. In the case of those who
are already strongly disposed to madness physically a very small
disappointment will be sufficient to induce it. For example, I remember a
man in a madhouse who had been a soldier, and had gone out of his mind
because his officer had addressed him as _Er_.(16) In the case of decided
physical disposition no occasion at all is required when this has come to
maturity. The madness which has sprung from purely psychical causes may,
perhaps, by the violent perversion of the course of thought which has
produced it, also introduce a kind of paralysis or other depravity of some
part of the brain, which, if not soon done away with, becomes permanent.
Therefore madness is only curable at first, and not after a longer time.

Pinel taught that there is a _mania sine delirio_, frenzy without
insanity. This was controverted by Esquirol, and since then much has been
said for and against it. The question can only be decided empirically. But
if such a state really does occur, then it is to be explained from the
fact that here the will periodically entirely withdraws itself from the
government and guidance of the intellect, and consequently of motives, and
thus it then appears as a blind, impetuous, destructive force of nature,
and accordingly manifests itself as the desire to annihilate everything
that comes in its way. The will thus let loose is like the stream which
has broken through the dam, the horse that has thrown his rider, or a
clock out of which the regulating screws have been taken. Yet only the
reason, thus _reflective_ knowledge, is included in that suspension, not
_intuitive_ knowledge also; otherwise the will would remain entirely
without guidance, and consequently the man would be immovable. But, on the
contrary, the man in a frenzy apprehends objects, for he breaks out upon
them; thus he has also consciousness of his present action, and afterwards
remembrance of it. But he is entirely without reflection, thus without any
guidance of the reason, consequently quite incapable of any consideration
or regard for the present, the past, or the future. When the attack is
over, and the reason has regained its command, its function is correct,
because here its proper activity has not been perverted or destroyed, but
only the will has found the means to withdraw itself from it entirely for
a while.




Chapter XXXIII.(17) Isolated Remarks On Natural Beauty.


What contributes among other things to make the sight of a beautiful
landscape so exceedingly delightful is the perfect _truth and consistency_
of nature. Certainly nature does not follow here the guidance of logic in
the connection of the grounds of knowledge, of antecedents and
consequences, premisses and conclusions; but still it follows what is for
it analogous to the law of causality in the visible connection of causes
and effects. Every modification, even the slightest, which an object
receives from its position, foreshortening, concealment, distance,
lighting, linear and atmospheric perspective, &c., is, through its effect
upon the eye, unerringly given and accurately taken account of: the Indian
proverb, “Every corn of rice casts its shadow,” finds here its
confirmation. Therefore here everything shows itself so consistent,
accurately regular, connected, and scrupulously right; here there are no
evasions. If now we consider the sight of a beautiful view, merely as a
brain‐phenomenon, it is the only one among the complicated brain‐phenomena
which is always absolutely regular, blameless, and perfect; all the rest,
especially our own mental operations, are, in form or material, affected
more or less with defects or inaccuracies. From this excellence of the
sight of beautiful nature, is the harmonious and thoroughly satisfying
character of its impression to be explained, and also the favourable
effect which it has upon our whole thought, which in its formal part
thereby becomes more correctly disposed, and to a certain extent purified,
for that brain‐phenomenon which alone is entirely faultless sets the brain
in general in perfectly normal action; and now the thought seeks to follow
that method of nature in the consistency, connectedness, regularity, and
harmony of all its processes, after being brought by it into the right
swing. A beautiful view is therefore a cathartic of the mind, as music,
according to Aristotle, is of the feeling, and in its presence one will
think most correctly.

That the sight of a mountain chain suddenly rising before us throws us so
easily into a serious, and even sublime mood may partly depend upon the
fact that the form of the mountains and the outline of the chain arising
from it is the only constantly _permanent_ line of the landscape, for the
mountains alone defy the decay which soon sweeps away everything else,
especially our own ephemeral person. Not that at the sight of the mountain
chain all this appeared distinctly in our consciousness, but an obscure
feeling of it is the fundamental note of our mood.

I would like to know why it is that while for the human form and
countenance light from above is altogether the most advantageous, and
light from below the most unfavourable, with regard to landscape nature
exactly the converse holds good.

Yet how æsthetic is nature! Every spot that is entirely uncultivated and
wild, _i.e._, left free to itself, however small it may be, if only the
hand of man remains absent, it decorates at once in the most tasteful
manner, clothes it with plants, flowers, and shrubs, whose unforced
nature, natural grace, and tasteful grouping bears witness that they have
not grown up under the rod of correction of the great egoist, but that
nature has here moved freely. Every neglected plant at once becomes
beautiful. Upon this rests the principle of the English garden, which is
as much as possible to conceal art, so that it may appear as if nature had
here moved freely; for only then is it perfectly beautiful, _i.e._, shows
in the greatest distinctness the objectification of the still unconscious
will to live, which here unfolds itself with the greatest naïveté, because
the forms are not, as in the animal world, determined by external ends,
but only immediately by the soil, climate, and a mysterious third
influence on account of which so many plants which have originally sprung
up in the same soil and climate yet show such different forms and
characters.

The great difference between the English, or more correctly the Chinese,
garden and the old French, which is now always becoming more rare, yet
still exists in a few magnificent examples, ultimately rests upon the fact
that the former is planned in an objective spirit, the latter in a
subjective. In the former the will of nature, as it objectifies itself in
tree and shrub, mountain and waterfall, is brought to the purest possible
expression of these its Ideas, thus of its own inner being. In the French
garden, on the other hand, only the will of the possessor of it is
mirrored, which has subdued nature so that instead of its Ideas it bears
as tokens of its slavery the forms which correspond to that will, and
which are forcibly imposed upon it—clipped hedges, trees cut into all
kinds of forms, straight alleys, arched avenues, &c.




Chapter XXXIV.(18) On The Inner Nature Of Art.


Not merely philosophy but also the fine arts work at bottom towards the
solution of the problem of existence. For in every mind that once gives
itself up to the purely objective contemplation of nature a desire has
been excited, however concealed and unconscious it may be, to comprehend
the true nature of things, of life and existence. For this alone has
interest for the intellect as such, _i.e._, for the pure subject of
knowledge which has become free from the aims of the will; as for the
subject which knows as a mere individual the aims of the will alone have
interest. On this account the result of the purely objective apprehension
of things is an expression more of the nature of life and existence, more
an answer to the question, “What is life?” Every genuine and successful
work of art answers this question in its own way with perfect correctness.
But all the arts speak only the naive and childish language of perception,
not the abstract and serious language of _reflection_; their answer is
therefore a fleeting image: not permanent and general knowledge. Thus for
_perception_ every work of art answers that question, every painting,
every statue, every poem, every scene upon the stage: music also answers
it; and indeed more profoundly than all the rest, for in its language,
which is understood with absolute directness, but which is yet
untranslatable into that of the reason, the inner nature of all life and
existence expresses itself. Thus all the other arts hold up to the
questioner a perceptible image, and say, “Look here, this is life.” Their
answer, however correct it may be, will yet always afford merely a
temporary, not a complete and final, satisfaction. For they always give
merely a fragment, an example instead of the rule, not the whole, which
can only be given in the universality of the _conception_. For this,
therefore, thus for reflection and in the abstract, to give an answer
which just on that account shall be permanent and suffice for always, is
the task of philosophy. However, we see here upon what the relationship of
philosophy to the fine arts rests, and can conclude from that to what
extent the capacity of both, although in its direction and in secondary
matters very different, is yet in its root the same.

Every work of art accordingly really aims at showing us life and things as
they are in truth, but cannot be directly discerned by every one through
the mist of objective and subjective contingencies. Art takes away this
mist.

The works of the poets, sculptors, and representative artists in general
contain an unacknowledged treasure of profound wisdom; just because out of
them the wisdom of the nature of things itself speaks, whose utterances
they merely interpret by illustrations and purer repetitions. On this
account, however, every one who reads the poem or looks at the picture
must certainly contribute out of his own means to bring that wisdom to
light; accordingly he comprehends only so much of it as his capacity and
culture admit of; as in the deep sea each sailor only lets down the lead
as far as the length of the line will allow. Before a picture, as before a
prince, every one must stand, waiting to see whether and what it will
speak to him; and, as in the case of a prince, so here he must not himself
address it, for then he would only hear himself. It follows from all this
that in the works of the representative arts all truth is certainly
contained, yet only _virtualiter_ or _implicite_; philosophy, on the other
hand, endeavours to supply the same truth _actualiter_ and _explicite_,
and therefore, in this sense, is related to art as wine to grapes. What it
promises to supply would be, as it were, an already realised and clear
gain, a firm and abiding possession; while that which proceeds from the
achievements and works of art is one which has constantly to be reproduced
anew. Therefore, however, it makes demands, not only upon those who
produce its works, but also upon those who are to enjoy them which are
discouraging and hard to comply with. Therefore its public remains small,
while that of art is large.

The co‐operation of the beholder, which is referred to above, as demanded
for the enjoyment of a work of art, depends partly upon the fact that
every work of art can only produce its effect through the medium of the
fancy; therefore it must excite this, and can never allow it to be left
out of the play and remain inactive. This is a condition of the æsthetic
effect, and therefore a fundamental law of all fine arts. But it follows
from this that, through the work of art, everything must not be directly
given to the senses, but rather only so much as is demanded to lead the
fancy on to the right path; something, and indeed the ultimate thing, must
always be left over for the fancy to do. Even the author must always leave
something over for the reader to think; for Voltaire has very rightly
said, “_Le secret d’être ennuyeux, c’est de tout dire_.” But besides this,
in art the best of all is too spiritual to be given directly to the
senses; it must be born in the imagination of the beholder, although
begotten by the work of art. It depends upon this that the sketches of
great masters often effect more than their finished pictures; although
another advantage certainly contributes to this, namely, that they are
completed offhand in the moment of conception; while the perfected
painting is only produced through continued effort, by means of skilful
deliberation and persistent intention, for the inspiration cannot last
till it is completed. From the fundamental æsthetical law we are speaking
of, it is further to be explained why wax figures never produce an
æsthetic effect, and therefore are not properly works of fine art,
although it is just in them that the imitation of nature is able to reach
its highest grade. For they leave nothing for the imagination to do.
Sculpture gives merely the form without the colour; painting gives the
colour, but the mere appearance of the form; thus both appeal to the
imagination of the beholder. The wax figure, on the other hand, gives all,
form and colour at once; whence arises the appearance of reality, and the
imagination is left out of account. Poetry, on the contrary, appeals
indeed to the imagination alone, which it sets in action by means of mere
words.

An arbitrary playing with the means of art without a proper knowledge of
the end is, in every art, the fundamental characteristic of the dabbler.
Such a man shows himself in the pillars that support nothing, aimless
volutes, juttings and projections of bad architecture, in the meaningless
runs and figures, together with the aimless noise of bad music, in the
jingling of the rhymes of senseless poetry, &c.

It follows from the preceding chapter, and from my whole view of art, that
its aim is the facilitating of the knowledge of the Ideas of the world (in
the Platonic sense, the only one which I recognise for the word Idea). The
Ideas, however, are essentially something perceptible, which, therefore,
in its fuller determinations, is inexhaustible. The communication of such
an Idea can therefore only take place on the path of perception, which is
that of art. Whoever, therefore, is filled with the comprehension of an
Idea is justified if he chooses art as the medium of its communication.
The mere conception, on the other hand, is something completely
determinable, therefore exhaustible, and distinctly thought, the whole
content of which can be coldly and dryly expressed in words. Now to desire
to communicate such a conception by means of a work of art is a very
useless circumlocution, indeed belongs to that playing with the means of
art without knowledge of its end which has just been condemned. Therefore
a work of art which has proceeded from mere distinct conceptions is always
ungenuine. If now, in considering a work of plastic art, or in reading a
poem, or in hearing a piece of music (which aims at describing something
definite), we see, through all the rich materials of art, the distinct,
limited, cold, dry conception shine out, and at last come to the front,
the conception which was the kernel of this work, the whole notion of
which consequently consisted in the distinct thinking of it, and
accordingly is absolutely exhausted by its communication, we feel
disgusted and indignant, for we see ourselves deceived and cheated out of
our interest and attention. We are only perfectly satisfied by the
impression of a work of art when it leaves something which, with all our
thinking about it, we cannot bring down to the distinctness of a
conception. The mark of that hybrid origin from mere conceptions is that
the author of a work of art could, before he set about it, give in
distinct words what he intended to present; for then it would have been
possible to attain his whole end through these words. Therefore it is an
undertaking as unworthy as it is absurd if, as has often been tried at the
present day, one seeks to reduce a poem of Shakspeare’s or Goethe’s to the
abstract truth which it was its aim to communicate. Certainly the artist
ought to think in the arranging of his work; but only that thought which
was _perceived_ before it was thought has afterwards, in its
communication, the power of animating or rousing, and thereby becomes
imperishable. We shall not refrain from observing here that certainly the
work which is done at a stroke, like the sketches of painters already
referred to, the work which is completed in the inspiration of its first
conception, and as it were unconsciously dashed off, like the melody which
comes entirely without reflection, and quite as if by inspiration, and
finally, also the lyrical poem proper, the mere song, in which the deeply
felt mood of the present, and the impression of the surroundings, as if
involuntarily, pours itself forth in words, whose metre and rhyme come
about of their own accord—that all these, I say, have the great advantage
of being purely the work of the ecstasy of the moment, the inspiration,
the free movement of genius, without any admixture of intention and
reflection; hence they are through and through delightful and enjoyable,
without shell and kernel, and their effect is much more inevitable than
that of the greatest works of art, of slower and more deliberate
execution. In all the latter, thus in great historical paintings, in long
epic poems, great operas, &c., reflection, intention, and deliberate
selection has had an important part; understanding, technical skill, and
routine must here fill up the gaps which the conception and inspiration of
genius has left, and must mix with these all kinds of necessary
supplementary work as cement of the only really genuinely brilliant parts.
This explains why all such works, only excepting the perfect masterpieces
of the very greatest masters (as, for example, “Hamlet,” “Faust,” the
opera of “Don Juan”), inevitably contain an admixture of something insipid
and wearisome, which in some measure hinders the enjoyment of them. Proofs
of this are the “Messiah,” “_Gerusalemme liberata_,” even “Paradise Lost”
and the “Æneid;” and Horace already makes the bold remark, “_Quandoque
dormitat bonus Homerus_.” But that this is the case is the consequence of
the limitation of human powers in general.

The mother of the useful arts is necessity; that of the fine arts
superfluity. As their father, the former have understanding; the latter
genius, which is itself a kind of superfluity, that of the powers of
knowledge beyond the measure which is required for the service of the
will.




Chapter XXXV.(19) On The Æsthetics Of Architecture.


In accordance with the deduction given in the text of the pure æsthetics
of architecture from the lowest grades of the objectification of the will
or of nature, the Ideas of which it seeks to bring to distinct perception,
its one constant theme is _support and burden_, and its fundamental law is
that no burden shall be without sufficient support, and no support without
a suitable burden; consequently that the relation of these two shall be
exactly the fitting one. The purest example of the carrying out of this
theme is the column and entablature. Therefore the order or columnar
arrangement has become, as it were, the thorough bass of the whole of
architecture. In column and entablature the support and the burden are
_completely separated_; whereby the reciprocal action of the two and their
relation to each other becomes apparent. For certainly even every plain
wall contains support and burden; but here the two are still fused
together. All is here support and all is burden; hence there is no
æsthetic effect. This first appears through the separation, and takes
place in proportion to its degree. For between the row of columns and the
plain wall there are many intermediate degrees. Even in the mere breaking
up of the wall of a house by windows and doors one seeks at least to
indicate that separation by flat projecting pilasters (_antæ_) with
capitals, which are inserted under the mouldings, nay, in case of need,
are represented by mere painting, in order to indicate in some way the
entablature and an order. Real pillars, and also consoles and supports of
various kinds, realise more that pure separation of support and burden
which is striven after throughout by architecture. In this respect, next
to the column with the entablature, but as a special construction not
imitating it, stands the vault with the pillar. The latter certainly is
far from attaining to the æsthetic effect of the former, because here the
support and the burden are not _purely separated_, but are fused, passing
over into each other. In the vault itself every stone is at once burden
and support, and even the pillars, especially in groined vaulting, are, at
least apparently, held in position by the pressure of opposite arches; and
also just on account of this lateral pressure not only vaults but even
mere arches ought not to rest upon columns, but require the massive four‐
cornered pillars. In the row of columns alone is the separation complete,
for here the entablature appears as pure burden, the column as pure
support. Accordingly the relation of the colonnade to the plain wall may
be compared to that which would exist between a scale ascending in regular
intervals and a tone ascending little by little from the same depth to the
same height without gradation, which would produce a mere howl. For in the
one as in the other the material is the same, and the important difference
proceeds entirely from the _pure separation_.

Moreover, the support is not adapted to the burden when it is only
sufficient to bear it, but when it can do this so conveniently and amply
that at the first glance we are quite at ease about it. Yet this
superfluity of support must not exceed a certain degree; for otherwise we
will perceive support without burden, which is opposed to the æsthetic
end. As a rule for determining that degree the ancients devised the line
of equilibrium, which is got by carrying out the diminution of the
thickness of the column as it ascends till it runs out into an acute
angle, whereby the column becomes a cone; now every cross section will
leave the lower part so strong that it is sufficient to support the upper
part cut off. Commonly, however, one builds with twentyfold strength,
_i.e._, one lays upon every support only 1/20th of the maximum it could
bear. A glaring example of burden without support is presented to the eye
by the balconies at the corners of many houses built in the elegant style
of the present day. We do not see what supports them; they seem to hang
suspended, and disturb the mind.

That in Italy even the simplest and most unornamented buildings make an
æsthetic impression, while in Germany this is not the case, depends
principally upon the fact that in Italy the roofs are very flat. A high
roof is neither support nor burden, for its two halves mutually support
each other, but the whole has no weight corresponding to its extension.
Therefore it presents to the eye an extended mass which is entirely
foreign to the æsthetic end, serves merely a useful end, consequently
disturbs the former, of which the theme is always only support and burden.

The form of the column has its sole ground in the fact that it affords the
simplest and most suitable support. In the twisted column
inappropriateness appears as if with intentional perversity, and therefore
shamelessness: hence good taste condemns it at the first glance. The four‐
cornered pillar, since the diagonal exceeds the sides, has unequal
dimensions of thickness which have no end as their motive, but are
occasioned by the accident of greater feasibleness; and just on this
account it pleases us so very much less than the column. Even the
hexagonal or octagonal pillar is more pleasing, because it approaches more
nearly to the round column; for the form of the latter alone is
exclusively determined by the end. It is, however, also so determined in
all its other proportions, primarily in the relation of its thickness to
its height, within the limits permitted by the difference of the three
columnar orders. Therefore its diminution from the first third of its
height upwards, and also a slight increase of its thickness just at this
place (_entasis vitr._), depends upon the fact that the pressure of the
burden is greatest there. It has hitherto been believed that this increase
in thickness was peculiar to the Ionic and Corinthian columns alone, but
recent measurements have shown it also in the Doric columns, even at
Pæstum. Thus everything in the column, its thoroughly determined form, the
proportion of its height to its thickness, of both to the intervals
between the columns, and that of the whole series to the entablature and
the burden resting upon it, is the exactly calculated result of the
relation of the necessary support to the given burden. As the latter is
uniformly distributed, so must also the support be; therefore groups of
columns are tasteless. On the other hand, in the best Doric temples the
corner column comes somewhat nearer to the next ones, because the meeting
of the entablatures at the corner increases the burden; and in this the
principle of architecture expresses itself distinctly, that the structural
relations, _i.e._, the relations between support and burden, are the
essential ones, to which the relations of symmetry, as subordinate, must
at once give way. According to the weight of the whole burden generally
will the Doric or the two lighter orders of columns be chosen, for the
first, not only by the greater thickness, but also by the closer position
of the columns, which is essential to it, is calculated for heavier
burdens, to which end also the almost crude simplicity of its capital is
suited. The capitals in general serve the end of showing visibly that the
columns bear the entablature, and are not stuck in like pins; at the same
time they increase by means of their abacus the bearing surface. Since,
then, all the laws of columnar arrangement, and consequently also the form
and proportion of the column, in all its parts and dimensions down to the
smallest details, follow from the thoroughly understood and consistently
carried out conception of the amply adequate support of a given burden,
thus so far are determined _a priori_, it comes out clearly how perverse
is the thought, so often repeated, that the stems of trees, or even (which
unfortunately even “Vitruvius,” iv. 1, expresses) the human form has been
the prototype of the column. For if the form of the column were for
architecture a purely accidental one, taken from without, it could never
appeal to us so harmoniously and satisfactorily whenever we behold it in
its proper symmetry; nor, on the other hand, could every even slight
disproportion of it be felt at once by the fine and cultivated sense as
disagreeable and disturbing, like a false note in music. This is rather
only possible because, according to the given end and means, all the rest
is essentially determined _a priori_, as in music, according to the given
melody and key, the whole harmony is essentially so determined. And, like
music, architecture in general is also not an imitative art, although both
are often falsely taken to be so.

Æsthetic satisfaction, as was fully explained in the text, always depends
upon the apprehension of a (Platonic) Idea. For architecture, considered
merely as a fine art, the Ideas of the lowest grades of nature, such as
gravity, rigidity, and cohesion, are the peculiar theme; but not, as has
hitherto been assumed, merely regular form, proportion, and symmetry,
which, as something purely geometrical, properties of space, are not
Ideas, and therefore cannot be the theme of a fine art. Thus in
architecture also they are of secondary origin, and have a subordinate
significance, which I shall bring out immediately. If it were the task of
architecture as a fine art simply to exhibit these, then the model would
have the same effect as the finished work. But this is distinctly not the
case; on the contrary, the works of architecture, in order to act
æsthetically, absolutely must have a considerable size; nay, they can
never be too large, but may easily be too small. Indeed _ceteris paribus_
the æsthetic effect is in exact proportion to the size of the building,
because only great masses make the action of gravitation apparent and
impressive in a high degree. But this confirms my view that the tendency
and antagonism of those fundamental forces of nature constitute the
special æsthetical material of architecture, which, according to its
nature, requires large masses in order to become visible, and indeed
capable of being felt. The forms in architecture, as was shown above in
the case of the column, are primarily determined by the immediate
structural end of each part. But so far as this leaves anything
undetermined, the law of the most perfect clearness to perception, thus
also of the easiest comprehensibility, comes in; for architecture has its
existence primarily in our spatial perception, and accordingly appeals to
our _a priori_ faculty for this. But these qualities always result from
the greatest regularity of the forms and rationality of their relations.
Therefore beautiful architecture selects only regular figures composed of
straight lines or regular curves, and also the bodies which result from
these, such as cubes, parallelopipeda, cylinders, spheres, pyramids, and
cones; but as openings sometimes circles or ellipses, yet, as a rule,
quadrates, and still oftener rectangles, the latter of thoroughly rational
and very easily comprehended relation of their sides (not, for instance as
6:7, but as 1:2, 2:3), finally also blind windows or niches of regular and
comprehensible proportions. For the same reason it will readily give to
the buildings themselves and their large parts a rational and easily
comprehended relation of height and breadth; for example, it will let the
height of a facade be half the breadth, and place the pillars so that
every three or four of them, with the intervals between them, will measure
a line which is equal to the height, thus will form a quadrate. The same
principle of perceptibility and easy comprehension demands also that a
building should be easily surveyed. This introduces symmetry, which is
further necessary to mark out the work as a whole, and to distinguish its
essential from its accidental limitation; for sometimes, for example, it
is only under the guidance of symmetry that one knows whether one has
before one three buildings standing beside each other or only one. Thus
only by means of symmetry does a work of architecture at once announce
itself as individual unity, and as the development of a central thought.

Now although, as was cursorily shown above, architecture has by no means
to imitate the forms of nature, such as the stems of trees or even the
human figure, yet it ought to work in the spirit of nature, for it makes
the law its own, _natura nihil agit frustra, nihilque supervacaneum, et
quod commodissimum in omnibus suis operationibus sequitur_, and
accordingly avoids everything which is even only apparently aimless, and
always attains the end in view in each case, whether this is purely
architectonic, _i.e._, structural, or an end connected with usefulness, by
the shortest and most natural path, and thus openly exhibits the end
through the work itself. Thus it attains a certain grace, analogous to
that which in living creatures consists in the ease and suitableness of
every movement and position to its end. Accordingly we see in the good
antique style of architecture every part, whether pillar, column, arch,
entablature, or door, window, stair, or balcony, attain its end in the
directest and simplest manner, at the same time displaying it openly and
naively; just as organised nature also does in its works. The tasteless
style of architecture, on the contrary, seeks in everything useless
roundabout ways, and delights in caprices, thereby hits upon aimlessly
broken and irregular entablatures, grouped columns, fragmentary cornices
on door arches and gables, meaningless volutes, scrolls, and such like. It
plays with the means of the art without understanding its aims, as
children play with the tools of grown‐up people. This was given above as
the character of the bungler. Of this kind is every interruption of a
straight line, every alteration in the sweep of a curve, without apparent
end. On the other hand, it is also just that naive simplicity in the
disclosure and attainment of the end, corresponding to the spirit in which
nature works and fashions, that imparts such beauty and grace of form to
antique pottery that it ever anew excites our wonder, because it contrasts
so advantageously in original taste with our modern pottery, which bears
the stamp of vulgarity, whether it is made of porcelain or common potter’s
clay. At the sight of the pottery and implements of the ancients we feel
that if nature had wished to produce such things it would have done so in
these forms. Since, then, we see that the beauty of architecture arises
from the unconcealed exhibition of the ends, and the attainment of them by
the shortest and most natural path, my theory here appears in direct
contradiction with that of Kant, which places the nature of all beauty in
an apparent design without an end.

The sole theme of architecture here set forth—support and burden—is so
very simple, that just on this account this art, so far as it is a fine
art (but not so far as it serves useful ends), is perfect and complete in
essential matters, since the best Greek period, at least, is not
susceptible of any important enrichment. On the other hand, the modern
architect cannot noticeably depart from the rules and patterns of the
ancients without already being on the path of deterioration. Therefore
there remains nothing for him to do but to apply the art transmitted to
him by the ancients, and carry out the rules so far as is possible under
the limitations which are inevitably laid down for him by wants, climate,
age, and country. For in this art, as in sculpture, the effort after the
ideal unites with the imitation of the ancients.

I scarcely need to remind the reader that in all these considerations I
have had in view antique architecture alone, and not the so‐called Gothic
style, which is of Saracen origin, and was introduced by the Goths in
Spain to the rest of Europe. Perhaps a certain beauty of its own kind is
not altogether to be denied to this style, but yet if it attempts to
oppose itself to the former as its equal, then this is a barbarous
presumption which must not be allowed for a moment. How beneficently,
after contemplating such Gothic magnificence, does the sight of a building
correctly carried out in the antique style act upon our mind! We feel at
once that this alone is right and true. If one could bring an ancient
Greek before our most celebrated Gothic cathedrals, what would he say to
them?—Βαρβαροι! Our pleasure in Gothic works certainly depends for the
most part upon the association of ideas and historical reminiscences, thus
upon a feeling which is foreign to art. All that I have said of the true
æsthetic end, of the spirit and the theme of architecture, loses in the
case of these works its validity. For the freely lying entablature has
vanished, and with it the columns: support and burden, arranged and
distributed in order to give visible form to the conflict between rigidity
and gravity, are here no longer the theme. Moreover, that thorough, pure
rationality by virtue of which everything admits of strict account, nay,
already presents it of its own accord to the thoughtful beholder, and
which belongs to the character of antique architecture, can here no longer
be found; we soon become conscious that here, instead of it, a will guided
by other conceptions has moved; therefore much remains unexplained to us.
For only the antique style of architecture is conceived in a purely
_objective_ spirit; the Gothic style is more in the subjective spirit. Yet
as we have recognised the peculiar æsthetic fundamental thought of antique
architecture in the unfolding of the conflict between rigidity and
gravity, if we wish to discover in Gothic architecture also an analogous
fundamental thought, it will be this, that here the entire overcoming and
conquest of gravity by rigidity is supposed to be exhibited. For in
accordance with this the horizontal line which is that of burden has
entirely vanished, and the action of gravity only appears indirectly,
disguised in arches and vaults, while the vertical line which is that of
support, alone prevails, and makes palpable to the senses the victorious
action of rigidity, in excessively high buttresses, towers, turrets, and
pinnacles without number which rise unencumbered on high. While in antique
architecture the tendency and pressure from above downwards is just as
well represented and exhibited as that from below upwards, here the latter
decidedly predominates; whence that analogy often observed with the
crystal, whose crystallisation also takes place with the overcoming of
gravity. If now we attribute this spirit and fundamental thought to Gothic
architecture, and would like thereby to set it up as the equally justified
antithesis of antique architecture, we must remember that the conflict
between rigidity and gravity, which the antique architecture so openly and
naïvely expresses, is an actual and true conflict founded in nature; the
entire overcoming of gravity by rigidity, on the contrary, remains a mere
appearance, a fiction accredited by illusion. Every one will easily be
able to see clearly how from the fundamental thought given here, and the
peculiarities of Gothic architecture noticed above, there arises that
mysterious and hyperphysical character which is attributed to it. It
principally arises, as was already mentioned, from the fact that here the
arbitrary has taken the place of the purely rational, which makes itself
known as the thorough adaptation of the means to the end. The many things
that are really aimless, but yet are so carefully perfected, raise the
assumption of unknown, unfathomed, and secret ends, _i.e._, give the
appearance of mystery. On the other hand, the brilliant side of Gothic
churches is the interior; because here the effect of the groined vaulting
borne by slender, crystalline, aspiring pillars, raised high aloft, and,
all burden having disappeared, promising eternal security, impresses the
mind; while most of the faults which have been mentioned lie upon the
outside. In antique buildings the external side is the most advantageous,
because there we see better the support and the burden; in the interior,
on the other hand, the flat roof always retains something depressing and
prosaic. For the most part, also, in the temples of the ancients, while
the outworks were many and great, the interior proper was small. An
appearance of sublimity is gained from the hemispherical vault of a
cupola, as in the Pantheon, of which, therefore, the Italians also,
building in this style, have made a most extensive use. What determines
this is, that the ancients, as southern peoples, lived more in the open
air than the northern nations who have produced the Gothic style of
architecture. Whoever, then, absolutely insists upon Gothic architecture
being accepted as an essential and authorised style may, if he is also
fond of analogies, regard it as the negative pole of architecture, or,
again, as its minor key. In the interest of good taste I must wish that
great wealth will be devoted to that which is objectively, _i.e._,
actually, good and right, to what in itself is beautiful, but not to that
whose value depends merely upon the association of ideas. Now when I see
how this unbelieving age so diligently finishes the Gothic churches left
incomplete by the believing Middle Ages, it looks to me as if it were
desired to embalm a dead Christianity.




Chapter XXXVI.(20) Isolated Remarks On The Æsthetics Of The Plastic And
Pictorial Arts.


In sculpture beauty and grace are the principal things; but in painting
expression, passion, and character predominate; therefore just so much of
the claims of beauty must be neglected. For a perfect beauty of all forms,
such as sculpture demands, would detract from the characteristic and weary
by monotony. Accordingly painting may also present ugly faces and
emaciated figures; sculpture, on the other hand, demands beauty, although
not always perfect, but, throughout, strength and fulness of the figures.
Consequently a thin Christ upon the Cross, a dying St. Jerome, wasted by
age and disease, like the masterpiece of Domenichino, is a proper subject
for painting; while, on the contrary, the marble figure by Donatello, in
the gallery at Florence, of John the Baptist, reduced to skin and bone by
fasting, has, in spite of the masterly execution, a repulsive effect. From
this point of view sculpture seems suitable for the affirmation, painting
for the negation, of the will to live, and from this it may be explained
why sculpture was the art of the ancients, while painting has been the art
of the Christian era.

In connection with the exposition given in § 45 of the first volume, that
the discovery, recognition, and retention of the type of human beauty
depends to a certain extent upon an anticipation of it, and therefore in
part has an _a priori_ foundation, I find that I have yet to bring out
clearly the fact that this anticipation nevertheless requires experience,
by which it may be stirred up; analogous to the instinct of the brutes,
which, although guiding the action _a priori_, yet requires determination
by motives in the details of it. Experience and reality present to the
intellect of the artist human forms, which, in one part or another, are
more or less true to nature, as if it were asking for his judgment
concerning them, and thus, after the Socratic method, call forth from that
obscure anticipation the distinct and definite knowledge of the ideal.
Therefore it assisted the Greek sculptors very much that the climate and
customs of their country gave them opportunity the whole day of seeing
half‐naked forms, and in the gymnasium entirely naked forms. In this way
every limb presented its plastic significance to criticism, and to
comparison with the ideal which lay undeveloped in their consciousness.
Thus they constantly exercised their judgment with regard to all forms and
limbs, down to their finest shades of difference; and thus, little by
little, their originally dull anticipation of the ideal of human beauty
was raised to such distinct consciousness that they became capable of
objectifying it in works of art. In an entirely analogous manner some
experience is useful and necessary to the poet for the representation of
characters. For although he does not work according to experience and
empirical data, but in accordance with the clear consciousness of the
nature of humanity, as he finds it within himself, yet experience serves
this consciousness as a pattern, incites it and gives it practice.
Accordingly his knowledge of human nature and its varieties, although in
the main it proceeds _a priori_ and by anticipation, yet first receives
life, definiteness, and compass through experience. But, supporting
ourselves upon the preceding book and chapter 44 in the following book, we
can go still deeper into the ground of that marvellous sense of beauty of
the Greeks which made them alone of all nations upon earth capable of
discovering the true normal type of the human form, and accordingly of
setting up the pattern of beauty and grace for the imitation of all ages,
and we can say: The same thing which, if it remains unseparated from the
_will_, gives sexual instinct with its discriminating selection, _i.e._,
_sexual love_ (which it is well known was subject among the Greeks to
great aberrations), becomes, if, by the presence of an abnormally
preponderating intellect, it separates itself from the will and yet
remains active, _the objective sense of beauty_ of the human form, which
now shows itself primarily as a critical artistic sense, but can rise to
the discovery and representation of the norm of all parts and proportions;
as was the case in Phidias, Praxiteles, Scopas, &c. Then is fulfilled what
Goethe makes the artist say—


    “That I with mind divine
    And human hand
    May be able to form
    What with my wife,
    As animal, I can and must.”


And again, analogous to this, that which in the poet, if it remained
unseparated from the will, would give only worldly prudence, becomes, if
it frees itself from the will by abnormal preponderance of the intellect,
the capacity for objective, dramatic representation.

Modern sculpture, whatever it may achieve, is still analogous to modern
Latin poetry, and, like this, is a child of imitation, sprung from
reminiscences. If it presumes to try to be original, it at once goes
astray, especially upon the bad path of forming according to nature as it
lies before it, instead of according to the proportions of the ancients.
Canova, Thorwaldsen, and many others may be compared to Johannes Secundus
and Owenus. It is the same with architecture, only there it is founded in
the art itself, the purely æsthetic part of which is of small compass, and
was already exhausted by the ancients; therefore the modern architect can
only distinguish himself in the wise application of it; and he ought to
know that he removes himself from good taste just so far as he departs
from the style and pattern of the Greeks.

The art of the painter, considered only so far as it aims at producing the
appearance of reality, may ultimately be referred to the fact that he
understands how to separate purely what in seeing is the mere sensation,
thus the affection of the retina, _i.e._, the only directly given
_effect_, from its _cause_, _i.e._, the objective external world, the
perception of which first rises in the understanding from this effect;
whereby, if he has technical skill, he is in a position to produce the
same effect in the eye through an entirely different cause, the patches of
applied colour, from which then in the understanding of the beholder the
same perception again arises through the unavoidable reference of the
effect to the ordinary cause.

If we consider how there lies something so entirely idiosyncratic, so
thoroughly original, in every human countenance, and that it presents a
whole which can only belong to a unity consisting entirely of necessary
parts by virtue of which we recognise a known individual out of so many
thousands, even after long years, although the possible variations of
human features, especially of one race, lie within very narrow limits, we
must doubt whether anything of such essential unity and such great
originality could ever proceed from any other source than from the
mysterious depths of the inner being of nature; but from this it would
follow that no artist could be capable of really reproducing the original
peculiarity of a human countenance, or even of composing it according to
nature from recollection. Accordingly what he produced of this kind would
always be only a half true, nay, perhaps an impossible composition; for
how should he compose an actual physiognomical unity when the principle of
this unity is really unknown to him? Therefore, in the case of every face
which has merely been imagined by an artist, we must doubt whether it is
in fact a possible face, and whether nature, as the master of all masters,
would not show it to be a bungled production by pointing out complete
contradictions in it. This would, of course, lead to the principle that in
historical paintings only portraits ought to figure, which certainly would
then have to be selected with the greatest care and in some degree
idealised. It is well known that great artists have always gladly painted
from living models and introduced many portraits.

Although, as is explained in the text, the real end of painting, as of art
in general, is to make the comprehension of the (Platonic) Ideas of the
nature of the world easier for us, whereby we are at once thrown into the
state of pure, _i.e._, will‐less, knowing, there yet belongs to it besides
this an independent beauty of its own, which is produced by the mere
harmony of the colours, the pleasingness of the grouping, the happy
distribution of light and shade, and the tone of the whole picture. This
accompanying subordinate kind of beauty furthers the condition of pure
knowing, and is in painting what the diction, the metre, and rhyme are in
poetry; both are not what is essential, but what acts first and
immediately.

I have some further evidence to give in support of my judgment given in
the first volume, § 50, on the inadmissibleness of allegory in painting.
In the Borghese palace at Rome there is the following picture by Michael
Angelo Caravaggio: Jesus, as a child of about ten years old, treads upon
the head of a serpent, but entirely without fear and with great calmness;
and His mother, who accompanies Him, remains quite as indifferent. Close
by stands St. Elizabeth, looking solemnly and tragically up to heaven. Now
what could be thought of this kyriological hieroglyphic by a man who had
never heard anything about the seed of the woman that should bruise the
head of the serpent? At Florence, in the library of the palace Riccardi,
we find the following allegory upon the ceiling, painted by Luca Giordano,
which is meant to signify that science frees the understanding from the
bonds of ignorance: the understanding is a strong man bound with cords,
which are just falling off; a nymph holds a mirror in front of him,
another hands him a large detached wing; above sits science on a globe,
and beside her, with a globe in her hand, the naked truth. At Ludwigsburg,
near Stuttgart, there is a picture which shows us time, as Saturn, cutting
off with a pair of shears the wings of Cupid. If this is meant to signify
that when we grow old love proves unstable, this no doubt has its truth.

The following may serve to strengthen my solution of the problem as to why
Laocoon does not cry out. One may practically convince oneself of the
faulty effect of the representation of shrieking by the works of the
plastic and pictorial arts, which are essentially dumb, by a picture of
the slaughter of the innocents, by Guido Reni, which is to be found in the
Academy of Arts at Bologna, and in which this great artist has committed
the mistake of painting six shrieking wide‐open mouths. Let any one who
wants to have this more distinct think of a pantomimic representation on
the stage, and in one of the scenes an urgent occasion for one of the
players to shriek; if now the dancer who is representing this part should
express the shriek by standing for a while with his mouth wide open, the
loud laughter of the whole house would bear witness to the absurdity of
the thing. Accordingly, since the shrieking of Laocoon had to be avoided
for reasons which did not lie in the objects to be represented, but in the
nature of the representing art, the task thus arose for the artist so to
present this not‐shrieking as to make it plausible to us that a man in
such a position should not shriek. He solves this problem by representing
the bite of the snake, not as having already taken place, nor yet as still
threatening, but as just happening now in the side; for thereby the lower
part of the body is contracted, and shrieking made impossible. This
immediate but only subordinate reason was correctly discovered by Goethe,
and is expounded at the end of the eleventh book of his autobiography, and
also in the paper on Laocoon in the first part of the Propylæa; but the
ultimate, primary reason, which conditions this one, is that which I have
set forth. I cannot refrain from remarking that I here stand in the same
relation to Goethe as with reference to the theory of colours. In the
collection of the Duke of Aremberg at Brussels there is an antique head of
Laocoon which was found later. However, the head in the world‐renowned
group is not a restored one which follows from Goethe’s special table of
all the restorations of this group, which is given at the end of the first
volume of the Propylæa, and is also confirmed by the fact that the head
which was found later resembles that of the group very much. Thus we must
assume that another antique repetition of the group has existed to which
the Aremberg head belonged. In my opinion the latter excels both in beauty
and expression that of the group. It has the mouth decidedly wider open
than in the group, yet not really to the extent of shrieking.




Chapter XXXVII.(21) On The Æsthetics Of Poetry.


I might give it as the simplest and most correct definition of poetry,
that it is the art of bringing the imagination into play by means of
words. How it brings this to pass I have shown in the first volume, § 51.
A special confirmation of what is said there is afforded by the following
passage in a letter of Wieland’s to Merck, which has since then been
published: “I have spent two days and a half upon a single stanza, in
which the whole thing ultimately depended upon a single word which I
wanted and could not find. I revolved and turned about the thing and my
brain in all directions, because naturally, where a picture was in
question, I desired to bring the same definite vision, which floated
before my own mind into the mind of my reader also, and for this all often
depends, _ut nosti_, upon a single touch or suggestion or reflex” (_Briefe
an Merck_, edited by Wagner, 1835, p. 193). From the fact that the
imagination of the reader is the material in which poetry exhibits its
pictures, it has the advantage that the fuller development of these
pictures and their finer touches, take place in the imagination of every
one just as is most suitable to his individuality, his sphere of
knowledge, and his humour, and therefore move him in the most lively
manner; instead of which plastic and pictorial art cannot so adapt itself,
but here _one_ picture, _one_ form, must satisfy all. And yet this will
always bear in some respect the stamp of the individuality of the artist
or of his model, as a subjective or accidental and inefficient addition;
although always less so the more objective, _i.e._, the more of a genius,
the artist is. This, to some extent, explains why works of poetry exercise
a much stronger, deeper, and more universal effect than pictures and
statues; the latter, for the most part, leave the common people quite
cold; and, in general, the plastic arts are those which have the weakest
effect. A remarkable proof of this is afforded by the frequent discovery
and disclosure of pictures by great masters in private houses and all
kinds of localities, where they have been hanging for many generations,
not buried and concealed, but merely unheeded, thus without any effect. In
my time (1823) there was even discovered in Florence a Madonna of
Raphael’s, which had hung for a long series of years on the wall of the
servants’ hall of a palace (in the _Quartiere di S. Spirito_); and this
happens among Italians, the nation which is gifted beyond all others with
the sense of the beautiful. It shows how little direct and immediate
effect the works of plastic and pictorial art have, and that it requires
more culture and knowledge to prize them than the works of all other arts.
How unfailingly, on the contrary, a beautiful melody that touches the
heart makes its journey round the world, and an excellent poem wanders
from people to people. That the great and rich devote their powerful
support just to the plastic and pictorial arts, and expend considerable
sums upon _their_ works only; nay, at the present day, an idolatry, in the
proper sense of the term, gives the value of a large estate for a picture
of a celebrated old master—this depends principally upon the rarity of the
masterpieces, the possession of which therefore gratifies pride; and then
also upon the fact that the enjoyment of them demands very little time and
effort, and is ready at any moment, for a moment; while poetry and even
music make incomparably harder conditions. Corresponding to this, the
plastic and pictorial arts may be dispensed with; whole nations—for
example, the Mohammedan peoples—are without them, but no people is without
music and poetry.

But the intention with which the poet sets our imagination in motion is to
reveal to us the Ideas, _i.e._, to show us by an example what life and
what the world is. The first condition of this is that he himself has
known it; according as his knowledge has been profound or superficial so
will his poem be. Therefore, as there are innumerable degrees of
profoundness and clearness in the comprehension of the nature of things,
so are there of poets. Each of these, however, must regard himself as
excellent so far as he has correctly represented what he knew, and his
picture answers to _his_ original: he must make himself equal with the
best, for even in the best picture he does not recognise more than in his
own, that is, as much as he sees in nature itself; for his glance cannot
now penetrate deeper. But the best himself recognises himself as such in
the fact that he sees how superficial was the view of the others, how much
lay beyond it which they were not able to repeat, because they did not see
it, and how much further his own glance and picture reaches. If he
understood the superficial poets as little as they do him, then he would
necessarily despair; for just because it requires an extraordinary man to
do him justice, but the inferior poets can just as little esteem him as he
can them, he also has long to live upon his own approval before that of
the world follows it. Meanwhile he is deprived even of his own approval,
for he is expected to be very modest. It is, however, as impossible that
he who has merit, and knows what it costs, should himself be blind to it,
as that a man who is six feet high should not observe that he rises above
others. If from the base of the tower to the summit is 300 feet, then
certainly it is just as much from the summit to the base. Horace,
Lucretius, Ovid, and almost all the ancients have spoken proudly of
themselves, and also Dante, Shakspeare, Bacon of Verulam, and many more.
That one can be a great man without observing anything of it is an
absurdity of which only hopeless incapacity can persuade itself, in order
that it may regard the feeling of its own insignificance as modesty. An
Englishman has wittily and correctly observed that merit and modesty have
nothing in common except the initial letter.(22) I have always a suspicion
about modest celebrities that they may very well be right; and Corneille
says directly—


    “La fausse humilité ne met plus en crédit:
    Je sçais ce que je vaux, et crois ce qu’on m’en dit.”


Finally, Goethe has frankly said, “Only good‐for‐nothings are modest.” But
the assertion would be still more certain that those who so eagerly demand
modesty from others, urge modesty, unceasingly cry, “Only be modest, for
God’s sake, only be modest!” are positively good‐for‐nothings, _i.e._,
persons entirely without merit, manufactures of nature, ordinary members
of the great mass of humanity. For he who himself has merit also concedes
merit—understands himself truly and really. But he who himself lacks all
excellence and merit wishes there was no such thing: the sight of it in
others stretches him upon the rack; pale, green, and yellow envy consumes
his heart: he would like to annihilate and destroy all those who are
personally favoured; but if unfortunately he must let them live, it must
only be under the condition that they conceal, entirely deny, nay, abjure
their advantages. This, then, is the root of the frequent eulogising of
modesty. And if the deliverers of these eulogies have the opportunity of
suppressing merit as it arises, or at least of hindering it from showing
itself or being known, who can doubt that they will do it? For this is the
practice of their theory.

Now, although the poet, like every artist, always brings before us only
the particular, the individual, what he has known, and wishes by his work
to make us know, is the (Platonic) Idea, the whole species; therefore in
his images, as it were, the type of human characters and situations will
be impressed. The narrative and also the dramatic poet takes the whole
particular from life, and describes it accurately in its individuality,
but yet reveals in this way the whole of human existence; for although he
seems to have to do with the particular, in truth he is concerned with
that which is everywhere and at all times. Hence it arises that sentences,
especially of the dramatic poets, even without being general apophthegms,
find frequent application in actual life. Poetry is related to philosophy
as experience is related to empirical science. Experience makes us
acquainted with the phenomenon in the particular and by means of examples,
science embraces the whole of phenomena by means of general conceptions.
So poetry seeks to make us acquainted with the (Platonic) Ideas through
the particular and by means of examples. Philosophy aims at teaching, as a
whole and in general, the inner nature of things which expresses itself in
these. One sees even here that poetry bears more the character of youth,
philosophy that of old age. In fact, the gift of poetry really only
flourishes in youth; and also the susceptibility for poetry is often
passionate in youth: the youth delights in verses as such, and is often
contented with small ware. This inclination gradually diminishes with
years, and in old age one prefers prose. By that poetical tendency of
youth the sense of the real is then easily spoiled. For poetry differs
from reality by the fact that in it life flows past us, interesting and
yet painless; while in reality, on the contrary, so long as it is painless
it is uninteresting, and as soon as it becomes interesting, it does not
remain without pain. The youth who has been initiated into poetry earlier
than into reality now desires from the latter what only the former can
achieve; this is a principal source of the discomfort which oppresses the
most gifted youths.

Metre and rhyme are a fetter, but also a veil which the poet throws round
him, and under which he is permitted to speak as he otherwise dared not
do; and that is what gives us pleasure. He is only half responsible for
all that he says; metre and rhyme must answer for the other half. Metre,
or measure, as mere rhythm, has its existence only in time, which is a
pure perception _a priori_, thus, to use Kant’s language, belongs merely
to _pure sensibility_; rhyme, on the other hand, is an affair of
sensation, in the organ of hearing, thus of _empirical sensibility_.
Therefore rhythm is a much nobler and more worthy expedient than rhyme,
which the ancients accordingly despised, and which found its origin in
those imperfect languages which arose from the corruption of earlier ones
and in barbarous times. The poorness of French poetry depends principally
upon the fact that it is confined to rhyme alone without metre, and it is
increased by the fact that in order to conceal its want of means it has
increased the difficulty of rhyming by a number of pedantic laws, such as,
for example, that only syllables which are written the same way rhyme, as
if it were for the eye and not for the ear that the hiatus is forbidden;
that a number of words must not occur; and many such, to all of which the
new school of French poetry seeks to put an end. In no language, however,
at least on me, does the rhyme make such a pleasing and powerful
impression as in Latin; the rhymed Latin poems of the Middle Ages have a
peculiar charm. This must be explained from the fact that the Latin
language is incomparably more perfect, more beautiful and noble, than any
modern language, and now moves so gracefully in the ornaments and spangles
which really belong to the latter, and which it itself originally
despised.

To serious consideration it might almost appear as high treason against
our reason that even the slightest violence should be done to a thought or
its correct and pure expression, with the childish intention that after
some syllables the same sound of word should be heard, or even that these
syllables themselves should present a kind of rhythmical beat. But without
such violence very few verses would be made; for it must be attributed to
this that in foreign languages verses are much more difficult to
understand than prose. If we could see into the secret workshops of the
poets, we would find that the thought is sought for the rhyme ten times
oftener than the rhyme for the thought; and even when the latter is the
case, it is not easily accomplished without pliability on the part of the
thought. But the art of verse bids defiance to these considerations, and,
moreover, has all ages and peoples upon its side, so great is the power
which metre and rhyme exercise upon the feeling, and so effective the
mysterious _lenocinium_ which belongs to them. I would explain this from
the fact that a happily rhymed verse, by its indescribably emphatic
effect, raises the feeling as if the thought expressed in it lay already
predestined, nay, performed in the language, and the poet has only had to
find it out. Even trivial thoughts receive from rhythm and rhyme a touch
of importance; cut a figure in this attire, as among girls plain faces
attract the eye by finery. Nay, even distorted and false thoughts gain
through versification an appearance of truth. On the other hand, even
famous passages from famous poets shrink together and become insignificant
when they are reproduced accurately in prose. If only the true is
beautiful, and the dearest ornament of truth is nakedness, then a thought
which appears true and beautiful in prose will have more true worth than
one which affects us in the same way in verse. Now it is very striking,
and well worth investigating, that such trifling, nay, apparently
childish, means as metre and rhyme produce so powerful an effect. I
explain it to myself in the following manner: That which is given directly
to the sense of hearing, thus the mere sound of the words, receives from
rhythm and rhyme a certain completeness and significance in itself for it
thereby becomes a kind of music; therefore it seems now to exist for its
own sake, and no longer as a mere means, mere signs of something
signified, the sense of the words. To please the ear with its sound seems
to be its whole end, and therefore with this everything seems to be
attained and all claims satisfied. But that it further contains a meaning,
expresses a thought, presents itself now as an unexpected addition, like
words to music—as an unexpected present which agreeably surprises us—and
therefore, since we made no demands of this kind, very easily satisfies
us; and if indeed this thought is such that, in itself, thus said in
prose, it would also be significant, then we are enchanted. I can
remember, in my early childhood, that I had delighted myself for a long
time with the agreeable sound of verse before I made the discovery that it
all also contained meaning and thoughts. Accordingly there is also, in all
languages, a mere doggerel poetry almost entirely devoid of meaning.
Davis, the Sinologist, in the preface to his translation of the “_Laou‐
sang‐urh_,” or “_An Heir in Old Age_” (_London, 1817_), observes that the
Chinese dramas partly consist of verses which are sung, and adds: “The
meaning of them is often obscure, and, according to the statements of the
Chinese themselves, the end of these verses is especially to flatter the
ear, and the sense is neglected, and even entirely sacrificed to the
harmony.” Who is not reminded here of the choruses of many Greek tragedies
which are often so hard to make out?

The sign by which one most immediately recognises the genuine poet, both
of the higher and lower species, is the unforced nature of his rhymes.
They have appeared of themselves as if by divine arrangement; his thoughts
come to him already in rhyme. The homely, prosaic man on the contrary,
seeks the rhyme for the thought; the bungler seeks the thought for the
rhyme. Very often one can find out from a couple of rhymed verses which of
the two had the thought and which had the rhyme as its father. The art
consists in concealing the latter, so that such lines may not appear
almost as mere stuffed out _boutsrimés_.

According to my feeling (proofs cannot here be given) rhyme is from its
nature binary: its effect is limited to one single recurrence of the same
sound, and is not strengthened by more frequent repetition. Thus whenever
a final syllable has received the one of the same sound its effect is
exhausted; the third recurrence of the note acts merely as a second rhyme
which accidentally hits upon the same sound, but without heightening the
effect; it links itself on to the existing rhyme, yet without combining
with it to produce a stronger impression. For the first note does not
sound through the second on to the third: therefore this is an æsthetic
pleonasm, a double courage which is of no use. Least of all, therefore, do
such accumulations of rhymes merit the heavy sacrifices which they cost in
the octave rhyme, the terza rima, and the sonnet, and which are the cause
of the mental torture under which we sometimes read such productions, for
poetical pleasure is impossible under the condition of racking our brains.
That the great poetical mind sometimes overcomes even these forms, and
moves in them with ease and grace, does not extend to a recommendation of
the forms themselves, for in themselves they are as ineffectual as they
are difficult. And even in good poets, when they make use of these forms,
we frequently see the conflict between the rhyme and the thought, in which
now one and now the other gains the victory; thus either the thought is
stunted for the sake of the rhyme, or the rhyme has to be satisfied with a
weak _à peu près_. Since this is so, I do not regard it as an evidence of
ignorance, but as a proof of good taste, that Shakspeare in his sonnets
has given different rhymes to each quatraine. At any rate, their acoustic
effect is not in the least diminished by it, and the thought obtains its
rights far more than it could have done if it had had to be laced up in
the customary Spanish boots.

It is a disadvantage for the poetry of a language if it has many words
which cannot be used in prose, and, on the other hand, dare not use
certain words of prose. The former is mostly the case in Latin and Italian
poetry, and the latter in French, where it has recently been very aptly
called, “_La bégeulerie de la langue française_;” both are to be found
less in English, and least in German. For such words belonging exclusively
to poetry remain foreign to our heart, do not speak to us directly, and
therefore leave us cold. They are a conventional language of poetry, and
as it were mere painted sensations instead of real ones: they exclude
genuine feeling.

The distinction, so often discussed in our own day, between _classic_ and
_romantic_ poetry seems to me ultimately to depend upon the fact that the
former knows no other motives than those which are purely human, actual,
and natural; the latter, on the other hand, also treats artificial
conventional, and imaginary motives as efficient. To such belong the
motives which spring from the Christian mythus, also from the chivalrous
over‐strained fantastical law of honour, further from the absurd and
ludicrous Germano‐Christian veneration of women, and lastly from doting
and mooning hyperphysical amorousness. But even in the best poets of the
romantic class, _e.g._, in Calderon, we can see to what ridiculous
distortions of human relations and human nature these motives lead. Not to
speak of the Autos, I merely refer to such pieces as “_No siempre el peor
es cierto_” (The worst is not always certain), and “_El postrero duelo en
España_” (The last duel in Spain), and similar comedies _en capa y
espada_: with the elements mentioned there is here further associated the
scholastic subtility so often appearing in the conversation which at that
time belonged to the mental culture of the higher classes. How decidedly
advantageous, on the contrary, is the position of the poetry of the
ancients, which always remains true to nature; and the result is that
classical poetry has an unconditional, romantic poetry only a conditional,
truth and correctness; analogous to Greek and Gothic architecture. Yet, on
the other hand, we must remark here that all dramatic or narrative poems
which transfer their scene to ancient Greece or Rome lose by this from the
fact that our knowledge of antiquity, especially in what concerns the
details of life, is insufficient, fragmentary, and not drawn from
perception. This obliges the poet to avoid much and to content himself
with generalities, whereby he becomes abstract, and his work loses that
concreteness and individualisation which is throughout essential to
poetry. It is this which gives all such works the peculiar appearance of
emptiness and tediousness. Only Shakspeare’s works of this kind are free
from it; because without hesitation he has presented, under the names of
Greeks and Romans, Englishmen of his own time.

It has been objected to many masterpieces of lyrical poetry, especially
some Odes of Horace (see, for example, the second of the third book) and
several of Goethe’s songs (for example, “The Shepherd’s Lament”), that
they lack proper connection and are full of gaps in the thought. But here
the logical connection is intentionally neglected, in order that the unity
of the fundamental sensation and mood may take its place, which comes out
more clearly just by the fact that it passes like a thread through the
separate pearls, and brings about the quick changes of the objects of
contemplation, in the same way as in music the transition from one key to
another is brought about by the chord of the seventh, through which the
still sounding fundamental note becomes the dominant of the new key. Most
distinctly, even exaggeratedly, the quality here described is found in the
Canzone of Petrarch which begins, “_Mai non vo’ più cantar, com’ io
soleva_.”

Accordingly, as in the lyrical poem the subjective element predominates,
so in the drama, on the contrary, the objective element is alone and
exclusively present. Between the two epic poetry in all its forms and
modifications, from the narrative romance to the epos proper, has a broad
middle path. For although in the main it is objective, yet it contains a
subjective element, appearing now more and now less, which finds its
expression in the tone, in the form of the delivery, and also in scattered
reflections. We do not so entirely lose sight of the poet as in the drama.

The end of the drama in general is to show us in an example what is the
nature and existence of man. The sad or the bright side of these can be
turned to us in it, or their transitions into each other. But the
expression, “nature and existence of man,” already contains the germ of
the controversy whether the nature, _i.e._, the character, or the
existence, _i.e._, the fate, the adventures, the action, is the principal
thing. Moreover, the two have grown so firmly together that although they
can certainly be separated in conception, they cannot be separated in the
representation of them. For only the circumstances, the fate, the events,
make the character manifest its nature, and only from the character does
the action arise from which the events proceed. Certainly, in the
representation, the one or the other may be made more prominent; and in
this respect the piece which centres in the characters and the piece which
centres in the plot are the two extremes.

The common end of the drama and the epic, to exhibit, in significant
characters placed in significant situations, the extraordinary actions
brought about by both, will be most completely attained by the poet if he
first introduces the characters to us in a state of peace, in which merely
their general colour becomes visible, and allows a motive to enter which
produces an action, out of which a new and stronger motive arises, which
again calls forth a more significant action, which, in its turn, begets
new and even stronger motives, whereby, then, in the time suitable to the
form of the poem, the most passionate excitement takes the place of the
original peace, and in this now the important actions occur in which the
qualities of the characters which have hitherto slumbered are brought
clearly to light, together with the course of the world.

Great poets transform themselves into each of the persons to be
represented, and speak out of each of them like ventriloquists; now out of
the hero, and immediately afterwards out of the young and innocent maiden,
with equal truth and naturalness: so Shakspeare and Goethe. Poets of the
second rank transform the principal person to be represented into
themselves. This is what Byron does; and then the other persons often
remain lifeless, as is the case even with the principal persons in the
works of mediocre poets.

Our pleasure in tragedy belongs, not to the sense of the beautiful, but to
that of the sublime; nay, it is the highest grade of this feeling. For, as
at the sight of the sublime in nature we turn away from the interests of
the will, in order to be purely perceptive, so in the tragic catastrophe
we turn away even from the will to live. In tragedy the terrible side of
life is presented to us, the wail of humanity, the reign of chance and
error, the fall of the just, the triumph of the wicked; thus the aspect of
the world which directly strives against our will is brought before our
eyes. At this sight we feel ourselves challenged to turn away our will
from life, no longer to will it or love it. But just in this way we become
conscious that then there still remains something over to us, which we
absolutely cannot know positively, but only negatively, as that which does
not will life. As the chord of the seventh demands the fundamental chord;
as the colour red demands green, and even produces it in the eye; so every
tragedy demands an entirely different kind of existence, another world,
the knowledge of which can only be given us indirectly just as here by
such a demand. In the moment of the tragic catastrophe the conviction
becomes more distinct to us than ever that life is a bad dream from which
we have to awake. So far the effect of the tragedy is analogous to that of
the dynamical sublime, for like this it lifts us above the will and its
interests, and puts us in such a mood that we find pleasure in the sight
of what tends directly against it. What gives to all tragedy, in whatever
form it may appear, the peculiar tendency towards the sublime is the
awakening of the knowledge that the world, life, can afford us no true
pleasure, and consequently is not worthy of our attachment. In this
consists the tragic spirit: it therefore leads to resignation.

I admit that in ancient tragedy this spirit of resignation seldom appears
and is expressed directly. Œdipus Colonus certainly dies resigned and
willing; yet he is comforted by the revenge on his country. Iphigenia at
Aulis is very willing to die; yet it is the thought of the welfare of
Greece that comforts her, and occasions the change of her mind, on account
of which she willingly accepts the death which at first she sought to
avoid by any means. Cassandra, in the Agamemnon of the great Æschylus,
dies willingly, αρκειτω βιος (1306); but she also is comforted by the
thought of revenge. Hercules, in the Trachiniæ, submits to necessity, and
dies composed, but not resigned. So also the Hippolytus of Euripides, in
whose case it surprises us that Artemis, who appears to comfort him,
promises him temples and fame, but never points him to an existence beyond
life, and leaves him in death, as all gods forsake the dying:—in
Christianity they come to him; and so also in Brahmanism and Buddhism,
although in the latter the gods are really exotic. Thus Hippolytus, like
almost all the tragic heroes of the ancients, shows submission to
inevitable fate and the inflexible will of the gods, but no surrender of
the will to live itself. As the Stoic equanimity is fundamentally
distinguished from Christian resignation by the fact that it teaches only
patient endurance and composed expectation of unalterably necessary evil,
while Christianity teaches renunciation, surrender of the will; so also
the tragic heroes of the ancients show resolute subjection under the
unavoidable blows of fate, while Christian tragedy, on the contrary, shows
the surrender of the whole will to live, joyful forsaking of the world in
the consciousness of its worthlessness and vanity. But I am also entirely
of opinion that modern tragedy stands higher than that of the ancients.
Shakspeare is much greater than Sophocles; in comparison with Goethe’s
Iphigenia one might find that of Euripides almost crude and vulgar. The
Bacchæ of Euripides is a revolting composition in favour of the heathen
priests. Many ancient pieces have no tragic tendency at all, like the
Alcestis and Iphigenia in Tauris of Euripides; some have disagreeable, or
even disgusting motives, like the Antigone and Philocteles. Almost all
show the human race under the fearful rule of chance and error, but not
the resignation which is occasioned by it, and delivers from it. All
because the ancients had not yet attained to the summit and goal of
tragedy, or indeed of the view of life itself.

Although, then, the ancients displayed little of the spirit of
resignation, the turning away of the will from life, in their tragic
heroes themselves, as their frame of mind, yet the peculiar tendency and
effect of tragedy remains the awakening of that spirit in the beholder,
the calling up of that frame of mind, even though only temporarily. The
horrors upon the stage hold up to him the bitterness and worthlessness of
life, thus the vanity of all its struggle. The effect of this impression
must be that he becomes conscious, if only in obscure feeling, that it is
better to tear his heart free from life, to turn his will from it, to love
not the world nor life; whereby then in his deepest soul, the
consciousness is aroused that for another kind of willing there must also
be another existence. For if this were not so, then the tendency of
tragedy would not be this rising above all the ends and good things of
life, this turning away from it and its seductions, and the turning
towards another kind of existence, which already lies in this, although an
existence which is for us quite inconceivable. How would it, then, in
general, be possible that the exhibition of the most terrible side of
life, brought before our eyes in the most glaring light, could act upon us
beneficently, and afford us a lofty satisfaction? Fear and sympathy, in
the excitement of which Aristotle places the ultimate end of tragedy,
certainly do not in themselves belong to the agreeable sensations:
therefore they cannot be the end, but only the means. Thus the summons to
turn away the will from life remains the true tendency of tragedy, the
ultimate end of the intentional exhibition of the suffering of humanity,
and is so accordingly even where this resigned exaltation of the mind is
not shown in the hero himself, but is merely excited in the spectator by
the sight of great, unmerited, nay, even merited suffering. Many of the
moderns also are, like the ancients, satisfied with throwing the spectator
into the mood which has been described, by the objective representation of
human misfortune as a whole; while others exhibit this through the change
of the frame of mind of the hero himself, effected by suffering. The
former give, as it were, only the premisses, and leave the conclusion to
the spectator; while the latter give the conclusion, or the moral of the
fable, also, as the change of the frame of mind of the hero, and even also
as reflection, in the mouth of the chorus, as, for example, Schiller in
“The Bride of Messina:” “Life is not the highest good.” Let me remark here
that the genuine tragic effect of the catastrophe, thus the resignation
and exaltation of the mind of the hero which is brought about by it,
seldom appears so purely motived and so distinctly expressed as in the
opera of “Norma,” where it comes in in the duet, “_Qual cor tradisti, qual
cor perdesti_,” in which the change of the will is distinctly indicated by
the quietness which is suddenly introduced into the music. In general,
this piece—regarded apart altogether from its excellent music, and also
from the diction which can only be that of a libretto, and considered only
according to its motives and its inner economy—is a highly perfect
tragedy, a true pattern of tragic disposition of the motives, tragic
progress of the action, and tragic development, together with the effect
of these upon the frame of mind of the hero, raising it above the world,
and which is then also communicated to the spectator; indeed the effect
attained here is the less delusive and the more indicative of the true
nature of tragedy that no Christians, nor even Christian ideas, appear in
it.

The neglect of the unity of time and place with which the moderns are so
often reproached is only a fault when it goes so far that it destroys the
unity of the action; for then there only remains the unity of the
principal character, as, for example, in Shakspeare’s “Henry VIII.” But
even the unity of the action does not need to go so far that the same
thing is spoken of throughout, as in the French tragedies which in general
observe this so strictly that the course of the drama is like a
geometrical line without breadth. There it is constantly a case of “Only
get on! _Pensez à votre affaire!_” and the thing is expedited and hurried
on in a thoroughly business fashion, and no one detains himself with
irrelevances which do not belong to it, or looks to the right or the left.
The Shakspearian tragedy, on the other hand, is like a line which has also
breadth: it takes time, _exspatiatur_: speeches and even whole scenes
occur which do not advance the action, indeed do not properly concern it,
by which, however, we get to know the characters or their circumstances
more fully, and then understand the action also more thoroughly. This
certainly remains the principal thing, yet not so exclusively that we
forget that in the last instance what is aimed at is the representation of
human nature and existence generally.

The dramatic or epic poet ought to know that he is fate, and should
therefore be inexorable, as it is; also that he is the mirror of the human
race, and should therefore represent very many bad and sometimes
profligate characters, and also many fools, buffoons, and eccentric
persons; then also, now and again, a reasonable, a prudent, an honest, or
a good man, and only as the rarest exception a truly magnanimous man. In
the whole of Homer there is in my opinion no really magnanimous character
presented, although many good and honest. In the whole of Shakspeare there
may be perhaps a couple of noble, though by no means transcendently noble,
characters to be found; perhaps Cordelia, Coriolanus—hardly more; on the
other hand, his works swarm with the species indicated above. But
Iffland’s and Kotzebue’s pieces have many magnanimous characters; while
Goldoni has done as I recommended above, whereby he shows that he stands
higher. On the other hand, Schiller’s “Minna von Barnhelm” labours under
too much and too universal magnanimity; but so much magnanimity as the one
Marquis Posa displays is not to be found in the whole of Goethe’s works
together. There is, however, a small German piece called “Duty for Duty’s
Sake” (a title which sounds as if it had been taken from the Critique of
Practical Reason), which has only three characters, and yet all the three
are of most transcendent magnanimity.

The Greeks have taken for their heroes only royal persons; and so also for
the most part have the moderns. Certainly not because the rank gives more
worth to him who is acting or suffering; and since the whole thing is just
to set human passions in play, the relative value of the objects by which
this happens is indifferent, and peasant huts achieve as much as kingdoms.
Moreover, civic tragedy is by no means to be unconditionally rejected.
Persons of great power and consideration are yet the best adapted for
tragedy on this account, that the misfortune in which we ought to
recognise the fate of humanity must have a sufficient magnitude to appear
terrible to the spectator, whoever he may be. Euripides himself says,
“φευ, φευ, τα μεγαλα, μεγαλα και πασχει κακα” (_Stob. Flor._, vol. ii. p.
299). Now the circumstances which plunge a citizen family into want and
despair are in the eyes of the great or rich, for the most part, very
insignificant, and capable of being removed by human assistance, nay,
sometimes even by a trifle: such spectators, therefore, cannot be
tragically affected by them. On the other hand, the misfortunes of the
great and powerful are unconditionally terrible, and also accessible to no
help from without; for kings must help themselves by their own power, or
fall. To this we have to add that the fall is greatest from a height.
Accordingly persons of the rank of citizens lack height to fall from.

If now we have found the tendency and ultimate intention of tragedy to be
a turning to resignation, to the denial of the will to live, we shall
easily recognise in its opposite, comedy, the incitement to the continued
assertion of the will. It is true the comedy, like every representation of
human life, without exception, must bring before our eyes suffering and
adversity; but it presents it to us as passing, resolving itself into joy,
in general mingled with success, victory, and hopes, which in the end
preponderate; moreover, it brings out the inexhaustible material for
laughter of which life, and even its adversities themselves are filled,
and which under all circumstances ought to keep us in a good humour. Thus
it declares, in the result, that life as a whole is thoroughly good, and
especially is always amusing. Certainly it must hasten to drop the curtain
at the moment of joy, so that we may not see what comes after; while the
tragedy, as a rule, so ends that nothing can come after. And moreover, if
once we contemplate this burlesque side of life somewhat seriously, as it
shows itself in the naïve utterances and gestures which trifling
embarrassment, personal fear, momentary anger, secret envy, and many
similar emotions force upon the forms of the real life that mirrors itself
here, forms which deviate considerably from the type of beauty, then from
this side also, thus in an unexpected manner, the reflective spectator may
become convinced that the existence and action of such beings cannot
itself be an end; that, on the contrary, they can only have attained to
existence by an error, and that what so exhibits itself is something which
had better not be.




Chapter XXXVIII.(23) On History.


In the passage of the first volume referred to below I have fully shown
that more is achieved for our knowledge of mankind by poetry than by
history, and why this is so; inasmuch as more real instruction was to be
expected from the former than from the latter. Aristotle has also
confessed this, for he says: “και φιλοσοφωτερον και σπουδαιοτερον ποιησις
ἱστοριας εστιν” (_et res magis philosophica, et melior poësis est quam
historia_(24)), _De poët._, c. 9. Yet, in order to cause no
misunderstanding as to the value of history, I wish here to express my
thoughts about it.

In every class and species of things the facts are innumerable, the
individuals infinite in number, the variety of their differences
unapproachable. At the first glance at them the curious mind becomes
giddy; however much it investigates, it sees itself condemned to
ignorance. But then comes science: it separates the innumerable multitude,
arranges it under generic conceptions, these again under conceptions of
species, whereby it opens the path to a knowledge of the general and the
particular, which also comprehends the innumerable individuals, for it
holds good of all without one being obliged to consider each particular
for itself. Thus it promises satisfaction to the investigating mind. Then
all sciences place themselves together, and above the real world of
individual things, as that which they have divided among them. Over them
all, however, moves philosophy, as the most general, and therefore
important, rational knowledge, which promises the conclusions for which
the others have only prepared the way. History alone cannot properly enter
into that series, since it cannot boast of the same advantage as the
others, for it lacks the fundamental characteristic of science, the
subordination of what is known, instead of which it can only present its
co‐ordination. Therefore there is no system of history, as there is of
every other science. It is therefore certainly rational knowledge, but it
is not a science. For it never knows the particular by means of the
general, but must comprehend the particular directly, and so, as it were,
creeps along the ground of experience; while the true sciences move above
it, because they have obtained comprehensive conceptions by means of which
they command the particular, and, at least within certain limits,
anticipate the possibility of things within their sphere, so that they can
be at ease even about what may yet have to come. The sciences, since they
are systems of conceptions, speak always of species; history speaks of
individuals. It would accordingly be a science of individuals, which is a
contradiction. It also follows that the sciences all speak of that which
always is as history, on the other hand, of that which is once, and then
no more. Since, further, history has to do with the absolutely particular
and individuals, which from its nature is inexhaustible, it knows
everything only imperfectly and half. Besides, it must also let itself be
taught by every new day in its trivial commonplaceness what as yet it did
not know at all. If it should be objected that in history also there is
subordination of the particular under the general, because the periods,
the governments, and other general changes, or political revolutions, in
short, all that is given in historical tables, is the general, to which
the special subordinates itself, this would rest upon a false
comprehension of the conception of the general. For the general in history
here referred to is merely _subjective_, _i.e._, its generality springs
merely from the inadequacy of the individual knowledge of the things, but
not _objective_, _i.e._, a conception in which the things would actually
already be thought together. Even the most general in history is in itself
only a particular and individual, a long period of time, or an important
event; therefore the special is related to this as the part to the whole,
but not as the case to the rule; which, on the contrary, takes place in
all the sciences proper because they afford conceptions and not mere
facts. On this account in these sciences by a correct knowledge of the
general we can determine with certainty the particular that arises. If,
for example, I know the laws of the triangle in general, I can then also
tell what must be the properties of the triangle laid before me; and what
holds good of all mammals, for example, that they have double ventricles
of the heart, exactly seven cervical vertebræ, lungs, diaphragm, bladder,
five senses, &c., I can also assert of the strange bat which has just been
caught, before dissecting it. But not so in history, where the general is
no objective general of the conception, but merely a subjective general of
my knowledge, which can only be called general inasmuch as it is
superficial. Therefore I may always know in general of the Thirty Years’
War that it was a religious war, waged in the seventeenth century; but
this general knowledge does not make me capable of telling anything more
definite about its course. The same opposition is also confirmed by the
fact that in the real sciences the special and individual is that which is
most certain, because it rests upon immediate apprehension; the general
truths, again, are only abstracted from it; therefore something false may
be more easily assumed in the latter. But in history, conversely, the most
general is the most certain; for example, the periods, the succession of
the kings, the revolutions, wars, and treaties of peace; the particulars,
again, of the events and their connection is uncertain, and becomes always
more so the further one goes into details. Therefore history is the more
interesting the more special it is, but the less to be trusted, and
approaches then in every respect to the romance. For the rest, what
importance is to be attached to the boasted pragmatic teaching of history
he will best be able to judge who remembers that sometimes it was only
after twenty years that he understood the events of his own life in their
true connection, although the data for this were fully before him, so
difficult is the combination of the action of the motives under the
constant interferences of chance and the concealment of the intentions.
Since now history really always has for its object only the particular,
the individual fact, and regards this as the exclusively real, it is the
direct opposite and counterpart of philosophy, which considers things from
the most general point of view, and has intentionally the general as its
object, which remains identical in every particular; therefore in the
particular philosophy sees only the general, and recognises the change in
its manifestation as unessential: φιλοκαθολου γαρ ὁ φιλοσοφος (_generalium
amator philosophus_). While history teaches us that at every time
something else has been, philosophy tries to assist us to the insight that
at all times exactly the same was, is, and shall be. In truth, the essence
of human life, as of nature in general, is given complete in every present
time, and therefore only requires depth of comprehension in order to be
exhaustively known. But history hopes to make up for depth by length and
breadth; for it every present time is only a fragment which must be
supplemented by the past, the length of which is, however, infinite, and
to which again an infinite future is joined. Upon this rests the
opposition between philosophical and historical minds; the former want to
go to the bottom, the latter want to go through the whole series. History
shows on every side only the same under different forms; but whoever does
not come to know this in one or a few will hardly attain to a knowledge of
it by going through all the forms. The chapters of the history of nations
are at bottom only distinguished by the names and dates; the really
essential content is everywhere the same.

Now since the material of art is the _Idea_, and the material of science
the _concept_, we see both occupied with that which always exists and
constantly in the same manner, not something which now is and now is not,
now is thus and now otherwise; therefore both have to do with that which
Plato set up as the exclusive object of real rational knowledge. The
material of history, on the other hand, is the particular in its
particularity and contingency, which at one time is, and then for ever is
no more, the transient complexities of a human world moved like clouds in
the wind, a world which is often entirely transformed by the most trifling
accident. From this point of view the material of history appears to us as
scarcely a worthy object of the serious and painful consideration of the
human mind, the human mind which, just because it is so transitory, ought
to choose for its consideration that which passes not away.

Finally, as regards the endeavour—specially introduced by the Hegelian
pseudo‐philosophy, everywhere so pernicious and stupefying to the mind—to
comprehend the history of the world as a planned whole, or, as they call
it, “to construe it organically,” a crude and positive realism lies at its
foundation, which takes the phenomenon for the inner being of the world,
and imagines that this phenomenon, its forms and events, are the chief
concern; in which it is secretly supported by certain mythological notions
which it tacitly assumes: otherwise one might ask for what spectators such
a comedy was really produced. For, since only the individual, and not the
human race, has actual, immediate unity of consciousness, the unity of the
course of life of the race is a mere fiction. Besides, as in nature only
the species are real, and the genera are mere abstractions, so in the
human race only the individuals and their course of life are real, the
peoples and their lives mere abstractions. Finally, constructive
histories, guided by a positive optimism, always ultimately end in a
comfortable, rich, fat State, with a well‐regulated constitution, good
justice and police, useful arts and industries, and, at the most, in
intellectual perfection; for this, in fact, is alone possible, since what
is moral remains essentially unaltered. But it is the moral element which,
according to the testimony of our inmost consciousness, is the whole
concern: and this lies only in the individual as the tendency of his will.
In truth, only the life of each individual has unity, connection, and true
significance: it is to be regarded as an instruction, and the meaning of
it is moral. Only the incidents of our _inner_ life, since they concern
the will, have true reality, and are actual events; because the will alone
is the thing in itself. In every microcosm lies the whole macrocosm, and
the latter contains nothing more than the former. Multiplicity is
phenomenal, and external events are mere configurations of the phenomenal
world, and have therefore directly neither reality nor significance, but
only indirectly through their relation to the wills of the individuals.
The endeavour to explain and interpret them directly is accordingly like
the endeavour to see in the forms of the clouds groups of men and animals.
What history narrates is in fact only the long, heavy, and confused dream
of humanity.

The Hegelians, who regard the philosophy of history as indeed the chief
end of all philosophy, are to be referred to Plato, who unweariedly
repeats that the object of philosophy is that which is unchangeable and
always remains, not that which now is thus and now otherwise. All those
who set up such constructions of the course of the world, or, as they call
it, of history, have failed to grasp the principal truth of all
philosophy, that what is is at all times the same, all becoming and
arising are only seeming; the Ideas alone are permanent; time ideal. This
is what Plato holds, this is what Kant holds. One ought therefore to seek
to understand what exists, what really is, to‐day and always, _i.e._, to
know the Ideas (in Plato’s sense). Fools, on the contrary, imagine that
something must first become and happen. Therefore they concede to history
the chief place in their philosophy, and construct it according to a
preconceived plan of the world, according to which everything is ordered
for the best, which is then supposed _finaliter_ to appear, and will be a
glorious thing. Accordingly they take the world as perfectly real, and
place the end of it in the poor earthly happiness, which, however much it
may be fostered by men and favoured by fate, is a hollow, deceptive,
decaying, and sad thing, out of which neither constitutions and legal
systems nor steam‐engines and telegraphs can ever make anything that is
essentially better. The said philosophers and glorifiers of history are
accordingly simple realists, and also optimists and eudæmonists,
consequently dull fellows and incarnate philistines; and besides are
really bad Christians, for the true spirit and kernel of Christianity, as
also of Brahmanism and Buddhism, is the knowledge of the vanity of earthly
happiness, the complete contempt for it, and the turning away from it to
an existence of another, nay, an opposite, kind. This, I say, is the
spirit and end of Christianity, the true “humour of the matter;” and not,
as they imagine, monotheism; therefore even atheistic Buddhism is far more
closely related to Christianity than optimistic Judaism or its variety
Islamism.

A true philosophy of history ought not therefore to consider, as all these
do, what (to use Plato’s language) always _becomes_ and never _is_, and
hold this to be the true nature of things; but it ought to fix its
attention upon that which always is and never becomes nor passes away.
Thus it does not consist in raising the temporal ends of men to eternal
and absolute ends, and then with art and imagination constructing their
progress through all complications; but in the insight that not only in
its development, but in its very nature, history is mendacious; for,
speaking of mere individuals and particular events, it pretends always to
relate something different, while from beginning to end it repeats always
the same thing under different names and in a different dress. The true
philosophy of history consists in the insight that in all these endless
changes and their confusion we have always before us only the same, even,
unchanging nature, which to‐day acts in the same way as yesterday and
always; thus it ought to recognise the identical in all events, of ancient
as of modern times, of the east as of the west; and, in spite of all
difference of the special circumstances, of the costume and the customs,
to see everywhere the same humanity. This identical element which is
permanent through all change consists in the fundamental qualities of the
human heart and head—many bad, few good. The motto of history in general
should run: _Eadem, sed aliter_. If one has read Herodotus, then in a
philosophical regard one has already studied history enough. For
everything is already there that makes up the subsequent history of the
world: the efforts, action, sufferings, and fate of the human race as it
proceeds from the qualities we have referred to, and the physical earthly
lot.

If in what has been said we have recognised that history, regarded as a
means for the knowledge of the nature of man, is inferior to poetry; then,
that it is not in the proper sense a science; finally, that the endeavour
to construct it as a whole with beginning, middle, and end, together with
a significant connection, is vain, and based upon misunderstanding: it
would look as if we wished to deny it all value if we did not show in what
its value consists. Really, however, there remains for it, after this
conquest by art and rejection by science, a quite special province,
different from both, in which it exists most honourably.

_What reason is to the individual that is history to the human race._ By
virtue of reason, man is not, like the brute, limited to the narrow,
perceptible present, but also knows the incomparably more extended past,
with which it is linked, and out of which it has proceeded; and only thus
has he a proper understanding of the present itself, and can even draw
inferences as to the future. The brute, on the other hand, whose
knowledge, devoid of reflection, is on this account limited to the
present, even when it is tamed, moves about among men ignorant, dull,
stupid, helpless, and dependent. Analogous to this is the nation that does
not know its own history, is limited to the present of the now living
generation, and therefore does not understand itself and its own present,
because it cannot connect it with a past, and explain it from this; still
less can it anticipate the future. Only through history does a nation
become completely conscious of itself. Accordingly history is to be
regarded as the rational consciousness of the human race, and is to the
race what the reflected and connected consciousness is to the individual
who is conditioned by reason, a consciousness through the want of which
the brute is confined to the narrow, perceptible present. Therefore every
gap in history is like a gap in the recollective self‐consciousness of a
man; and in the presence of a monument of ancient times which has outlived
the knowledge of itself, as, for example, the Pyramids, or temples and
palaces in Yucatan, we stand as senseless and stupid as the brute in the
presence of the action of man, in which it is implicated in his service;
or as a man before something written in an old cipher of his own, the key
to which he has forgotten; nay, like a somnambulist who finds before him
in the morning what he has done in his sleep. In this sense, then, history
is to be regarded as the reason, or the reflected consciousness, of the
human race, and takes the place of an immediate self‐consciousness common
to the whole race, so that only by virtue of it does the human race come
to be a whole, come to be a humanity. This is the true value of history,
and accordingly the universal and predominating interest in it depends
principally upon the fact that it is a personal concern of the human race.
Now, what language is for the reason of individuals, as an indispensable
condition of its use, writing is for the reason of the whole race here
pointed out; for only with this does its real existence begin, as that of
the individual reason begins first with language. Writing serves to
restore unity to the consciousness of the human race, which is constantly
interrupted by death, and therefore fragmentary; so that the thought which
has arisen in the ancestor is thought out by his remote descendant; it
finds a remedy for the breaking up of the human race and its consciousness
into an innumerable number of ephemeral individuals, and so bids defiance
to the ever hurrying time, in whose hand goes forgetfulness. As an attempt
to accomplish this we must regard not only written, but also _stone_
monuments, which in part are older than the former. For who will believe
that those who, at incalculable cost, set in action the human powers of
many thousands for many years in order to construct the pyramids,
monoliths, rock tombs, obelisks, temples, and palaces which have already
existed for thousands of years, could have had in view the short span of
their own life, too short to let them see the finishing of the
construction, or even the ostensible end which the ignorance of the many
required them to allege? Clearly their real end was to speak to their
latest descendants, to put themselves in connection with these, and so to
establish the unity of the consciousness of humanity. The buildings of the
Hindus, the Egyptians, even the Greeks and Romans, were calculated to last
several thousand years, because through higher culture their horizon was a
wider one; while the buildings of the Middle Ages and of modern times have
only been intended, at the most, to last a few centuries; which, however,
is also due to the fact that men trusted more to writing after its use had
become general, and still more since from its womb was born the art of
printing. Yet even in the buildings of more recent times we see the desire
to speak to posterity; and, therefore, it is shameful if they are
destroyed or disfigured in order to serve low utilitarian ends. Written
monuments have less to fear from the elements, but more to fear from
barbarians, than stone ones; they accomplish far more. The Egyptians
wished to combine the two, for they covered their stone monuments with
hieroglyphics, nay, they added paintings in case the hieroglyphics should
no longer be understood.




Chapter XXXIX.(25) On The Metaphysics Of Music.


The outcome, or result, of my exposition of the peculiar significance of
this wonderful art, which is given in the passage of the first volume
referred to below, and which will here be present to the mind of the
reader, was, that there is indeed no resemblance between its productions
and the world as idea, _i.e._, the world of nature, but yet there must be
a distinct _parallelism_, which was then also proved. I have yet to add
some fuller particulars with regard to this parallelism, which are worthy
of attention.

The four voices, or parts, of all harmony, the bass, the tenor, the alto,
and the soprana, or the fundamental note, the third, the fifth, and the
octave, correspond to the four grades in the series of existences, the
mineral kingdom, the vegetable kingdom, the brute kingdom, and man. This
receives an additional and striking confirmation in the fundamental rule
of music, that the bass must be at a much greater distance below the three
upper parts than they have between themselves; so that it must never
approach nearer to them than at the most within an octave of them, and
generally remains still further below them. Hence, then, the correct triad
has its place in the third octave from the fundamental note. Accordingly
the effect of _extended_ harmony, in which the bass is widely separated
from the other parts, is much more powerful and beautiful than that of
_close_ harmony, in which it is moved up nearer to them, and which is only
introduced on account of the limited compass of the instruments. This
whole rule, however, is by no means arbitrary, but has its root in the
natural source of the tonal system; for the nearest consonant intervals
that sound along with the fundamental note by means of its vibrations are
the octave and its fifth. Now, in this rule we recognise the analogue of
the fundamental characteristic of nature on account of which organised
beings are much more nearly related to each other than to the inanimate,
unorganised mass of the mineral kingdom, between which and them exists the
most definite boundary and the widest gulf in the whole of nature. The
fact that the high voice which sings the melody is yet also an integral
part of the harmony, and therein accords even with the deepest fundamental
bass, may be regarded as the analogue of the fact that _the same_ matter
which in a human organism is the supporter of the Idea of man must yet
also exhibit and support the Ideas of gravitation and chemical qualities,
that is, of the lowest grades of the objectification of will.

That music acts directly upon the will, _i.e._, the feelings, passions,
and emotions of the hearer, so that it quickly raises them or changes
them, may be explained from the fact that, unlike all the other arts, it
does not express the Ideas, or grades of the objectification of the will,
but directly the _will itself_.

As surely as music, far from being a mere accessory of poetry, is an
independent art, nay, the most powerful of all the arts, and therefore
attains its ends entirely with means of its own, so surely does it not
stand in need of the words of the song or the action of an opera. Music as
such knows the tones or notes alone, but not the causes which produce
these. Accordingly, for it even the human voice is originally and
essentially nothing else than a modified tone, just like that of an
instrument; and, like every other tone, it has the special advantages and
disadvantages which are a consequence of the instrument that produces it.
Now, in this case, that this same instrument, as the organ of speech, also
serves to communicate conceptions is an accidental circumstance, which
music can certainly also make use of, in order to enter into a connection
with poetry; but it must never make this the principal matter, and concern
itself entirely with the expression of what for the most part, nay (as
Diderot gives us to understand in _Le Neveu de Rameau_), essentially are
insipid verses. The words are and remain for the music a foreign addition,
of subordinate value, for the effect of the tones is incomparably more
powerful, more infallible, and quicker than that of the words. Therefore,
if words become incorporated in music, they must yet assume an entirely
subordinate position, and adapt themselves completely to it. But the
relation appears reversed in the case of the given poetry, thus the song
or the libretto of an opera to which music is adapted. For the art of
music at once shows in these its power and higher fitness, disclosing the
most profound ultimate and secret significance of the feeling expressed in
the words or the action presented in the opera, giving utterance to their
peculiar and true nature, and teaching us the inmost soul of the actions
and events whose mere clothing and body is set before us on the stage.
With regard to this superiority of the music, and also because it stands
to the libretto and the action in the relation of the universal to the
particular, of the rule to the example, it might perhaps appear more
fitting that the libretto should be written for the music than that the
music should be composed for the libretto. However, in the customary
method, the words and actions of the libretto lead the composer to the
affections of the will which lie at their foundation, and call up in him
the feelings to be expressed; they act, therefore, as a means of exciting
his musical imagination. Moreover, that the addition of poetry to music is
so welcome to us, and a song with intelligible words gives us such deep
satisfaction, depends upon the fact that in this way our most direct and
most indirect ways of knowing are called into play at once and in
connection. The most direct is that for which music expresses the emotions
of the will itself, and the most indirect that of conceptions denoted by
words. When the language of the feelings is in question the reason does
not willingly sit entirely idle. Music is certainly able with the means at
its own disposal to express every movement of the will, every feeling; but
by the addition of words we receive besides this the objects of these
feelings, the motives which occasion them. The music of an opera, as it is
presented in the score, has a completely independent, separate, and, as it
were, abstract existence for itself, to which the incidents and persons of
the piece are foreign, and which follows its own unchanging rules;
therefore it can produce its full effect without the libretto. But this
music, since it was composed with reference to the drama, is, as it were,
the soul of the latter; for, in its connection with the incidents,
persons, and words, it becomes the expression of the inner significance of
all those incidents, and of their ultimate and secret necessity which
depends upon this significance. The pleasure of the spectator, unless he
is a mere gaper, really depends upon an indistinct feeling of this. Yet in
the opera music also shows its heterogeneous nature and higher reality by
its entire indifference to the whole material of the incidents; in
consequence of which it everywhere expresses the storm of the passions and
the pathos of the feelings in the same way, and its tones accompany the
piece with the same pomp, whether Agamemnon and Achilles or the
dissensions of a bourgeois family form its material. For only the
passions, the movements of the will, exist for it, and, like God, it sees
only the hearts. It never assimilates itself to the natural; and
therefore, even when it accompanies the most ludicrous and extravagant
farces of the comic opera, it still preserves its essential beauty,
purity, and sublimity; and its fusion with these incidents is unable to
draw it down from its height, to which all absurdity is really foreign.
Thus the profound and serious significance of our existence hangs over the
farce and the endless miseries of human life, and never leaves it for a
moment.

If we now cast a glance at purely instrumental music, a symphony of
Beethoven presents to us the greatest confusion, which yet has the most
perfect order at its foundation, the most vehement conflict, which is
transformed the next moment into the most beautiful concord. It is _rerum
concordia discors_, a true and perfect picture of the nature of the world
which rolls on in the boundless maze of innumerable forms, and through
constant destruction supports itself. But in this symphony all human
passions and emotions also find utterance; joy, sorrow, love, hatred,
terror, hope, &c., in innumerable degrees, yet all, as it were, only _in
abstracto_, and without any particularisation; it is their mere form
without the substance, like a spirit world without matter. Certainly we
have a tendency to realise them while we listen, to clothe them in
imagination with flesh and bones, and to see in them scenes of life and
nature on every hand. Yet, taken generally, this is not required for their
comprehension or enjoyment, but rather imparts to them a foreign and
arbitrary addition: therefore it is better to apprehend them in their
immediacy and purity.

Since now, in the foregoing remarks, and also in the text, I have
considered music only from the metaphysical side, that is, with reference
to the inner significance of its performances, it is right that I should
now also subject to a general consideration the means by which, acting
upon our mind, it brings these about; therefore that I should show the
connection of that metaphysical side of music, and the physical side,
which has been fully investigated, and is well known, I start from the
theory which is generally known, and has by no means been shaken by recent
objections, that all harmony of the notes depends upon the coincidence of
their vibrations, which when two notes sound together occurs perhaps at
every second, or at every third, or at every fourth vibration, according
to which, then, they are the octave, the fifth, or the fourth of each
other, and so on. So long as the vibrations of two notes have a rational
relation to each other, which can be expressed in small numbers, they can
be connected together in our apprehension through their constantly
recurring coincidence: the notes become blended, and are thereby in
consonance. If, on the other hand, that relation is an irrational one, or
one which can only be expressed in larger numbers, then no coincidence of
the vibrations which can be apprehended occurs, but _obstrepunt sibi
perpetuo_, whereby they resist being joined together in our apprehension,
and accordingly are called a dissonance. Now, according to this theory,
music is a means of making rational and irrational relations of numbers
comprehensible, not like arithmetic by the help of the concept, but by
bringing them to a knowledge which is perfectly directly and
simultaneously sensible. Now the connection of the metaphysical
significance of music with this its physical and arithmetical basis
depends upon the fact that what resists our _apprehension_, the irrational
relation, or the dissonance, becomes the natural type of what resists our
_will_; and, conversely, the consonance, or the rational relation, which
easily adapts itself to our apprehension, becomes the type of the
satisfaction of the will. And further, since that rational and irrational
element in the numerical relations of the vibrations admits of innumerable
degrees, shades of difference, sequences, and variations, by means of it
music becomes the material in which all the movements of the human heart,
_i.e._, of the will, movements whose essential nature is always
satisfaction and dissatisfaction, although in innumerable degrees, can be
faithfully portrayed and rendered in all their finest shades and
modifications, which takes place by means of the invention of the melody.
Thus we see here the movements of the will transferred to the province of
the mere idea, which is the exclusive scene of the achievements of the
fine arts, for they absolutely demand that the _will itself_ shall not
interfere, and that we shall conduct ourselves as pure _knowing_ subjects.
Therefore the affections of the will itself, thus actual pain and actual
pleasure, must not be excited, but only their substitutes, that which is
agreeable to _the intellect_, as a _picture_ of the satisfaction of the
will, and that which is more or less repugnant to it, as a _picture_ of
greater or less pain. Only thus does music never cause us actual sorrow,
but even in its most melancholy strains is still pleasing, and we gladly
hear in its language the secret history of our will, and all its emotions
and strivings, with their manifold protractions, hindrances, and griefs,
even in the saddest melodies. When, on the other hand, in reality and its
terrors, it is our _will itself_ that is roused and tormented, we have not
then to do with tones and their numerical relations, but are rather now
ourselves the trembling string that is stretched and twanged.

But, further, because, in consequence of the physical theory which lies at
its foundation, the musical quality of the notes is in the proportion of
the rapidity of their vibrations, but not in their relative strength, the
musical ear always follows by preference, in harmony, the highest note,
not the loudest. Therefore, even in the case of the most powerful
orchestral accompaniment, the soprano comes out clearly, and thus receives
a natural right to deliver the melody. And this is also supported by its
great flexibility, which depends upon the same rapidity of the vibrations,
and shows itself in the ornate passages, whereby the soprano becomes the
suitable representative of the heightened sensibility, susceptible to the
slightest impression, and determinable by it, consequently of the most
highly developed consciousness standing on the uppermost stage of the
scale of being. Its opposite, from converse causes, is the bass,
inflexible, rising and falling only in great intervals, thirds, fourths,
and fifths, and also at every step guided by rigid rules. It is therefore
the natural representative of the inorganic kingdom of nature, which is
insensible, insusceptible to fine impressions, and only determinable
according to general laws. It must indeed never rise by one tone, for
example, from a fourth to a fifth, for this produces in the upper parts
the incorrect consecutive fifths and octaves; therefore, originally and in
its own nature, it can never present the melody. If, however, the melody
is assigned to it, this happens by means of counterpoint, _i.e._, it is an
_inverted_ bass—one of the upper parts is lowered and disguised as a bass;
properly speaking, it then requires a second fundamental bass as its
accompaniment. This unnaturalness of a melody lying in the bass is the
reason why bass airs, with full accompaniment, never afford us pure,
undisturbed pleasure, like the soprano air, which, in the connection of
harmony, is alone natural. We may remark in passing that such a melodious
bass, forcibly obtained by inversion, might, in keeping with our
metaphysic of music, be compared to a block of marble to which the human
form has been imparted: and therefore it is wonderfully suitable to the
stone guest in “Don Juan.”

But now we shall try to get somewhat nearer the foundation of the genesis
of melody, which can be accomplished by analysing it into its constituent
parts, and in any case will afford us the pleasure which arises from
bringing to abstract and distinct consciousness what every one knows in
the concrete, so that it gains the appearance of novelty.

Melody consists of two elements, the one rhythmical, the other harmonious.
The former may also be described as the quantitative, the latter as the
qualitative element, since the first is concerned with the duration, and
the second with the pitch of the notes. In the writing of music the former
depends upon the perpendicular, and the latter upon the horizontal lines.
Purely arithmetical relations, thus relations of time, lie at the
foundation of both; in the one case the relative duration of the notes, in
the other the relative rapidity of their vibrations. The rhythmical
element is the essential; for it can produce a kind of melody of itself
alone, and without the other, as, for example, on the drum; yet complete
melody requires both elements. It consists in an alternating _disunion and
reconciliation_ of them, as I shall show immediately; but first, since I
have already spoken of the harmonious element in what has been said, I
wish to consider the rhythmical element somewhat more closely.

_Rhythm_ is in time what _symmetry_ is in space, division into equal parts
corresponding to each other. First, into larger parts, which again fall
into smaller parts, subordinate to the former. In the series of the arts
given by me _architecture_ and _music_ are the two extreme ends. Moreover,
according to their inner nature, their power, the extent of their spheres,
and their significance, they are the most heterogeneous, indeed true
antipodes. This opposition extends even to the form of their appearance,
for architecture is in space alone, without any connection with time; and
music is in time alone, without any connection with space.(26) Now hence
springs their one point of analogy, that as in architecture that which
orders and holds together is _symmetry_, in music it is _rhythm_, and thus
here also it holds true that extremes meet. As the ultimate constituent
parts of a building are the exactly similar stones, so the ultimate
constituent parts of a musical composition are the exactly similar beats;
yet by being weak or strong, or in general by the measure, which denotes
the species of time, these are divided into equal parts, which may be
compared to the dimensions of the stone. The musical period consists of
several bars, and it has also two equal parts, one rising, aspiring,
generally going to the dominant, and one sinking, quieting, returning to
the fundamental note. Two or several periods constitute a part, which in
general is also symmetrically doubled by the sign of repetition; two parts
make a small piece of music, or only a movement of a larger piece; and
thus a concerto or sonata usually consists of three movements, a symphony
of four, and a mass of five. Thus we see the musical composition bound
together and rounded off as a whole, by symmetrical distribution and
repeated division, down to the beats and their fractions, with thorough
subordination, superordination, and co‐ordination of its members, just as
a building is connected and rounded off by its symmetry. Only in the
latter that is exclusively in space which in the former is exclusively in
time. The mere feeling of this analogy has in the last thirty years called
forth the oft‐repeated, daring witticism, that architecture is frozen
music. The origin of this can be traced to Goethe; for, according to
Eckermann’s “Conversations,” vol. ii. p. 88, he said: “I have found among
my papers a page on which I call architecture a rigidified music; and
really there is something in it; the mood which is produced by
architecture approaches the effect of music.” Probably he let fall this
witticism much earlier in conversation, and in that case it is well known
that there were never wanting persons to pick up what he so let fall that
they might afterwards go about decked with it. For the rest, whatever
Goethe may have said, the analogy of music and architecture, which is here
referred by me to its sole ground, the analogy of rhythm with symmetry,
extends accordingly only to the outward form, and by no means to the inner
nature of the two arts, which is entirely different. Indeed it would be
absurd to wish to put on the same level in essential respects the most
limited and the weakest of all the arts, and the most far‐reaching and
powerful. As an amplification of the analogy pointed out, we might add
further, that when music, as it were in a fit of desire for independence,
seizes the opportunity of a pause to free itself from the control of
rhythm, to launch out into the free imagination of an ornate _cadenza_,
such a piece of music divested of all rhythm is analogous to the ruin
which is divested of symmetry, and which accordingly may be called, in the
bold language of the witticism, a frozen _cadenza_.

After this exposition of _rhythm_, I have now to show how the nature of
melody consists in the constantly renewed _disunion and reconciliation_ of
the rhythmical, and the harmonious elements of it. Its harmonious element
has as its assumption the fundamental note, as the rhythmical element has
the species of time, and consists in a wandering from it through all the
notes of the scale, until by shorter or longer digressions it reaches a
harmonious interval, generally the dominant or sub‐dominant, which affords
it an incomplete satisfaction; and then follows, by a similarly long path,
its return to the fundamental note, with which complete satisfaction
appears. But both must so take place that the attainment of the interval
referred to and the return to the fundamental note correspond with certain
favourite points of the rhythm, otherwise it will not work. Thus, as the
harmonious succession of sounds requires certain notes, first of all the
tonic, next to it the dominant, and so on, so rhythm, on its part,
requires certain _points of time_, certain numbered bars, and certain
parts of these bars, which are called strong or good beats, or the
accented parts of the bar, in opposition to the weak or bad beats, or
unaccented parts of the bar. Now the disunion of these two fundamental
elements consists in this, that because the demand of one is satisfied
that of the other is not; and their reconciliation consists in this, that
both are satisfied at once and together. That wandering of the notes until
they find a more or less harmonious interval must so take place that this
interval is attained only after a definite number of bars, and also at an
accented part of the bar, and in this way becomes for it a kind of
resting‐point; and similarly the return to the keynote must take place
after a like number of bars, and also at an accented part of the bar, and
thus complete satisfaction is then attained. So long as this required
coincidence of the satisfaction of both elements is not attained, the
rhythm, on the one hand, may follow its regular course, and, on the other
hand, the required notes may occur often enough, but yet they will remain
entirely without that effect through which melody arises. The following
very simple example may serve to illustrate this:—

                          [Illustration: Music]

Here the harmonious sequence of notes finds the keynote just at the end of
the first bar; but it does not receive any satisfaction from this, because
the rhythm is caught at the least accented part of the bar. Immediately
afterwards, in the second bar, the rhythm has the accented part of the
bar, but the sequence of notes has arrived at the seventh. Thus here the
two elements of melody are entirely _disunited_; and we feel disquieted.
In the second half of the period everything is reversed, and in the last
note they are _reconciled_. This kind of thing can be shown in every
melody, although generally in a much more extended form. Now the constant
disunion and reconciliation of its two elements which there takes place
is, when metaphysically considered, the copy of the origination of new
wishes, and then of their satisfaction. Thus, by flattery, music
penetrates into our hearts, for it presents the image of the complete
satisfaction of its wishes. More closely considered, we see in this
procedure of melody a condition which, to a certain extent, is _inward_
(the harmonious) meet with an _outward_ condition (the rhythmical), as if
by an _accident_,—which is certainly brought about by the composer, and
which may, so far, be compared to rhyme in poetry. But this is just the
copy of the meeting of our wishes with the favourable outward
circumstances which are independent of them, and is thus the picture of
happiness. The effect of the _suspension_ also deserves to be considered
here. It is a dissonance which delays the final consonance, which is
awaited with certainty; and thus the longing for it is strengthened, and
its appearance satisfies all the more. Clearly an analogue of the
heightened satisfaction of the will through delay. The complete cadence
requires the preceding chord of the seventh on the dominant; because the
most deeply felt satisfaction and the most entire relief can only follow
the most earnest longing. Thus, in general, music consists of a constant
succession of more or less disquieting chords, _i.e._, chords which excite
longing, and more or less quieting and satisfying chords; just as the life
of the heart (the will) is a constant succession of greater or less
disquietude through desire and aversion, and just as various degrees of
relief. Accordingly the harmonious sequence of chords consists of the
correct alternation of dissonance and consonance. A succession of merely
consonant chords would be satiating, wearisome, and empty, like the
languor produced by the satisfaction of all wishes. Therefore dissonances
must be introduced, although they disquiet us and affect us almost
painfully, but only in order to be resolved again in consonances with
proper preparation. Indeed, in the whole of music there are really only
two fundamental chords, the dissonant chord of the seventh and the
consonant triad, to which all chords that occur can be referred. This just
corresponds to the fact, that for the will there are at bottom only
dissatisfaction and satisfaction, under however many forms they may
present themselves. And as there are two general fundamental moods of the
mind, serenity, or at least healthiness, and sadness, or even oppression,
so music has two general keys, the major and the minor, which correspond
to these, and it must always be in one of the two. But it is, in fact,
very wonderful that there is a sign of pain which is neither physically
painful nor yet conventional, but which nevertheless is suitable and
unmistakable: the minor. From this we may measure how deeply music is
founded in the nature of things and of man. With northern nations, whose
life is subject to hard conditions, especially with the Russians, the
minor prevails, even in the church music. Allegro in the minor is very
common in French music, and is characteristic of it; it is as if one
danced while one’s shoe pinched.

I add further a few subsidiary remarks. When the key‐note is changed, and
with it the value of all the intervals, in consequence of which the same
note figures as the second, the third, the fourth, and so on, the notes of
the scale are analogous to actors, who must assume now one _rôle_, now
another, while their person remains the same. That the actors are often
not precisely suited to these _rôles_ may be compared to the unavoidable
impurity of every harmonic system (referred to at the end of § 52 of the
first volume) which the equal temperament has introduced.

Perhaps some may be offended, that, according to this metaphysic of it,
music, which so often exalts our minds, which seems to us to speak of
other and better worlds than ours, yet really only flatters the will to
live, because it exhibits to it its nature, deludes it with the image of
its success, and at the end expresses its satisfaction and contentment.
The following passage from the “_Vedas_” may serve to quiet such doubts:
“_Etanand sroup, quod forma gaudii est,_ τον _pram Atma ex hoc dicunt,
quod quocunque loco gaudium est, particula e gaudio ejus est_”
(_Oupnekhat_, vol. i. p. 405; _et iterum_, vol. ii. p. 215).





SUPPLEMENTS TO THE FOURTH BOOK.


    “_Tous les hommes désirent uniquement de se délivrer de la mort:
    ils ne savent pas se délivrer de la vie._”

    —_Lao‐tsen‐Tao‐te‐King_, ed. STAN. JULIEN, p. 184.




Chapter XL. Preface.


The supplements to this fourth book would be very considerable if it were
not that two of its principal subjects which stand specially in need of
being supplemented—the freedom of the will and the foundation of
ethics—have, on the occasion of prize questions being set by two
Scandinavian Academies, been fully worked out by me in the form of a
monograph, which was laid before the public in the year 1841 under the
title, “The Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics.” Accordingly I assume an
acquaintance on the part of my readers with the work which has just been
mentioned, just as unconditionally as in the supplements to the second
book I have assumed it with regard to the work “On the Will in Nature.” In
general I make the demand that whoever wishes to make himself acquainted
with my philosophy shall read every line of me. For I am no voluminous
writer, no fabricator of compendiums, no earner of pecuniary rewards, not
one whose writings aim at the approbation of a minister; in a word, not
one whose pen is under the influence of personal ends. I strive after
nothing but the truth, and write as the ancients wrote, with the sole
intention of preserving my thoughts, so that they may be for the benefit
of those who understand how to meditate upon them and prize them.
Therefore I have written little, but that little with reflection and at
long intervals, and accordingly I have also confined within the smallest
possible limits those repetitions which in philosophical works are
sometimes unavoidable on account of the connection, and from which no
single philosopher is free; so that by far the most of what I have to say
is only to be found in one place. On this account, then, whoever wishes to
learn from me and understand me must leave nothing unread that I have
written. Yet one can judge me and criticise me without this, as experience
has shown; and to this also I further wish much pleasure.

Meanwhile the space gained by the said elimination of two important
subjects will be very welcome to us. For since those explanations, which
every man has more at heart than anything else, and which therefore in
every system, as ultimate results, form the apex of its pyramid, are also
crowded together in _my_ last book, a larger space will gladly be granted
to every firmer proof or more accurate account of these. Besides this we
have been able to discuss here, as belonging to the doctrine of the
“assertion of the will to live,” a question which in our fourth book
itself remained untouched, as it was also entirely neglected by all
philosophers before me: it is the inner significance and real nature of
the sexual love, which sometimes rises to a vehement passion—a subject
which it would not have been paradoxical to take up in the ethical part of
philosophy if its importance had been known.




Chapter XLI.(27) On Death And Its Relation To The Indestructibility Of Our
True Nature.


Death is the true inspiring genius, or the muse of philosophy, wherefore
Socrates has defined the latter as θανατου μελετη. Indeed without death
men would scarcely philosophise. Therefore it will be quite in order that
a special consideration of this should have its place here at the
beginning of the last, most serious, and most important of our books.

The brute lives without a proper knowledge of death; therefore the
individual brute enjoys directly the absolute imperishableness of the
species, for it is only conscious of itself as endless. In the case of men
the terrifying certainty of death necessarily entered with reason. But as
everywhere in nature with every evil a means of cure, or at least some
compensation, is given, the same reflection which introduces the knowledge
of death also assists us to _metaphysical_ points of view, which comfort
us concerning it, and of which the brute has no need and is incapable. All
religious and philosophical systems are principally directed to this end,
and are thus primarily the antidote to the certainty of death, which the
reflective reason produces out of its own means. Yet the degree in which
they attain this end is very different, and certainly _one_ religion or
philosophy will, far more than the others, enable men to look death in the
face with a quiet glance. Brahmanism and Buddhism, which teach man to
regard himself as himself, the original being, the Brahm, to which all
coming into being and passing away is essentially foreign, will achieve
much more in this respect than such as teach that man is made out of
nothing, and actually begins at birth his existence derived from another.
Answering to this we find in India a confidence and a contempt for death
of which one has no conception in Europe. It is, in fact, a hazardous
thing to force upon a man, by early imprinting them, weak and untenable
conceptions in this important regard, and thereby making him for ever
incapable of taking up correct and stable ones. For example, to teach him
that he recently came out of nothing, and consequently through an eternity
has been nothing, but yet for the future will be imperishable, is just the
same as to teach him that although he is through and through the work of
another, yet he will be held responsible through all eternity for his
actions. If, then, when the mind ripens and reflection appears, the
untenable nature of such doctrines forces itself upon him, he has nothing
better to put in its place, nay, is no longer capable of understanding
anything better, and thus loses the comfort which nature had destined for
him also, as a compensation for the certainty of death. In consequence of
such a process, we see even now in England (1844), among ruined factory
hands, the Socialists, and in Germany, among ruined students, the young
Hegelians, sink to the absolutely physical point of view, which leads to
the result: _edite_, _bibite_, _post mortem nulla voluptas_, and so far
may be defined as bestialism.

However, after all that has been taught concerning death, it cannot be
denied that, at least in Europe, the opinion of men, nay, often even of
the same individual, very frequently vacillates between the conception of
death as absolute annihilation and the assumption that we are, as it were,
with skin and hair, immortal. Both are equally false: but we have not so
much to find a correct mean as rather to gain the higher point of view
from which such notions disappear of themselves.

In these considerations I shall first of all start from the purely
empirical standpoint. Here there primarily lies before us the undeniable
fact that, according to the natural consciousness, man not only fears
death for his own person more than anything else, but also weeps violently
over the death of those that belong to him, and indeed clearly not
egotistically, for his own loss, but out of sympathy for the great
misfortune that has befallen them. Therefore he also censures those who in
such a case neither weep nor show sadness as hard‐hearted and unloving. It
is parallel with this that revenge, in its highest degree, seeks the death
of the adversary as the greatest evil that can be inflicted. Opinions
change with time and place; but the voice of nature remains always and
everywhere the same, and is therefore to be heeded before everything else.
Now here it seems distinctly to say that death is a great evil. In the
language of nature death means annihilation. And that death is a serious
matter may be concluded from the fact that, as every one knows, life is no
joke. We must indeed deserve nothing better than these two.

In fact, the fear of death is independent of all knowledge; for the brute
has it, although it does not know death. Everything that is born brings it
with it into the world. But this fear of death is _a priori_ only the
reverse side of the will to live, which indeed we all are. Therefore in
every brute the fear of its destruction is inborn, like the care for its
maintenance. Thus it is the fear of death, and not the mere avoidance of
pain, which shows itself in the anxious carefulness with which the brute
seeks to protect itself, and still more its brood, from everything that
might become dangerous. Why does the brute flee, trembling, and seek to
conceal itself? Because it is simply the will to live, but, as such, is
forfeited to death, and wishes to gain time. Such also, by nature, is man.
The greatest evil, the worst that can anywhere threaten, is death; the
greatest fear is the fear of death. Nothing excites us so irresistibly to
the most lively interest as danger to the life of others; nothing is so
shocking as an execution. Now the boundless attachment to life which
appears here cannot have sprung from knowledge and reflection; to these it
rather appears foolish, for the objective worth of life is very uncertain,
and at least it remains doubtful whether it is preferable to not being,
nay, if experience and reflection come to be expressed, not being must
certainly win. If one knocked on the graves, and asked the dead whether
they wished to rise again, they would shake their heads. Such is the
opinion of Socrates in “Plato’s Apology,” and even the gay and amiable
Voltaire cannot help saying, “_On aime la vie; mais le néant ne laisse pas
d’avoir du bon_;” and again, “_Je ne sais pas ce que c’est que la vie
éternelle, mais celle‐ci est une mauvaise plaisanterie_.” Besides, life
must in any case soon end; so that the few years which perhaps one has yet
to be vanish entirely before the endless time when one will be no more.
Accordingly it appears to reflection even ludicrous to be so anxious about
this span of time, to tremble so much if our own life or that of another
is in danger, and to compose tragedies the horror of which has its
strength in the fear of death. That powerful attachment to life is
therefore irrational and blind; it can only be explained from the fact
that our whole inner nature is itself will to live, to which, therefore,
life must appear as the highest good, however embittered, short, and
uncertain it may always be; and that that will, in itself and originally,
is unconscious and blind. Knowledge, on the contrary, far from being the
source of that attachment to life, even works against it, for it discloses
the worthlessness of life, and thus combats the fear of death. When it
conquers, and accordingly the man faces death courageously and composedly,
this is honoured as great and noble, thus we hail then the triumph of
knowledge over the blind will to live, which is yet the kernel of our own
being. In the same way we despise him in whom knowledge is defeated in
that conflict, and who therefore clings unconditionally to life, struggles
to the utmost against approaching death, and receives it with despair;(28)
and yet in him it is only the most original being of ourselves and of
nature that expresses itself. We may here ask, in passing, how could this
boundless love of life and endeavour to maintain it in every way as long
as possible be regarded as base, contemptible, and by the adherents of
every religion as unworthy of this, if it were the gift of good gods, to
be recognised with thankfulness? And how could it then seem great and
noble to esteem it lightly? Meanwhile, what is confirmed by these
considerations is—(1.) that the will to live is the inmost nature of man;
(2.) that in itself it is unconscious and blind; (3.) that knowledge is an
adventitious principle, which is originally foreign to the will; (4.) that
knowledge conflicts with the will, and that our judgment applauds the
victory of knowledge over the will.

If what makes death seem so terrible to us were the thought of not being,
we would necessarily think with equal horror of the time when as yet we
were not. For it is irrefutably certain that not being after death cannot
be different from not being before birth, and consequently is also no more
deplorable. A whole eternity has run its course while as yet we were not,
but that by no means disturbs us. On the other hand, we find it hard, nay,
unendurable, that after the momentary intermezzo of an ephemeral
existence, a second eternity should follow in which we shall no longer be.
Should, then, this thirst for existence have arisen because we have now
tasted it and have found it so delightful? As was already briefly
explained above, certainly not; far sooner could the experience gained
have awakened an infinite longing for the lost paradise of non‐existence.
To the hope, also, of the immortality of the soul there is always added
that of a “better world”—a sign that the present world is not much good.
Notwithstanding all this, the question as to our state after death has
certainly been discussed, in books and verbally, ten thousand times
oftener than the question as to our state before birth. Yet theoretically
the one is just as near at hand and as fair a problem as the other; and
besides, whoever had answered the one would soon see to the bottom of the
other. We have fine declamations about how shocking it would be to think
that the mind of man, which embraces the world, and has so many very
excellent thoughts, should sink with him into the grave; but we hear
nothing about this mind having allowed a whole eternity to pass before it
came into being with these its qualities, and how the world must have had
to do without it all that time. Yet no question presents itself more
naturally to knowledge, uncorrupted by the will, than this: An infinite
time has passed before my birth; what was I during this time?
Metaphysically, it might perhaps be answered, “I was always I; that is,
all who during that time said I, were just I.” But let us look away from
this to our present entirely empirical point of view, and assume that I
did not exist at all. Then I can console myself as to the infinite time
after my death, when I shall not be, with the infinite time when I already
was not, as a well‐accustomed, and indeed very comfortable, state. For the
eternity _a parte post_ without me can be just as little fearful as the
eternity _a parte ante_ without me, since the two are distinguished by
nothing except by the interposition of an ephemeral dream of life. All
proofs, also, for continued existence after death may just as well be
applied _in partem ante_, where they then demonstrate existence before
life, in the assumption of which the Hindus and Buddhists therefore show
themselves very consistent. Kant’s ideality of time alone solves all these
riddles. But we are not speaking of that now. This, however, results from
what has been said, that to mourn for the time when one will be no more is
just as absurd as it would be to mourn over the time when as yet one was
not; for it is all the same whether the time which our existence does not
fill is related to that which it does fill, as future or as past.

But, also, regarded entirely apart from these temporal considerations, it
is in and for itself absurd to look upon not being as an evil; for every
evil, as every good, presupposes existence, nay, even consciousness: but
the latter ceases with life, as also in sleep and in a swoon; therefore
the absence of it is well known to us, and trusted, as containing no evil
at all: its entrance, however, is always an affair of a moment. From this
point of view Epicurus considered death, and therefore quite rightly said,
“ὁ θανατος μηδεν προς ἡμας” (Death does not concern us); with the
explanation that when we are death is not, and when death is we are not
(_Diog. Laert._, x. 27). To have lost what cannot be missed is clearly no
evil. Therefore ceasing to be ought to disturb us as little as not having
been. Accordingly from the standpoint of knowledge there appears
absolutely no reason to fear death. But consciousness consists in knowing;
therefore, for consciousness death is no evil. Moreover, it is really not
this _knowing_ part of our _ego_ that fears death, but the _fuga mortis_
proceeds entirely and alone from the blind _will_, of which everything
living is filled. To this, however, as was already mentioned above, it is
essential, just because it is will to live, whose whole nature consists in
the effort after life and existence, and which is not originally endowed
with knowledge, but only in consequence of its objectification in animal
individuals. If now the will, by means of knowledge, beholds death as the
end of the phenomenon with which it has identified itself, and to which,
therefore, it sees itself limited, its whole nature struggles against it
with all its might. Whether now it has really something to fear from death
we will investigate further on, and will then remember the real source of
the fear of death, which has been shown here along with the requisite
distinction of the willing and the knowing part of our nature.

Corresponding to this, then, what makes death so terrible to us is not so
much the end of life—for this can appear to no one specially worthy of
regret—but rather the destruction of the organism; really because this is
the will itself exhibiting itself as body. But we only really feel this
destruction in the evils of disease or of old age; death itself, on the
other hand, consists for the _subject_ only in the moment when
consciousness vanishes because the activity of the brain ceases. The
extension of the stoppage to all the other parts of the organism which
follows this is really already an event after death. Thus death, in a
subjective regard, concerns the consciousness alone. Now what the
vanishing of this may be every one can to a certain extent judge of from
going to sleep; but it is still better known to whoever has really
fainted, for in this the transition is not so gradual, nor accompanied by
dreams, but first the power of sight leaves us, still fully conscious, and
then immediately the most profound unconsciousness enters; the sensation
that accompanies it, so far as it goes, is anything but disagreeable; and
without doubt, as sleep is the brother of death, so the swoon is its twin‐
brother. Even violent death cannot be painful, for even severe wounds are
not felt at all till some time afterwards, often not till the outward
signs of them are observed. If they are rapidly mortal, consciousness will
vanish before this discovery; if they result in death later, then it is
the same as with other illnesses. All those also who have lost
consciousness in water, or from charcoal fumes, or through hanging are
well known to say that it happened without pain. And now, finally, the
death which is properly in accordance with nature, death from old age,
euthanasia, is a gradual vanishing and sinking out of existence in an
imperceptible manner. Little by little in old age, the passions and
desires, with the susceptibility for their objects, are extinguished; the
emotions no longer find anything to excite them; for the power of
presenting ideas to the mind always becomes weaker, its images fainter;
the impressions no longer cleave to us, but pass over without leaving a
trace, the days roll ever faster, events lose their significance,
everything grows pale. The old man stricken in years totters about or
rests in a corner now only a shadow, a ghost of his former self. What
remains there for death to destroy? One day a sleep is his last, and his
dreams are ——. They are the dreams which Hamlet inquires after in the
famous soliloquy. I believe we dream them even now.

I have here also to remark that the maintenance of the life process,
although it has a metaphysical basis, does not go on without resistance,
and consequently not without effort. It is this to which the organism
yields every night, on account of which it then suspends the brain
function and diminishes certain secretions, the respiration, the pulse,
and the development of heat. From this we may conclude that the entire
ceasing of the life process must be a wonderful relief to its motive
force; perhaps this has some share in the expression of sweet contentment
on the faces of most dead persons. In general the moment of death may be
like the moment of awaking from a heavy dream that has oppressed us like a
nightmare.

Up to this point the result we have arrived at is that death, however much
it may be feared, can yet really be no evil. But often it even appears as
a good thing, as something wished for, as a friend. All that have met with
insuperable obstacles to their existence or their efforts, that suffer
from incurable diseases or inconsolable griefs, have as a last refuge,
which generally opens to them of its own accord, the return into the womb
of nature, from which they arose for a short time, enticed by the hope of
more favourable conditions of existence than have fallen to their lot, and
the same path out of which constantly remains open. That return is the
_cessio bonorum_ of life. Yet even here it is only entered upon after a
physical and moral conflict: so hard does one struggle against returning
to the place from which one came out so lightly and readily, to an
existence which has so much suffering and so little pleasure to offer. The
Hindus give the god of death, Yama, two faces; one very fearful and
terrible, and one very cheerful and benevolent. This partly explains
itself from the reflections we have just made.

At the empirical point of view at which we still stand, the following
consideration is one which presents itself of its own accord, and
therefore deserves to be accurately defined by illustration, and thereby
referred to its proper limits. The sight of a dead body shows me that
sensibility, irritability, circulation of the blood, reproduction, &c.,
have here ceased. I conclude from this with certainty that what actuated
these hitherto, which was yet always something unknown to me, now actuates
them no longer, thus has departed from them. But if I should now wish to
add that this must have been just what I have known only as consciousness,
consequently as intelligence (soul), this would be not only an unjustified
but clearly a false conclusion. For consciousness has always showed itself
to me not as the cause, but as the product and result of the organised
life, for it rose and sank in consequence of this in the different periods
of life, in health and sickness, in sleep, in a swoon, in awaking, &c.,
thus always appeared as effect, never as cause of the organised life,
always showed itself as something which arises and passes away, and again
arises, so long as the conditions of this still exist, but not apart from
them. Nay, I may also have seen that the complete derangement of
consciousness, madness, far from dragging down with it and depressing the
other forces, or indeed endangering life, heightens these very much,
especially irritability or muscular force, and rather lengthens than
shortens life, if other causes do not come in. Then, also: I knew
individuality as a quality of everything organised, and therefore, if this
is a self‐conscious organism, also of consciousness. But there exists no
occasion now to conclude that individuality was inherent in that vanished
principle, which imparts life, and is completely unknown to me; all the
less so as I see that everywhere in nature each particular phenomenon is
the work of a general force which is active in thousands of similar
phenomena. But, on the other hand, there is just as little occasion to
conclude that because the organised life has ceased here that force which
hitherto actuated it has also become nothing; as little as to infer the
death of the spinner from the stopping of the spinning‐wheel. If a
pendulum, by finding its centre of gravity, at last comes to rest, and
thus its individual apparent life has ceased, no one will imagine that
gravitation is now annihilated; but every one comprehends that, after as
before, it is active in innumerable phenomena. Certainly it might be urged
against this comparison, that here also, in this pendulum, gravitation has
not ceased to be active, but only to manifest its activity palpably;
whoever insists on this may think, instead, of an electrical body, in
which, after its discharge, electricity has actually ceased to be active.
I only wished to show in this that we ourselves recognise in the lowest
forces of nature an eternity and ubiquity with regard to which the
transitory nature of their fleeting phenomena never makes us err for a
moment. So much the less, then, should it come into our mind to regard the
ceasing of life as the annihilation of the living principle, and
consequently death as the entire destruction of the man. Because the
strong arm which, three thousand years ago, bent the bow of Ulysses is no
more, no reflective and well‐regulated understanding will regard the force
which acted so energetically in it as entirely annihilated, and therefore,
upon further reflection, will also not assume that the force which bends
the bow to‐day first began with this arm. The thought lies far nearer us,
that the force which earlier actuated the life which now has vanished is
the same which is active in the life which now flourishes: nay, this is
almost inevitable. Certainly, however, we know that, as was explained in
the second book, only that is perishable which is involved in the causal
series; but only the states and forms are so involved. On the other hand,
untouched by the change of these which is introduced by causes, there
remain on the one side matter, and on the other side natural forces: for
both are the presupposition of all these changes. But the principle of our
life we must, primarily at least, conceive as a force of nature, until
perhaps a more profound investigation has brought us to know what it is in
itself. Thus, taken simply as a force of nature, the vital force remains
entirely undisturbed by the change of forms and states, which the bond of
cause and effect introduces and carries off again, and which alone are
subject to the process of coming into being and passing away, as it lies
before us in experience. Thus so far the imperishable nature of our true
being can be proved with certainty. But it is true this will not satisfy
the claims which are wont to be made upon proofs of our continued
existence after death, nor insure the consolation which is expected from
such proofs. However, it is always something; and whoever fears death as
an absolute annihilation cannot afford to despise the perfect certainty
that the inmost principle of his life remains untouched by it. Nay, the
paradox might be set up, that that second thing also which, just like the
forces of nature, remains untouched by the continual change under the
guidance of causality, thus matter, by its absolute permanence, insures us
indestructibility, by virtue of which whoever was incapable of
comprehending any other might yet confidently trust in a certain
imperishableness. “What!” it will be said, “the permanence of the mere
dust, of the crude matter, is to be regarded as a continuance of our
being?” Oh! do you know this dust, then? Do you know what it is and what
it can do? Learn to know it before you despise it. This matter which now
lies there as dust and ashes will soon, dissolved in water, form itself as
a crystal, will shine as metal, will then emit electric sparks, will by
means of its galvanic intensity manifest a force which, decomposing the
closest combinations, reduces earths to metals; nay, it will, of its own
accord, form itself into plants and animals, and from its mysterious womb
develop that life for the loss of which you, in your narrowness, are so
painfully anxious. Is it, then, absolutely nothing to continue to exist as
such matter? Nay, I seriously assert that even this permanence of matter
affords evidence of the indestructibility of our true nature, though only
as in an image or simile, or, rather, only as in outline. To see this we
only need to call to mind the explanation of matter given in chapter 24,
from which it resulted that mere formless matter—this basis of the world
of experience which is never perceived for itself alone, but assumed as
constantly remaining—is the immediate reflection, the visibility in
general, of the thing in itself, thus of the will. Therefore, whatever
absolutely pertains to the will as such holds good also of matter, and it
reflects the true eternal nature of the will under the image of temporal
imperishableness. Because, as has been said, nature does not lie, no view
which has sprung from a purely objective comprehension of it, and been
logically thought out, can be absolutely false, but at the most only very
one‐sided and imperfect. Such, however, is, indisputably, consistent
materialism; for instance, that of Epicurus, just as well as the absolute
idealism opposed to it, like that of Berkeley, and in general every
philosophical point of view which has proceeded from a correct _apperçu_,
and been honestly carried out. Only they are all exceedingly one‐sided
comprehensions, and therefore, in spite of their opposition, they are all
true, each from a definite point of view; but as soon as one has risen
above this point of view, then they only appear as relatively and
conditionally true. The highest standpoint alone, from which one surveys
them all and knows them in their relative truth, but also beyond this, in
their falseness, can be that of absolute truth so far as this is in
general attainable. Accordingly we see, as was shown above, that in the
very crude, and therefore very old, point of view of materialism proper
the indestructibility of our true nature in itself is represented, as by a
mere shadow of it, the imperishableness of matter; as in the already
higher naturalism of an absolute physics it is represented by the ubiquity
and eternity of the natural forces, among which the vital force is at
least to be counted. Thus even these crude points of view contain the
assertion that the living being suffers no absolute annihilation through
death, but continues to exist in and with the whole of nature.

The considerations which have brought us to this point, and to which the
further explanations link themselves on, started from the remarkable fear
of death which fills all living beings. But now we will change the
standpoint and consider how, in contrast to the individual beings, the
_whole_ of nature bears itself with reference to death. In doing this,
however, we still always remain upon the ground of experience.

Certainly we know no higher game of chance than that for death and life.
Every decision about this we watch with the utmost excitement, interest,
and fear; for in our eyes all in all is at stake. On the other hand,
nature, which never lies, but is always straightforward and open, speaks
quite differently upon this theme, speaks like Krishna in the
Bhagavadgita. What it says is: The death or the life of the individual is
of no significance. It expresses this by the fact that it exposes the life
of every brute, and even of man, to the most insignificant accidents
without coming to the rescue. Consider the insect on your path; a slight,
unconscious turning of your step is decisive as to its life or death. Look
at the wood‐snail, without any means of flight, of defence, of deception,
of concealment, a ready prey for all. Look at the fish carelessly playing
in the still open net; the frog restrained by its laziness from the flight
which might save it; the bird that does not know of the falcon that soars
above it; the sheep which the wolf eyes and examines from the thicket. All
these, provided with little foresight, go about guilelessly among the
dangers that threaten their existence every moment. Since now nature
exposes its organisms, constructed with such inimitable skill, not only to
the predatory instincts of the stronger, but also to the blindest chance,
to the humour of every fool, the mischievousness of every child without
reserve, it declares that the annihilation of these individuals is
indifferent to it, does it no harm, has no significance, and that in these
cases the effect is of no more importance than the cause. It says this
very distinctly, and it does not lie; only it makes no comments on its
utterances, but rather expresses them in the laconic style of an oracle.
If now the all‐mother sends forth her children without protection to a
thousand threatening dangers, this can only be because she knows that if
they fall they fall back into her womb, where they are safe; therefore
their fall is a mere jest. Nature does not act otherwise with man than
with the brutes. Therefore its declaration extends also to man: the life
and death of the individual are indifferent to it. Accordingly, in a
certain sense, they ought also to be indifferent to us, for we ourselves
are indeed nature. Certainly, if only we saw deep enough, we would agree
with nature, and regard life and death as indifferently as it does.
Meanwhile, by means of reflection, we must attribute that carelessness and
indifference of nature towards the life of the individuals to the fact
that the destruction of such a phenomenon does not in the least affect its
true and proper nature.

If we further ponder the fact, that not only, as we have just seen, are
life and death dependent upon the most trifling accidents, but that the
existence of the organised being in general is an ephemeral one, that
animal and plant arise to‐day and pass away to‐morrow, and birth and death
follow in quick succession, while to the unorganised things which stand so
much lower an incomparably longer duration is assured, and an infinite
duration to the absolutely formless matter alone, to which, indeed, we
attribute this _a priori_,—then, I think, the thought must follow of its
own accord, even from the purely empirical, but objective and unprejudiced
comprehension of such an order of things, that this is only a superficial
phenomenon, that such a constant arising and passing away can by no means
touch the root of things, but can only be relative, nay, only apparent, in
which the true inner nature of that thing is not included, the nature
which everywhere evades our glance and is thoroughly mysterious, but
rather that this continues to exist undisturbed by it; although we can
neither apprehend nor conceive the manner in which this happens, and must
therefore think of it only generally as a kind of _tour de passe‐passe_
which took place there. For that, while what is most imperfect, the
lowest, the unorganised, continues to exist unassailed, it is just the
most perfect beings, the living creatures, with their infinitely
complicated and inconceivably ingenious organisations, which constantly
arise, new from the very foundation, and after a brief span of time
absolutely pass into nothingness, to make room for other new ones like
them coming into existence out of nothing—this is something so obviously
absurd that it can never be the true order of things, but rather a mere
veil which conceals this, or, more accurately, a phenomenon conditioned by
the nature of our intellect. Nay, the whole being and not being itself of
these individuals, in relation to which death and life are opposites, can
only be relative. Thus the language of nature, in which it is given us as
absolute, cannot be the true and ultimate expression of the nature of
things and of the order of the world, but indeed only a _patois du pays_,
_i.e._, something merely relatively true,—something to be understood _cum
grano salis_, or, to speak properly, something conditioned by our
intellect; I say, an immediate, intuitive conviction of the kind which I
have tried to describe in words will press itself upon every one; _i.e._,
certainly only upon every one whose mind is not of an utterly ordinary
species, which is absolutely only capable of knowing the particular simply
and solely as such, which is strictly limited to the knowledge of
individuals, after the manner of the intellect of the brutes. Whoever, on
the other hand, by means of a capacity of an only somewhat higher power,
even just begins to see in the individual beings their universal, their
Ideas, will also, to a certain extent, participate in that conviction, and
that indeed as an immediate, and therefore certain, conviction. In fact,
it is also only small, limited minds that fear death quite seriously as
their annihilation, and persons of decidedly superior capacity are
completely free from such terrors. Plato rightly bases the whole of
philosophy upon the knowledge of the doctrine of Ideas, _i.e._, upon the
perception of the universal in the particular. But the conviction here
described, which proceeds directly from the comprehension of nature, must
have been exceedingly vivid in those sublime authors of the Upanishads of
the Vedas, who can scarcely be thought of as mere men, for it speaks to us
so forcibly out of an innumerable number of their utterances that we must
ascribe this immediate illumination of their mind to the fact that these
wise men, standing nearer the origin of our race in time, comprehended the
nature of things more clearly and profoundly than the already deteriorated
race, ὁιοι νυν βροτοι εισιν, is able to do. But certainly their
comprehension is assisted by the natural world of India, which is endowed
with life in a very different degree from our northern world. However,
thorough reflection, as pursued by Kant’s great mind, leads by another
path to the same result, for it teaches us that our intellect, in which
that phenomenal world which changes so fast exhibits itself, does not
comprehend the true ultimate nature of things, but merely its phenomenal
manifestation, and indeed, as I add, because it is originally only
destined to present the motives to our will, _i.e._, to be serviceable to
it in the pursuit of its paltry ends.

Let us, however, carry our objective and unprejudiced consideration of
nature still further. If I kill a living creature, whether a dog, a bird,
a frog, or even only an insect, it is really inconceivable that this
being, or rather the original force by virtue of which such a marvellous
phenomenon exhibited itself just the moment before, in its full energy and
love of life, should have been annihilated by my wicked or thoughtless
act. And again, on the other hand, the millions of animals of every kind
which come into existence every moment, in infinite variety, full of force
and activity, can never, before the act of their generation, have been
nothing at all, and have attained from nothing to an absolute beginning.
If now in this way I see one of these withdraw itself from my sight,
without me knowing where it goes, and another appear without me knowing
whence it comes; if, moreover, both have the same form, the same nature,
the same character, and only not the same matter, which yet during their
existence they continually throw off and renew; then certainly the
assumption, that that which vanishes and that which appears in its place
are one and the same, which has only experienced a slight alteration, a
renewal of the form of its existence, and that consequently death is for
the species what sleep is for the individual; this assumption, I say, lies
so close at hand that it is impossible not to light upon it, unless the
mind, perverted in early youth by the imprinting of false views, hurries
it out of the way, even from a distance, with superstitious fear. But the
opposite assumption that the birth of an animal is an arising out of
nothing, and accordingly that its death is its absolute annihilation, and
this with the further addition that man, who has also originated out of
nothing, has yet an individual, endless existence, and indeed a conscious
existence, while the dog, the ape, the elephant, are annihilated by death,
is really something against which the healthy mind revolts and which it
must regard as absurd. If, as is sufficiently often repeated, the
comparison of the results of a system with the utterances of the healthy
mind is supposed to be a touchstone of its truth, I wish the adherents of
the system which was handed down from Descartes to the pre‐Kantian
eclectics, nay, which even now is still the prevailing view of the great
majority of cultured people in Europe, would apply this touchstone here.

Throughout and everywhere the true symbol of nature is the circle, because
it is the schema or type of recurrence. This is, in fact, the most
universal form in nature, which it carries out in everything, from the
course of the stars down to the death and the genesis of organised beings,
and by which alone, in the ceaseless stream of time, and its content, a
permanent existence, _i.e._, a nature, becomes possible.

If in autumn we consider the little world of insects, and see how one
prepares its bed to sleep the long, rigid winter‐sleep; another spins its
cocoon to pass the winter as a chrysalis, and awake in spring rejuvenated
and perfected; and, finally, how most of them, intending themselves to
rest in the arms of death, merely arrange with care the suitable place for
their egg, in order to issue forth again from it some day renewed;—this is
nature’s great doctrine of immortality, which seeks to teach us that there
is no radical difference between sleep and death, but the one endangers
existence just as little as the other. The care with which the insect
prepares a cell, or hole, or nest, deposits its egg in it, together with
food for the larva that will come out of it in the following spring, and
then quietly dies, is just like the care with which in the evening a man
lays ready his clothes and his breakfast for the next morning, and then
quietly goes to sleep; and at bottom it could not take place at all if it
were not that the insect which dies in autumn is in itself, and according
to its true nature, just as much identical with the one which is hatched
out in the spring as the man who lies down to sleep is identical with the
man who rises from it.

If now, after these considerations, we return to ourselves and our own
species, then cast our glance forward far into the future, and seek to
present to our minds the future generations, with the millions of their
individuals in the strange form of their customs and pursuits, and then
interpose with the question: Whence will all these come? Where are they
now? Where is the fertile womb of that nothing, pregnant with worlds,
which still conceals the coming races? Would not the smiling and true
answer to this be, Where else should they be than there where alone the
real always was and will be, in the present and its content?—thus with
thee, the foolish questioner, who in this mistaking of his own nature is
like the leaf upon the tree, which, fading in autumn and about to fall,
complains at its destruction, and will not be consoled by looking forward
to the fresh green which will clothe the tree in spring, but says
lamenting, “I am not these! These are quite different leaves!” Oh, foolish
leaf! Whither wilt thou? And whence should others come? Where is the
nothing whose abyss thou fearest? Know thine own nature, that which is so
filled with thirst for existence; recognise it in the inner, mysterious,
germinating force of the tree, which, constantly _one_ and the same in all
generations of leaves, remains untouched by all arising and passing away.
And now, οἱη περ φυλλων γενεη, τοιηδε και ανδρων (_Qualis foliorum
generatio, talis et hominum_). Whether the fly which now buzzes round me
goes to sleep in the evening, and buzzes again tomorrow, or dies in the
evening, and in spring another fly buzzes which has sprung from its egg:
that is in itself the same thing; but therefore the knowledge which
exhibits this as two fundamentally different things is not unconditioned,
but relative, a knowledge of the phenomenon, not of the thing in itself.
In the morning the fly exists again; it also exists again in the spring.
What distinguishes for it the winter from the night? In Burdach’s
“Physiology,” vol. i. § 275, we read, “Till ten o’clock in the morning no
_Cercaria ephemera_ (one of the infusoria) is to be seen (in the
infusion), and at twelve the whole water swarms with them. In the evening
they die, and the next morning they again appear anew.” So it was observed
by Nitzsch six days running.

So everything lingers but a moment, and hastens on to death. The plant and
the insect die at the end of the summer, the brute and the man after a few
years: death reaps unweariedly. Yet notwithstanding this, nay, as if this
were not so at all, everything is always there and in its place, just as
if everything were imperishable. The plant always thrives and blooms, the
insect hums, the brute and the man exist in unwasted youth, and the
cherries that have already been enjoyed a thousand times we have again
before us every summer. The nations also exist as immortal individuals,
although sometimes their names change; even their action, what they do and
suffer, is always the same; although history always pretends to relate
something different: for it is like the kaleidoscope, which at every turn
shows a new figure, while we really always have the same thing before our
eyes. What then presses itself more irresistibly upon us than the thought
that that arising and passing away does not concern the real nature of
things, but this remains untouched by it, thus is imperishable, and
therefore all and each that _wills_ to exist actually exists continuously
and without end. Accordingly at every given point of time all species of
animals, from the gnat to the elephant, exist together complete. They have
already renewed themselves many thousand times, and withal have remained
the same. They know nothing of others like them, who have lived before
them, or will live after them; it is the species which always lives, and
in the consciousness of the imperishable nature of the species and their
identity with it the individuals cheerfully exist. The will to live
manifests itself in an endless present, because this is the form of the
life of the species, which, therefore, never grows old, but remains always
young. Death is for it what sleep is for the individual, or what winking
is for the eye, by the absence of which the Indian gods are known, if they
appear in human form. As through the entrance of night the world vanishes,
but yet does not for a moment cease to exist, so man and brute apparently
pass away through death, and yet their true nature continues, just as
undisturbed by it. Let us now think of that alternation of death and birth
as infinitely rapid vibrations, and we have before us the enduring
objectification of the will, the permanent Ideas of being, fixed like the
rainbow on the waterfall. This is temporal immortality. In consequence of
this, notwithstanding thousands of years of death and decay, nothing has
been lost, not an atom of the matter, still less anything of the inner
being, that exhibits itself as nature. Therefore every moment we can
cheerfully cry, “In spite of time, death, and decay, we are still all
together!”

Perhaps we would have to except whoever had once said from the bottom of
his heart, with regard to this game, “I want no more.” But this is not yet
the place to speak of this.

But we have certainly to draw attention to the fact that the pain of birth
and the bitterness of death are the two constant conditions under which
the will to live maintains itself in its objectification, _i.e._, our
inner nature, untouched by the course of time and the death of races,
exists in an everlasting present, and enjoys the fruit of the assertion of
the will to live. This is analogous to the fact that we can only be awake
during the day on condition that we sleep during the night; indeed the
latter is the commentary which nature offers us for the understanding of
that difficult passage.(29)

For the substratum, or the content, πληρωμα, or the material of the
_present_, is through all time really the same. The impossibility of
knowing this identity directly is just _time_, a form and limitation of
our intellect. That on account of it, for example, the future event is not
yet, depends upon an illusion of which we become conscious when that event
has come. That the essential form of our intellect introduces such an
illusion explains and justifies itself from the fact that the intellect
has come forth from the hands of nature by no means for the apprehension
of the nature of things, but merely for the apprehension of motives, thus
for the service of an individual and temporal phenomenon of will.(30)

Whoever comprehends the reflections which here occupy us will also
understand the true meaning of the paradoxical doctrine of the Eleatics,
that there is no arising and passing away, but the whole remains
immovable: “Παρμενιδης και Μελισσος ανῃρουν γενεσιν και φθοραν, δια το
νομιξειν το παν ακινητον” (_Parmenides et Melissus ortum et interitum
tollebant, quoniam nihil moveri putabant_), _Stob. Ecl._, i. 21. Light is
also thrown here upon the beautiful passage of Empedocles which Plutarch
has preserved for us in the book, “_Adversus Coloten_,” c. 12:—


    “Νηπιοι; ου γαρ σφιν δολιχοφρονες εισι μεριμναι,
    Οἱ δη γινεσθαι παρος ουκ εον ελπιζουσι,
    Η τι καταθνησκειν και εξολλυσθαι ἁπαντη.
    Ουκ αν ανηρ τοιαυτα σοφος φρεσι μαντευσαιτο,
    Ὡς οφρα μεν τε βιωσι (το δη βιοτον καλεουσι),
    Τοφρα μεν ουν εισιν, και σφιν παρα δεινα και ἐσθλα
    Πριν τε παγεν τε βροτοι, και επει λυθεν, ουδεν αρ᾽ ἐισιν.”

    _(Stulta, et prolixas non admittentia curas_
    _Pectora: qui sperant, existere posse, quod ante_
    _Non fuit, aut ullam rem pessum protinus ire_;—
    _Non animo prudens homo quod præsentiat ullus_,
    _Dum vivunt (namque hoc vitaï nomine signant)_,
    _Sunt, et fortuna tum conflictantur utraque_:
    _Ante ortum nihil est homo, nec post funera quidquam.)_


The very remarkable and, in its place, astonishing passage in Diderot’s
“_Jacques le fataliste_,” deserves not less to be mentioned here: “_Un
château immense, au frontispice duquel on lisait: __‹ __Je n’appartiens à
personne, et j’appartiens à tout le monde: vous y étiez avant que d’y
entrer, vous y serez encore, quand vous en sortirez__ ›_.”

Certainly in the sense in which, when he is begotten, the man arises out
of nothing, he becomes nothing through death. But really to learn to know
this “nothing” would be very interesting; for it only requires moderate
acuteness to see that this empirical nothing is by no means absolute,
_i.e._, such as would in every sense be nothing. We are already led to
this insight by the observation that all qualities of the parents recur in
the children, thus have overcome death. Of this, however, I will speak in
a special chapter.

There is no greater contrast than that between the ceaseless flight of
time, which carries its whole content with it, and the rigid immobility of
what is actually present, which at all times is one and the same. And if
from this point of view we watch in a purely objective manner the
immediate events of life, the _Nunc stans_ becomes clear and visible to us
in the centre of the wheel of time. To the eye of a being of incomparably
longer life, which at _one_ glance comprehended the human race in its
whole duration, the constant alternation of birth and death would present
itself as a continuous vibration, and accordingly it would not occur to it
at all to see in this an ever new arising out of nothing and passing into
nothing; but just as to our sight the quickly revolving spark appears as a
continuous circle, the rapidly vibrating spring as a permanent triangle,
the vibrating cord as a spindle, so to this eye the species would appear
as that which has being and permanence, death and life as vibrations.

We will have false conceptions of the indestructibility of our true nature
by death, so long as we do not make up our minds to study it primarily in
the brutes, but claim for ourselves alone a class apart from them, under
the boastful name of immortality. But it is this pretension alone, and the
narrowness of view from which it proceeds, on account of which most men
struggle so obstinately against the recognition of the obvious truth that
we are essentially, and in the chief respect, the same as the brutes; nay,
that they recoil at every hint of our relationship with these. But it is
this denial of the truth which more than anything else closes against them
the path to real knowledge of the indestructibility of our nature. For if
we seek anything upon a wrong path, we have just on that account forsaken
the right path, and upon the path we follow we will never attain to
anything in the end but late disillusion. Up, then, follow the truth, not
according to preconceived notions, but as nature leads! First of all,
learn to recognise in the aspect of every young animal the existence of
the species that never grows old, which, as a reflection of its eternal
youth, imparts to every individual a temporary youth, and lets it come
forth as new and fresh as if the world were of to‐day. Let one ask himself
honestly whether the swallow of this year’s spring is absolutely a
different one from the swallow of the first spring, and whether really
between the two the miracle of the creation out of nothing has repeated
itself millions of times, in order to work just as often into the hands of
absolute annihilation. I know well that if I seriously assured any one
that the cat which now plays in the yard is still the same one which made
the same springs and played the same tricks there three hundred years ago,
he would think I was mad; but I also know that it is much madder to
believe that the cat of to‐day is through and through and in its whole
nature quite a different one from the cat of three hundred years ago. One
only requires truly and seriously to sink oneself in the contemplation of
one of these higher vertebrates in order to become distinctly conscious
that this unfathomable nature, taken as a whole, as it exists there,
cannot possibly become nothing; and yet, on the other hand, one knows its
transitoriness. This depends upon the fact that in this animal the
infinite nature of its Idea (species) is imprinted in the finiteness of
the individual. For in a certain sense it is of course true that in the
individual we always have before us another being—in the sense which
depends upon the principle of sufficient reason, in which are also
included time and space, which constitute the _principium
individuationis_. But in another sense it is not true—in the sense in
which reality belongs to the permanent forms of things, the Ideas alone,
and which was so clearly evident to Plato that it became his fundamental
thought, the centre of his philosophy; and he made the comprehension of it
the criterion of capacity for philosophising in general.

As the scattered drops of the roaring waterfall change with lightning
rapidity, while the rainbow, whose supporter they are, remains immovably
at rest, quite untouched by that ceaseless change, so every Idea, _i.e._,
every species of living creature remains quite untouched by the continual
change of its individuals. But it is the Idea, or the species in which the
will to live is really rooted, and manifests itself; and therefore also
the will is only truly concerned in the continuance of the species. For
example, the lions which are born and die are like the drops of the
waterfall; but the _leonitas_, the Idea or form of the lion, is like the
unshaken rainbow upon it. Therefore Plato attributed true being to the
Ideas alone, _i.e._, to the species; to the individuals only a ceaseless
arising and passing away. From the profound consciousness of his
imperishable nature really springs also the confidence and peace of mind
with which every brute, and even human individual, moves unconcernedly
along amid a host of chances, which may annihilate it any moment, and,
moreover, moves straight on to death: out of its eyes, however, there
shines the peace of the species, which that death does not affect, and
does not concern. Even to man this peace could not be imparted by
uncertain and changing dogmas. But, as was said, the contemplation of
every animal teaches that death is no obstacle to the kernel of life, to
the will in its manifestation. What an unfathomable mystery lies, then, in
every animal! Look at the nearest one; look at your dog, how cheerfully
and peacefully he lives! Many thousands of dogs have had to die before it
came to this one’s turn to live. But the death of these thousands has not
affected the Idea of the dog; it has not been in the least disturbed by
all that dying. Therefore the dog exists as fresh and endowed with
primitive force as if this were its first day and none could ever be its
last; and out of its eyes there shines the indestructible principle in it,
the archæus. What, then, has died during those thousands of years? Not the
dog—it stands unscathed before us; merely its shadow, its image in our
form of knowledge, which is bound to time. Yet how can one even believe
that that passes away which for ever and ever exists and fills all time?
Certainly the matter can be explained empirically; in proportion as death
destroyed the individuals, generation produced new ones. But this
empirical explanation is only an apparent explanation: it puts one riddle
in the place of the other. The metaphysical understanding of the matter,
although not to be got so cheaply, is yet the only true and satisfying
one.

Kant, in his subjective procedure, brought to light the truth that time
cannot belong to the thing in itself, because it lies pre‐formed in our
apprehension. Now death is the temporal end of the temporal phenomenon;
but as soon as we abstract time, there is no longer any end, and this word
has lost all significance. But I, here upon the objective path, am trying
to show the positive side of the matter, that the thing in itself remains
untouched by time, and by that which is only possible through time,
arising and passing away, and that the phenomena in time could not have
even that ceaselessly fleeting existence which stands next to nothingness,
if there were not in them a kernel of the infinite. Eternity is certainly
a conception which has no perception as its foundation; accordingly it has
also a merely negative content; it signifies a timeless existence. Time is
yet merely an image of eternity, ὁ χρονος εἰκων τον αἰωνος, as Plotinus
has it; and in the same way our temporal existence is a mere image of our
true nature. This must lie in eternity, just because time is only the form
of our knowledge; but on account of this alone do we know our own
existence, and that of all things as transitory, finite, and subject to
annihilation.

In the second book I have shown that the adequate objectivity of the will
as the thing in itself, at each of its grades, is the (Platonic) Idea;
similarly in the third book that the Ideas of things have the pure subject
of knowledge as their correlative; consequently the knowledge of them only
appears exceptionally and temporarily under specially favourable
conditions. For individual knowledge, on the other hand, thus in time, the
_Idea_ presents itself under the form of the _species_, which is the Idea
broken up through its entrance into time. Therefore the species is the
most immediate objectification of the thing in itself, _i.e._, of the will
to live. The inmost nature of every brute, and also of man, accordingly
lies in the species; thus the will to live, which is so powerfully active,
is rooted in this, not really in the individual. On the other hand, in the
individual alone lies the immediate consciousness: accordingly it imagines
itself different from the species, and therefore fears death. The will to
live manifests itself in relation to the individual as hunger and the fear
of death: in relation to the species as sexual instinct and passionate
care for the offspring. In agreement with this we find nature, which is
free from that delusion of the individual, as careful for the maintenance
of the species as it is indifferent to the destruction of the individuals:
the latter are always only means, the former is the end. Therefore a
glaring contrast appears between its niggardliness in the endowment of the
individuals and its prodigality when the species is concerned. In the
latter case from _one_ individual are often annually obtained a hundred
thousand germs, and more; for example, from trees, fishes, crabs,
termites, and many others. In the former case, on the contrary, only
barely enough in the way of powers and organs is given to each to enable
it with ceaseless effort to maintain its life. And, therefore, if an
animal is injured or weakened it must, as a rule, starve. And where an
incidental saving was possible, through the circumstance that one part
could upon necessity be dispensed with, it has been withheld, even out of
order. Hence, for example, many caterpillars are without eyes; the poor
creatures grope in the dark from leaf to leaf, which, since they lack
feelers, they do by moving three‐fourths of their body back and forward in
the air, till they find some object. Hence they often miss their food
which is to be found close by. But this happens in consequence of the _lex
parsimoniæ naturæ_, to the expression of which _natura nihil facit
supervacaneum_ one may add _et nihil largitur_. The same tendency of
nature shows itself also in the fact that the more fit the individual is,
on account of his age, for the propagation of the species, the more
powerfully does the _vis naturæ medicatrix_ manifest itself in him, and
therefore his wounds heal easily, and he easily recovers from diseases.
This diminishes along with the power of generation, and sinks low after it
is extinct; for now in the eyes of nature the individual has become
worthless.

If now we cast another glance at the scale of existences, with the whole
of their accompanying gradations of consciousness, from the polyp up to
man, we see this wonderful pyramid, kept in ceaseless oscillation
certainly by the constant death of the individuals, yet by means of the
bond of generation, enduring in the species through the infinite course of
time. While, then, as was explained above, the _objective_, the species,
presents itself as indestructible, the _subjective_, which consists merely
in the self‐consciousness of these beings, seems to be of the shortest
duration, and to be unceasingly destroyed, in order, just as often, to
come forth again from nothing in an incomprehensible manner. But, indeed,
one must be very short‐sighted to let oneself be deceived by this
appearance, and not to comprehend that, although the form of temporal
permanence only belongs to the objective, the subjective, _i.e._, the
will, which lives and manifests itself in all, and with it the subject of
the _knowledge_ in which all exhibits itself, must be not less
indestructible; because the permanence of the objective, or external, can
yet only be the phenomenal appearance of the indestructibility of the
subjective or internal; for the former can possess nothing which it has
not received on loan from the latter; and cannot be essentially and
originally an objective, a phenomenon, and then secondarily and
accidentally a subjective, a thing in itself, a self‐consciousness. For
clearly the former as a manifestation presupposes something which
manifests itself, as being for other presupposes a being for self, and as
object presupposes a subject; and not conversely: because everywhere the
root of things must lie in that which they are for themselves, thus in the
subjective, not in the objective, _i.e._, in that which they are only for
others, in a foreign consciousness. Accordingly we found in the first book
that the right starting‐point for philosophy is essentially and
necessarily the subjective, _i.e._, the idealistic starting‐point; and
also that the opposite starting‐point, that which proceeds from the
objective, leads to materialism. At bottom, however, we are far more one
with the world than we commonly suppose: its inner nature is our will, its
phenomenal appearance is our idea. For any one who could bring this unity
of being to distinct consciousness, the difference between the continuance
of the external world after his death and his own continuance after death
would vanish. The two would present themselves to him as one and the same;
nay, he would laugh at the delusion that could separate them. For the
understanding of the indestructibility of our nature coincides with that
of the identity of the macrocosm and the microcosm. Meanwhile one may
obtain light upon what is said here by a peculiar experiment, performed by
means of the imagination, an experiment which might be called
metaphysical. Let any one try to present vividly to his mind the time, in
any case not far distant, when he will be dead. Then he thinks himself
away and lets the world go on existing; but soon, to his own astonishment,
he will discover that he was nevertheless still there. For he intended to
present the world to his mind without himself; but the ego is the
immediate element in consciousness, through which alone the world is
brought about, and for which alone it exists. This centre of all
existence, this kernel of all reality, is to be abolished, and yet the
world is to go on existing; it is a thought which can be conceived in the
abstract, but not realised. The endeavour to accomplish this, the attempt
to think the secondary without the primary, the conditioned without the
condition, that which is supported without the supporter, always fails,
much in the same way as the attempt to think an equilateral, right‐angled
triangle, or a destruction or origination of matter, and similar
impossibilities. Instead of what was intended, the feeling here presses
upon us that the world is not less in us than we in it, and that the
source of all reality lies within us. The result is really this: the time
when I shall not be will objectively come; but subjectively it can never
come. It might therefore, indeed, be asked, how far every one, in his
heart, actually believes in a thing which he really cannot conceive at
all; or whether, since the profound consciousness of the
indestructibleness of our true nature associates itself with that merely
intellectual experiment, which, however, has already been made more or
less distinctly by every one, whether, I say, our own death is not perhaps
for us at bottom the most incredible thing in the world.

The deep conviction of the indestructibleness of our nature through death,
which, as is also shown by the inevitable qualms of conscience at its
approach, every one carries at the bottom of his heart, depends altogether
upon the consciousness of the original and eternal nature of our being:
therefore Spinoza expresses it thus: “_Sentimus, experimurque, nos æternos
esse_.” For a reasonable man can only think of himself as imperishable,
because he thinks of himself as without beginning, as eternal, in fact as
timeless. Whoever, on the other hand, regards himself as having become out
of nothing must also think that he will again become nothing; for that an
eternity had passed before he was, and then a second eternity had begun,
through which he will never cease to be, is a monstrous thought. Really
the most solid ground for our immortality is the old principle: “_Ex
nihilo nihil fit, et in nihilum nihil potest reverti_.” Theophrastus
Paracelsus very happily says (Works, Strasburg, 1603, vol. ii. p. 6): “The
soul in me has arisen out of something; therefore it does not come to
nothing; for it comes out of something.” He gives the true reason. But
whoever regards the birth of the man as his absolute beginning must regard
death as his absolute end. For both are what they are in the same sense;
consequently every one can only think of himself as _immortal_ so far as
he also thinks of himself as _unborn_, and in the same sense. What birth
is, that also is death, according to its nature and significance: it is
the same line drawn in two directions. If the former is an actual arising
out of nothing, then the latter is also an actual annihilation. But in
truth it is only by means of the _eternity_ of our real being that we can
conceive it as imperishable, and consequently this imperishableness is not
temporal. The assumption that man is made out of nothing leads necessarily
to the assumption that death is his absolute end. Thus in this the Old
Testament is perfectly consistent; for no doctrine of immortality is
suitable to a creation out of nothing. New Testament Christianity has such
a doctrine because it is Indian in spirit, and therefore more than
probably also of Indian origin, although only indirectly, through Egypt.
But to the Jewish stem, upon which that Indian wisdom had to be grafted in
the Holy Land, such a doctrine is as little suited as the freedom of the
will to its determinism, or as


    “_Humano capiti cervicem pictor equinam Jungere si velit._”


It is always bad if one cannot be thoroughly original, and dare not carve
out of the whole wood. Brahmanism and Buddhism, on the other hand, have
quite consistently, besides the continued existence after death, an
existence before birth to expiate the guilt of which we have this life.
Moreover, how distinctly conscious they were of the necessary consistency
in this is shown by the following passage from Colebrooke’s “History of
the Indian Philosophy” in the “Transac. of the Asiatic London Society,”
vol. i. p. 577: “Against the system of the Bhagavatas which is but
partially heretical, the objection upon which the chief stress is laid by
Vyaso is, that the soul would not be eternal if it were a production, and
consequently had a beginning.” Further, in Upham’s “Doctrine of Buddhism,”
p. 110, it is said: “The lot in hell of impious persons called Deitty is
the most severe: these are they who, discrediting the evidence of Buddha,
adhere to the heretical doctrine that all living beings had their
beginning in the mother’s womb, and will have their end in death.”

Whoever conceives his existence as merely accidental must certainly fear
that he will lose it by death. On the other hand, whoever sees, even only
in general, that his existence rests upon some kind of original necessity
will not believe that this which has produced so wonderful a thing is
limited to such a brief span of time, but that it is active in every one.
But he will recognise his existence as necessary who reflects that up till
now, when he exists, already an infinite time, thus also an infinity of
changes, has run its course, but in spite of this he yet exists; thus the
Whole range of all possible states has already exhausted itself without
being able to destroy his existence. _If he could ever not be, he would
already not be now._ For the infinity of the time that has already
elapsed, with the exhausted possibility of the events in it, guarantees
that _what exists, exists necessarily_. Therefore every one must conceive
himself as a necessary being, _i.e._, as a being whose existence would
follow from its true and exhaustive definition if one only had it. In this
line of thought, then, really lies the only immanent proof of the
imperishableness of our nature, _i.e._, the only proof of this that holds
good within the sphere of empirical data. In this nature existence must
inhere, because it shows itself as independent of all states which can
possibly be introduced through the chain of causes; for these states have
already done what they could, and yet our existence has remained unshaken
by it, as the ray of light by the storm wind which it cuts through. If
time, of its own resources, could bring us to a happy state, then we would
already have been there long ago; for an infinite time lies behind us. But
also: if it could lead us to destruction, we would already have long been
no more. From the fact that we now exist, it follows, if well considered,
that we must at all times exist. For we are ourselves the nature which
time has taken up into itself in order to fill its void; consequently it
fills the whole of time, present, past, and future, in the same way, and
it is just as impossible for us to fall out of existence as to fall out of
space. Carefully considered, it is inconceivable that what once exists in
all the strength of reality should ever become nothing, and then not be,
through an infinite time. Hence has arisen the Christian doctrine of the
restoration of all things, that of the Hindus of the constantly repeated
creation of the world by Brahma, together with similar dogmas of the Greek
philosophers. The great mystery of our being and not being, to explain
which these and all kindred dogmas have been devised, ultimately rests
upon the fact that the same thing which objectively constitutes an
infinite course of time is subjectively an indivisible, ever present
present: but who comprehends it? It has been most distinctly set forth by
Kant in his immortal doctrine of the ideality of time and the sole reality
of the thing in itself. For it results from this that the really essential
part of things, of man, of the world, lies permanently and enduringly in
the _Nunc stans_, firm and immovable; and that the change of the phenomena
and events is a mere consequence of our apprehension of them by means of
our form of perception, which is time. Accordingly, instead of saying to
men, “Ye have arisen through birth, but are immortal,” one ought to say to
them, “Ye are not nothing,” and teach them to understand this in the sense
of the saying attributed to Hermes Trismegistus, “Το γαρ ὀν ἀει ἐσται”
(_Quod enim est, erit semper_), _Stob. Ecl._, i. 43, 6. If, however, this
does not succeed, but the anxious heart raises its old lament, “I see all
beings arise through birth out of nothing, and after a brief term again
return to this; my existence also, now in the present, will soon lie in
the distant past, and I will be nothing!”—the right answer is, “Dost thou
not exist? Hast thou not within thee the valuable present, after which ye
children of time so eagerly strive, now within, actually within? And dost
thou understand how thou hast attained to it? Knowest thou the paths which
have led thee to it, that thou canst know they will be shut against thee
by death? An existence of thyself after the destruction of thy body is not
conceivable by thee as possible; but can it be more inconceivable to thee
than thy present existence, and how thou hast attained to it? Why shouldst
thou doubt but that the secret paths to this present, which stood open to
thee, will also stand open to every future present?”

If, then, considerations of this kind are at any rate adapted to awaken
the conviction that there is something in us which death cannot destroy,
this yet only takes place by raising us to a point of view from which
birth is not the beginning of our existence. But from this it follows that
what is proved to be indestructible by death is not properly the
individual, which, moreover, as having arisen through generation, and
having in itself the qualities of the father and mother, presents itself
as a mere difference of the species, but as such can only be finite. As,
in accordance with this, the individual has no recollection of its
existence before its birth, so it can have no remembrance of its present
existence after death. But every one places his ego in _consciousness_;
this seems to him therefore to be bound to individuality, with which,
besides, everything disappears which is peculiar to him, as to this, and
distinguishes him from others. His continued existence without
individuality becomes to him therefore indistinguishable from the
continuance of other beings, and he sees his ego sink. But whoever thus
links his existence to the identity of consciousness, and therefore
desires an endless existence after death for this, ought to reflect that
he can certainly only attain this at the price of just as endless a past
before birth. For since he has no remembrance of an existence before
birth, thus his consciousness begins with birth, he must accept his birth
as an origination of his existence out of nothing. But then he purchases
the endless time of his existence after death for just as long a time
before birth; thus the account balances without any profit for him. If, on
the other hand, the existence which death leaves untouched is different
from that of the individual consciousness, then it must be independent of
birth, just as of death; and therefore, with regard to it, it must be
equally true to say, “I will always be,” and “I have always been;” which
then gives two infinities for one. But the great equivocation really lies
in the word “I,” as any one will see at once who remembers the contents of
our second book, and the separation which is made there of the willing
from the knowing part of our nature. According as I understand this word I
can say, “Death is my complete end;” or, “This my personal phenomenal
existence is just as infinitely small a part of my true nature as I am of
the world.” But the “I” is the dark point in consciousness, as on the
retina the exact point at which the nerve of sight enters is blind, as the
brain itself is entirely without sensation, the body of the sun is dark,
and the eye sees all except itself. Our faculty of knowledge is directed
entirely towards without, in accordance with the fact that it is the
product of a brain function, which has arisen for the purpose of mere
self‐maintenance, thus of the search for nourishment and the capture of
prey. Therefore every one knows himself only as this individual as it
presents itself in external perception. If, on the other hand, he could
bring to consciousness what he is besides and beyond this, then he would
willingly give up his individuality, smile at the tenacity of his
attachment to it, and say, “What is the loss of this individuality to me,
who bear in myself the possibility of innumerable individualities?” He
would see that even if a continued existence of his individuality does not
lie before him, it is yet quite as good as if he had such an existence,
because he carries in himself complete compensation for it. Besides,
however, it may further be taken into consideration that the individuality
of most men is so miserable and worthless that with it they truly lose
nothing, and that that in them which may still have some worth is the
universal human element; but to this imperishableness can be promised.
Indeed, even the rigid unalterableness and essential limitation of every
individual would, in the case of an endless duration of it, necessarily at
last produce such great weariness by its monotony that only to be relieved
of this one would prefer to become nothing. To desire that the
individuality should be immortal really means to wish to perpetuate an
error infinitely. For at bottom every individuality is really only a
special error, a false step, something that had better not be; nay,
something which it is the real end of life to bring us back from. This
also finds confirmation in the fact that the great majority, indeed really
all men, are so constituted that they could not be happy in whatever kind
of world they might be placed. In proportion as such a world excluded want
and hardship, they would become a prey to ennui, and in proportion as this
was prevented, they would fall into want, misery, and suffering. Thus for
a blessed condition of man it would be by no means sufficient that he
should be transferred to a “better world,” but it would also be necessary
that a complete change should take place in himself; that thus he should
no longer be what he is, and, on the contrary, should become what he is
not. But for this he must first of all cease to be what he is: this
desideratum is, as a preliminary, supplied by death, the moral necessity
of which can already be seen from this point of view. To be transferred to
another world and to have his whole nature changed are, at bottom, one and
the same. Upon this also ultimately rests that dependence of the objective
upon the subjective which the idealism of our first book shows.
Accordingly here lies the point at which the transcendent philosophy links
itself on to ethics. If one considers this one will find that the awaking
from the dream of life is only possible through the disappearance along
with it of its whole ground‐warp also, But this is its organ itself, the
intellect together with its forms, with which the dream would spin itself
out without end, so firmly is it incorporated with it. That which really
dreamt this dream is yet different from it, and alone remains over. On the
other hand, the fear that with death all will be over may be compared to
the case of one who imagines in a dream that there are only dreams without
a dreamer. But now, after an individual consciousness has once been ended
by death, would it even be desirable that it should be kindled again in
order to continue for ever? The greater part of its content, nay,
generally its whole content, is nothing but a stream of small, earthly,
paltry thoughts and endless cares. Let them, then, at last be stilled!
Therefore with a true instinct, the ancients inscribed upon their
gravestones: _Securitati perpetuæ_;—or _Bonæ quieti_. But if here, as so
often has happened, a continued existence of the individual consciousness
should be desired, in order to connect with it a future reward or
punishment, what would really be aimed at in this would simply be the
compatibility of virtue and egoism. But these two will never embrace: they
are fundamentally opposed. On the other hand, the conviction is well
founded, which the sight of noble conduct calls forth, that the spirit of
love, which enjoins one man to spare his enemy, and another to protect at
the risk of his life some one whom he has never seen before, can never
pass away and become nothing.

The most thorough answer to the question as to the continued existence of
the individual after death lies in Kant’s great doctrine of the _ideality
of time_, which just here shows itself specially fruitful and rich in
consequences, for it substitutes a purely theoretical but well‐proved
insight for dogmas which upon one path as upon the other lead to the
absurd, and thus settles at once the most exciting of all metaphysical
questions. Beginning, ending, and continuing are conceptions which derive
their significance simply and solely from time, and are therefore valid
only under the presupposition of this. But time has no absolute existence;
it is not the manner of being of the thing in itself, but merely the form
of our _knowledge_ of our existence and nature, and that of all things,
which is just on this account very imperfect, and is limited to mere
phenomena. Thus with reference to this knowledge alone do the conceptions
of ceasing and continuing find application, not with reference to that
which exhibits itself in these, the inner being of things in relation to
which these conceptions have therefore no longer any meaning. For this
shows itself also in the fact that an answer to the question which arises
from those time‐conceptions is impossible, and every assertion of such an
answer, whether upon one side or the other, is open to convincing
objections. One might indeed assert that our true being continues after
death because it is false that it is destroyed; but one might just as well
assert that it is destroyed because it is false that it continues: at
bottom the one is as true as the other. Accordingly something like an
antinomy might certainly be set up here. But it would rest upon mere
negations. In it one would deny two contradictorily opposite predicates of
the subject of the judgment, but only because the whole category of these
predicates would be inapplicable to that subject. But if now one denies
these two predicates, not together, but separately, it appears as if the
contradictory opposite of the predicate which in each case is denied were
proved of the subject of the judgment. This, however, depends upon the
fact that here incommensurable quantities are compared, for the problem
removes us to a scene where time is abolished, and yet asks about temporal
properties which it is consequently equally false to attribute to, or to
deny of the subject. This just means: the problem is transcendent. In this
sense death remains a mystery.

On the other hand, adhering to that distinction between phenomenon and
thing in itself, we can make the assertion that, as phenomenon, man is
certainly perishable, but yet his true being will not be involved in this.
Thus this true being is indestructible, although, on account of the
elimination of time‐conceptions which is connected with it, we cannot
attribute to it continuance. Accordingly we would be led here to the
conception of an indestructibility which would yet be no continuance. Now
this is a conception which, having been obtained on the path of
abstraction, can certainly also be thought in the abstract, but yet cannot
be supported by any perception, and consequently cannot really become
distinct; yet, on the other hand, we must here keep in mind that we have
not, like Kant, absolutely given up the knowledge of the thing in itself,
but know that it is to be sought for in the will. It is true that we have
never asserted an absolute and exhaustive knowledge of the thing in
itself, but rather have seen very well that it is impossible to know
anything as it is absolutely and in itself. For as soon as I _know_, I
have an idea; but this idea, just because it is _my_ idea, cannot be
identical with what is known, but repeats it in an entirely different
form, for it makes a being for other out of a being for self, and is thus
always to be regarded as a phenomenal appearance of the thing in itself.
Therefore for a _knowing_ consciousness, however it may be constituted,
there can be always only phenomena. This is not entirely obviated even by
the fact that it is my own nature which is known; for, since it falls
within my _knowing_ consciousness, it is already a reflex of my nature,
something different from this itself, thus already in a certain degree
phenomenon. So far, then, as I am a knowing being, I have even in my own
nature really only a phenomenon; so far, on the other hand, as I am
directly this nature itself, I am not a _knowing_ being. For it is
sufficiently proved in the second book that knowledge is only a secondary
property of our being, and introduced by its animal nature. Strictly
speaking, then, we know even our own will always merely as phenomenon, and
not as it may be absolutely in and for itself. But in that second book,
and also in my work upon the will in nature, it is fully explained and
proved that if, in order to penetrate into the inner nature of things,
leaving what is given merely indirectly and from without, we stick to the
only phenomenon into the nature of which an immediate insight from within
is attainable, we find in this quite definitely, as the ultimate kernel of
reality, the will, in which therefore we recognise the thing in itself in
so far as it has here no longer space, although it still has time, for its
form consequently really only in its most immediate manifestation, and
with the reservation that this knowledge of it is still not exhaustive and
entirely adequate. Thus in this sense we retain here also the conception
of will as that of the thing in itself.

The conception of ceasing to be is certainly applicable to man as a
phenomenon in time, and empirical knowledge plainly presents death as the
end of this temporal existence. The end of the person is just as real as
was its beginning, and in the same sense as before birth we were not,
after death we shall be no more. Yet no more can be destroyed by death
than was produced by birth; thus not that through which birth first became
possible. In this sense _natus et denatus_ is a beautiful expression. But
now the whole of empirical knowledge affords us merely phenomena;
therefore only phenomena are involved in the temporal processes of coming
into being and passing away, and not that which manifests itself in the
phenomena, the thing in itself. For this the opposition of coming into
being and passing away conditioned by the brain, does not exist at all,
but has here lost meaning and significance. It thus remains untouched by
the temporal end of a temporal phenomenon, and constantly retains that
existence to which the conceptions of beginning, end, and continuance are
not applicable. But the thing in itself, so far as we can follow it, is in
every phenomenal being the will of this being: so also in man.
Consciousness, on the other hand, consists in knowledge. But knowledge, as
activity of the brain, and consequently as function of the organism,
belongs, as has been sufficiently proved, to the mere phenomenon, and
therefore ends with this. The will alone, whose work, or rather whose
image was the body, is that which is indestructible. The sharp distinction
of will from knowledge, together with the primacy of the former, which
constitutes the fundamental characteristic of my philosophy, is therefore
the only key to the contradiction which presents itself in so many ways,
and arises ever anew in every consciousness, even the most crude, that
death is our end, and that yet we must be eternal and indestructible, thus
the _sentimus, experimurque nos æternos esse_ of Spinoza. All philosophers
have erred in this: they place the metaphysical, the indestructible, the
eternal element in man in the _intellect_. It lies exclusively in the
_will_, which is entirely different from the intellect, and alone is
original. The intellect, as was most fully shown in the second book, is a
secondary phenomenon, and conditioned by the brain, therefore beginning
and ending with this. The will alone is that which conditions, the kernel
of the whole phenomenon, consequently free from the forms of the
phenomenon to which time belongs, thus also indestructible. Accordingly
with death consciousness is certainly lost, but not that which produced
and sustained consciousness; life is extinguished, but not the principle
of life also, which manifested itself in it. Therefore a sure feeling
informs every one that there is something in him which is absolutely
imperishable and indestructible. Indeed the freshness and vividness of
memories of the most distant time, of earliest childhood, bears witness to
the fact that something in us does not pass away with time, does not grow
old, but endures unchanged. But what this imperishable element is one
could not make clear to oneself. It is not consciousness any more than it
is the body upon which clearly consciousness depends. But it is just that
which, when it appears in consciousness, presents itself as _will_. Beyond
this immediate manifestation of it we certainly cannot go; because we
cannot go beyond consciousness; therefore the question what that may be
when it does not come within consciousness, _i.e._, what it is absolutely
in itself, remains unanswerable.

In the phenomenon, and by means of its forms, time and space, as
_principium individuationis_, what presents itself is that the human
individual perishes, while the human race, on the contrary, always remains
and lives. But in the true being of things, which is free from these
forms, this whole distinction between the individual and the race also
disappears, and the two are immediately one. The whole will to live is in
the individual, as it is in the race, and therefore the continuance of the
species is merely the image of the indestructibility of the individual.

Since, then, the infinitely important understanding of the
indestructibility of our true nature by death depends entirely upon the
distinction between phenomenon and thing in itself, I wish now to bring
this difference into the clearest light by explaining it in the opposite
of death, thus in the origin of the animal existence, _i.e._, generation.
For this process, which is just as mysterious as death, presents to us
most directly the fundamental opposition between the phenomenal appearance
and the true being of things, _i.e._, between the world as idea and the
world as will, and also the entire heterogeneity of the laws of these two.
The act of procreation presents itself to us in a twofold manner: first,
for self‐consciousness, whose only object, as I have often shown, is the
will, with all its affections; and then for the consciousness of other
things, _i.e._, the world of idea, or the empirical reality of things.
Now, from the side of the will, thus inwardly, subjectively, for self‐
consciousness, that act presents itself as the most immediate and complete
satisfaction of the will, _i.e._, as sensual pleasure. From the side of
the idea, on the other hand, thus externally, objectively, for the
consciousness of other things, this act is just the woof of the most
cunning of webs, the foundation of the inexpressibly complicated animal
organism, which then only requires to be developed to become visible to
our astonished eyes. This organism, whose infinite complication and
perfection is only known to him who has studied anatomy, cannot, from the
side of the idea, be otherwise conceived and thought of than as a system
devised with the most ingenious forethought and carried out with the most
consummate skill and exactness, as the most arduous work of profound
reflection. But from the side of the will we know, through self‐
consciousness, the production of this organism as the work of an act which
is exactly the opposite of all reflection, an impetuous, blind impulse, an
exceedingly pleasurable sensation. This opposition is closely related to
the infinite contrast, which is shown above, between the absolute facility
with which nature produces its works, together with the correspondingly
boundless carelessness with which it abandons them to destruction, and the
incalculably ingenious and studied construction of these very works,
judging from which they must have been infinitely difficult to make, and
their maintenance should have been provided for with all conceivable care;
while we have the opposite before our eyes. If now by this certainly very
unusual consideration, we have brought together in the boldest manner the
two heterogeneous sides of the world, and, as it were, grasped them with
one hand, we must now hold them fast in order to convince ourselves of the
entire invalidity of the laws of the phenomenon, or the world as idea, for
that of will, or the thing in itself. Then it will become more
comprehensible to us that while on the side of the idea, that is, in the
phenomenal world, there exhibits itself to us now an arising out of
nothing, and now an entire annihilation of what has arisen, from that
other side, or in itself, a nature lies before us with reference to which
the conceptions of arising and passing away have no significance. For, by
going back to the root, where, by means of self‐consciousness, the
phenomenon and the thing in itself meet, we have just, as it were,
palpably apprehended that the two are absolutely incommensurable, and the
whole manner of being of the one, together with all the fundamental laws
of its being, signify nothing, and less than nothing, in the other. I
believe that this last consideration will only be rightly understood by a
few, and that it will be displeasing and even offensive to all who do not
understand it, but I shall never on this account omit anything that can
serve to illustrate my fundamental thought.

At the beginning of this chapter I have explained that the great clinging
to life, or rather fear of death, by no means springs from knowledge, in
which case it would be the result of the known value of life; but that
that fear of death has its root directly in the _will_, out of the
original nature of which it proceeds, in which it is entirely without
knowledge, and therefore blind will to live. As we are allured into life
by the wholly illusory inclination to sensual pleasure, so we are retained
in it by the fear of death, which is certainly just as illusory. Both
spring directly from the will, which in itself is unconscious. If, on the
contrary, man were merely a _knowing_ being, then death would necessarily
be to him not only indifferent, but even welcome. The reflection to which
we have here attained now teaches that what is affected by death is merely
the _knowing_ consciousness, and the will, on the other hand, because it
is the thing in itself, which lies at the foundation of every phenomenon,
is free from all that depends upon temporal determinations, thus is also
imperishable. Its striving towards existence and manifestation, from which
the world results, is constantly satisfied, for this accompanies it as the
shadow accompanies the body, for it is merely the visibility of its
nature. That yet in us it fears death results from the fact that here
knowledge presents its existence to it as merely in the individual
phenomenon, whence the illusion arises that it will perish with this, as
my image in a mirror seems to be destroyed along with it if the mirror is
broken; this then, as contrary to its original nature, which is a blind
striving towards existence, fills it with horror. From this now it follows
that that in us which alone is capable of fearing death, and also alone
fears it, the _will_, is not affected by it; and that, on the other hand,
what is affected by it and really perishes is that which from its nature
is capable of no fear, and in general of no desire or emotion, and is
therefore indifferent to being and not being, the mere subject of
knowledge, the intellect, whose existence consists in its relation to the
world of idea, _i.e._, the objective world, whose correlative it is, and
with whose existence its own is ultimately one. Thus, although the
individual consciousness does not survive death, yet that survives it
which alone struggles against it—the will. This also explains the
contradiction that from the standpoint of knowledge philosophers have
always proved with cogent reasons that death is no evil; yet the fear of
death remains inevitable for all, because it is rooted, not in knowledge,
but in the will. It is also a result of the fact that only the will, and
not the intellect, is indestructible, that all religions and philosophies
promise a reward in eternity only to the virtues of the will, or heart,
not to those of the intellect, or head.

The following may also serve to illustrate this consideration. The will,
which constitutes our true being, is of a simple nature; it merely wills,
and does not know. The subject of knowledge, on the other hand, is a
secondary phenomenon, arising from the objectification of the will; it is
the point of unity of the sensibility of the nervous system, as it were
the focus in which the rays of the activity of all the parts of the brain
unite. With this, then, it must perish. In self‐consciousness, as that
which alone knows, it stands over against the will as its spectator, and,
although sprung from it, knows it as something different from itself,
something foreign to it, and consequently also only empirically, in time,
by degrees, in its successive excitements and acts, and also learns its
decisions only _a posteriori_, and often very indirectly. This explains
the fact that our own nature is a riddle to us, _i.e._, to our intellect,
and that the individual regards itself as having newly arisen and as
perishable; although its true nature is independent of time, thus is
eternal. As now the _will_ does not _know_, so conversely the intellect,
or the subject of knowledge, is simply and solely _knowing_, without ever
_willing_. This can be proved even physically in the fact that, as was
already mentioned in the second book, according to Bichat, the various
emotions directly affect all parts of the organism and disturb their
functions, with the exception of the brain, which can only be affected by
them very indirectly, _i.e._, just in consequence of those disturbances
(_De la vie et de la mort_, art. 6, § 2). But from this it follows that
the subject of knowledge, for itself and as such, cannot take part or
interest in anything, but for it the being or not being of everything,
nay, even of its own self, is a matter of indifference. Now why should
this purely neutral being be immortal? It ends with the temporal
manifestation of the will, _i.e._, the individual, as it arose with it. It
is the lantern which is extinguished when it has served its end. The
intellect, like the perceptible world which exists only in it, is a mere
phenomenon; but the finiteness of both does not affect that of which they
are the phenomenal appearance. The intellect is the function of the
cerebral nervous system; but the latter, like the rest of the body, is the
objectivity of the _will_. Therefore the intellect depends upon the
somatic life of the organism; but this itself depends upon the will. The
organised body may thus, in a certain sense, be regarded as the link
between the will and the intellect; although really it is only the will
itself exhibiting itself spatially in the perception of the intellect.
Death and birth are the constant renewal of the consciousness of the will,
in itself without end and without beginning, which alone is, as it were,
the substance of existence (but each such renewal brings a new possibility
of the denial of the will to live). Consciousness is the life of the
subject of knowledge, or the brain, and death is its end. And therefore,
finally, consciousness is always new, in each case beginning at the
beginning. The will alone is permanent; and, moreover, it is it alone that
permanence concerns; for it is the will to live. The knowing subject for
itself is not concerned about anything. In the ego, however, the two are
bound up together. In every animal existence the will has achieved an
intellect which is the light by which it here pursues its ends. It may be
remarked by the way that the fear of death may also partly depend upon the
fact that the individual will is so loath to separate from the intellect
which has fallen to its lot through the course of nature, its guide and
guard, without which it knows that it is helpless and blind.

Finally, this explanation also agrees with the commonplace moral
experience which teaches us that the will alone is real, while its
objects, on the other hand, as conditioned by knowledge, are only
phenomena, are only froth and vapour, like the wine which Mephistopheles
provided in Auerbach’s cellar: after every sensuous pleasure we also say,
“And yet it seemed as I were drinking wine.”

The terrors of death depend for the most part upon the false illusion that
now the ego vanishes and the world remains. But rather is the opposite the
case; the world vanishes, but the inmost kernel of the ego, the supporter
and producer of that subject, in whose idea alone the world has its
existence, remains. With the brain the intellect perishes, and with the
intellect the objective world, its mere idea. That in other brains,
afterwards as before, a similar world lives and moves is, with reference
to the intellect which perishes, a matter of indifference. If, therefore,
reality proper did not lie in the _will_, and if the moral existence were
not that which extends beyond death, then, since the intellect, and with
it its world, is extinguished, the true nature of things in general would
be no more than an endless succession of short and troubled dreams,
without connection among themselves; for the permanence of unconscious
nature consists merely in the idea of time of conscious nature. Thus a
world‐spirit dreaming without end or aim, dreams which for the most part
are very troubled and heavy, would then be all in all.

When, now, an individual experiences the fear of death, we have really
before us the extraordinary, nay, absurd, spectacle of the lord of the
worlds, who fills all with his being, and through whom alone everything
that is has its existence, desponding and afraid of perishing, of sinking
into the abyss of eternal nothingness;—while, in truth, all is full of
him, and there is no place where he is not, no being in which he does not
live; for it is not existence that supports him, but he that supports
existence. Yet it is he who desponds in the individual who suffers from
the fear of death, for he is exposed to the illusion produced by the
_principium individuationis_ that his existence is limited to the nature
which is now dying. This illusion belongs to the heavy dream into which,
as the will to live, he has fallen. But one might say to the dying
individual: “Thou ceasest to be something which thou hadst done better
never to become.”

So long as no denial of the will takes place, what death leaves untouched
is the germ and kernel of quite another existence, in which a new
individual finds itself again, so fresh and original that it broods over
itself in astonishment. What sleep is for the individual, death is for the
will as thing in itself. It would not endure to continue the same actions
and sufferings throughout an eternity without true gain, if memory and
individuality remained to it. It flings them off, and this is lethe; and
through this sleep of death it reappears refreshed and fitted out with
another intellect, as a new being—“a new day tempts to new shores.”

As the self‐asserting will to live man has the root of his existence in
the species. Accordingly death is the loss of one individuality and the
assumption of another, consequently a change of individuality under the
exclusive guidance of one’s own will. For in this alone lies the eternal
power which could produce its existence with its ego, yet, on account of
its nature, was not able to maintain it in existence. For death is the
_démenti_ which the essence (_essentia_) of every one receives in its
claim to existence (_existentia_), the appearance of a contradiction which
lies in every individual existence:


          “For all that arises
    Is worthy of being destroyed.”


But an infinite number of such existences, each with its ego, stands
within reach of this power, thus of the will, which, however, will again
prove just as transitory and perishable. Since now every ego has its
separate consciousness, that infinite number of them is, with reference to
such an ego, not different from a single one. From this point of view it
appears to me not accidental that _ævum_, αἰων, signifies both the
individual term of life and infinite time. Indeed from this point of view
it may be seen, although indistinctly, that ultimately and in themselves
both are the same; and according to this there would really be no
difference whether I existed only through my term of life or for an
infinite time.

Certainly, however, we cannot obtain an idea of all that is said above
entirely without time‐concepts; yet when we are dealing with the thing in
itself these ought to be excluded. But it belongs to the unalterable
limitations of our intellect that it can never entirely cast off this
first and most immediate form of all its ideas, in order to operate
without it. Therefore we certainly come here upon a kind of
metempsychosis, although with the important difference that it does not
concern the whole ψυχη, not the _knowing_ being, but the _will_ alone; and
thus, with the consciousness that the form of time only enters here as an
unavoidable concession to the limitation of our intellect, so many
absurdities which accompany the doctrine of metempsychosis disappear. If,
indeed, we now call in the assistance of the fact, to be explained in
chapter 43, that the character, _i.e._, the will, is inherited from the
father, and the intellect, on the other hand, from the mother, it agrees
very well with our view that the will of a man, in itself individual,
separated itself in death from the intellect received from the mother in
generation, and in accordance with its now modified nature, under the
guidance of the absolutely necessary course of the world harmonising with
this, received through a new generation a new intellect, with which it
became a new being, which had no recollection of an earlier existence; for
the intellect, which alone has the faculty of memory, is the mortal part
or the form, while the will is the eternal part, the substance. In
accordance with this, this doctrine is more correctly denoted by the word
palingenesis than by metempsychosis. These constant new births, then,
constitute the succession of the life‐dreams of a will which in itself is
indestructible, until, instructed and improved by so much and such various
successive knowledge in a constantly new form, it abolishes or abrogates
itself.

The true and, so to speak, esoteric doctrine of Buddhism, as we have come
to know it through the latest investigations, also agrees with this view,
for it teaches not metempsychosis, but a peculiar palingenesis, resting
upon a moral basis which it works out and explains with great profundity.
This may be seen from the exposition of the subject, well worth reading
and pondering, which is given in Spence Hardy’s “Manual of Buddhism,” pp.
394‐96 (with which compare pp. 429, 440, and 445 of the same book), the
confirmation of which is to be found in Taylor’s “_Prabodh Chandro Daya_,”
London, 1812, p. 35; also in Sangermano’s “Burmese Empire,” p. 6, and in
the “Asiatic Researches,” vol. vi. p. 179, and vol. ix. p. 256. The very
useful German compendium of Buddhism by Köppen is also right upon this
point. Yet for the great mass of Buddhists this doctrine is too subtle;
therefore to them simple metempsychosis is preached as a comprehensible
substitute.

Besides, it must not be neglected that even empirical grounds support a
palingenesis of this kind. As a matter of fact there does exist a
connection between the birth of the newly appearing beings and the death
of those that are worn out. It shows itself in the great fruitfulness of
the human race which appears as a consequence of devastating diseases.
When in the fourteenth century the black death had for the most part
depopulated the old world, a quite abnormal fruitfulness appeared among
the human race, and twin‐births were very frequent. The circumstance was
also very remarkable that none of the children born at this time obtained
their full number of teeth; thus nature, exerting itself to the utmost,
was niggardly in details. This is related by F. Schnurrer, “_Chronik der
Seuchen_,” 1825. Casper also, “_Ueber die wahrscheinliche Lebensdauer des
Menschen_,” 1835, confirms the principle that the number of births in a
given population has the most decided influence upon the length of life
and mortality in it, as this always keeps pace with the mortality: so that
always and everywhere the deaths and the births increase and decrease in
like proportion; which he places beyond doubt by an accumulation of
evidence collected from many lands and their various provinces. And yet it
is impossible that there can be a _physical_ causal connection between my
early death and the fruitfulness of a marriage with which I have nothing
to do, or conversely. Thus here the metaphysical appears undeniably and in
a stupendous manner as the immediate ground of explanation of the
physical. Every new‐born being indeed comes fresh and blithe into the new
existence, and enjoys it as a free gift: but there is, and can be, nothing
freely given. Its fresh existence is paid for by the old age and death of
a worn‐out existence which has perished, but which contained the
indestructible seed out of which this new existence has arisen: they are
_one_ being. To show the bridge between the two would certainly be the
solution of a great riddle.

The great truth which is expressed here has never been entirely
unacknowledged, although it could not be reduced to its exact and correct
meaning, which is only possible through the doctrine of the primacy and
metaphysical nature of the will and the secondary, merely organic nature
of the intellect. We find the doctrine of metempsychosis, springing from
the earliest and noblest ages of the human race, always spread abroad in
the earth as the belief of the great majority of mankind, nay, really as
the teaching of all religions, with the exception of that of the Jews and
the two which have proceeded from it: in the most subtle form, however,
and coming nearest to the truth, as has already been mentioned, in
Buddhism. Accordingly, while Christians console themselves with the
thought of meeting again in another world, in which one regains one’s
complete personality and knows oneself at once, in those other religions
the meeting again is already going on now, only incognito. In the
succession of births, and by virtue of metempsychosis or palingenesis, the
persons who now stand in close connection or contact with us will also be
born along with us at the next birth, and will have the same or analogous
relations and sentiments towards us as now, whether these are of a
friendly or a hostile description. (_Cf._, for example, Spence Hardy’s
“Manual of Buddhism,” p. 162.) Recognition is certainly here limited to an
obscure intimation, a reminiscence which cannot be brought to distinct
consciousness, and refers to an infinitely distant time;—with the
exception, however, of Buddha himself, who has the prerogative of
distinctly knowing his own earlier births and those of others;—as this is
described in the “Jâtaka.” But, in fact, if at favourable moment one
contemplates, in a purely objective manner, the action of men in reality;
the intuitive conviction is forced upon one that it not only is and
remains constantly the same, according to the (Platonic) Idea, but also
that the present generation, in its true inner nature, is precisely and
substantially identical with every generation that has been before it. The
question simply is in what this true being consists. The answer which my
doctrine gives to this question is well known. The intuitive conviction
referred to may be conceived as arising from the fact that the
multiplying‐glasses, time and space, lose for a moment their effect. With
reference to the universality of the belief in metempsychosis, Obry says
rightly, in his excellent book, “_Du Nirvana Indien_,” p. 13: “_Cette
vieille croyance a fait le tour du monde, et était tellement répandue dans
la haute antiquité, qu’un docte Anglican l’avait jugée sans père, sans
mère, et sans généalogie_” (_Ths. Burnet, dans Beausobre, Hist. du
Manichéisme_, ii. p. 391). Taught already in the "Vedas," as in all the
sacred books of India, metempsychosis is well known to be the kernel of
Brahmanism and Buddhism. It accordingly prevails at the present day in the
whole of non‐Mohammedan Asia, thus among more than half of the whole human
race, as the firmest conviction, and with an incredibly strong practical
influence. It was also the belief of the Egyptians (Herod., ii. 123), from
whom it was received with enthusiasm by Orpheus. Pythagoras, and Plato:
the Pythagoreans, however, specially retained it. That it was also taught
in the mysteries of the Greeks undeniably follows from the ninth book of
Plato’s “Laws” (pp. 38 and 42, ed. Bip.) Nemesius indeed (_De nat. hom._,
c. 2) says: “Κοινη μεν οὐν παντες Ἑλληνες, οἱ την ψυχην αθανατον
αποφηναμενοι, την μετενσωματωσιν δογματιζουσι.” (_Communiter igitur omnes
Græci, qui animam immortalem statuerunt, eam de uno corpore in aliud
transferri censuerunt._) The “Edda” also, especially in the “Völuspá,”
teaches metempsychosis. Not less was it the foundation of the religion of
the Druids (_Cæs. de bello Gall._, vi.; _A. Pictet, Le mystère des Bardes
de l’ile de Bretagne_, 1856). Even a Mohammedan sect in Hindostan, the
Bohrahs, of which Colebrooke gives a full account in the “Asiatic
Researches,” vol. vii. p. 336 _sqq._, believes in metempsychosis, and
accordingly refrains from all animal food. Also among American Indians and
negro tribes, nay, even among the natives of Australia, traces of this
belief are found, as appears from a minute description given in the
_Times_ of 29th January 1841 of the execution of two Australian savages
for arson and murder. It is said there: “The younger of the two prisoners
met his end with a dogged and a determined spirit, as it appeared, of
revenge; the only intelligible expressions made use of conveyed an
impression that he would rise up a ‘white fellow,’ which it was considered
strengthened his resolution.” Also in a book by Ungewitter, “_Der
Welttheil Australien_,” it is related that the Papuas in Australia
regarded the whites as their own relations who had returned to the world.
According to all this, the belief in metempsychosis presents itself as the
natural conviction of man, whenever he reflects at all in an unprejudiced
manner. It would really be that which Kant falsely asserts of his three
pretended Ideas of the reason, a philosopheme natural to human reason,
which proceeds from its forms; and when it is not found it must have been
displaced by positive religious doctrines coming from a different source.
I have also remarked that it is at once obvious to every one who hears of
it for the first time. Let any one only observe how earnestly Lessing
defends it in the last seven paragraphs of his “_Erziehung des
Menschengeschlechts_.” Lichtenberg also says in his
“_Selbstcharacteristik_:” “I cannot get rid of the thought that I died
before I was born.” Even the excessively empirical Hume says in his
sceptical essay on immortality, p. 23: “The metempsychosis is therefore
the only system of this kind that philosophy can hearken to.”(31) What
resists this belief, which is spread over the whole human race and
commends itself alike to the wise and to the vulgar, is Judaism, together
with the two religions which have sprung from it, because they teach the
creation of man out of nothing, and he has then the hard task of linking
on to this the belief in an endless existence _a parte post_. They
certainly have succeeded, with fire and sword, in driving out of Europe
and part of Asia that consoling primitive belief of mankind; it is still
doubtful for how long. Yet how difficult this was is shown by the oldest
Church histories. Most of the heretics were attached to this primitive
belief; for example, Simonists, Basilidians, Valentinians, Marcionists,
Gnostics, and Manichæans. The Jews themselves have in part fallen into it,
as Tertullian and Justinus (in his dialogues) inform us. In the Talmud it
is related that Abel’s soul passed into the body of Seth, and then into
that of Moses. Even the passage of the Bible, Matt. xvi. 13‐15, only
obtains a rational meaning if we understand it as spoken under the
assumption of the dogma of metempsychosis. Luke, it is true, who also has
the passage (ix. 18‐20), adds the words ὁτι προφητης τις των αρχαιων
ανεστῃ, and thus attributes to the Jews the assumption that such an
ancient prophet can rise again body and all, which, since they know that
he has already lain between six and seven hundred years in his grave, and
consequently has long since turned to dust, would be a palpable absurdity.
In Christianity, however, the doctrine of original sin, _i.e._, the
doctrine of punishment for the sins of another individual, has taken the
place of the transmigration of souls and the expiation in this way of all
the sins committed in an earlier life. Both identify, and that with a
moral tendency, the existing man with one who has existed before; the
transmigration of souls does so directly, original sin indirectly.

Death is the great reprimand which the will to live, or more especially
the egoism, which is essential to this, receives through the course of
nature; and it may be conceived as a punishment for our existence.(32) It
is the painful loosing of the knot which the act of generation had tied
with sensual pleasure, the violent destruction coming from without of the
fundamental error of our nature: the great disillusion. We are at bottom
something that ought not to be: therefore we cease to be. Egoism consists
really in the fact that man limits all reality to his own person, in that
he imagines that he lives in this alone and not in others. Death teaches
him better, for it destroys this person, so that the true nature of man,
which is his will, will henceforth live only in other individuals; while
his intellect, which itself belonged only to the phenomenon, _i.e._, to
the world as idea, and was merely the form of the external world, also
continues to exist in the condition of being idea, _i.e._, in the
_objective_ being of things as such, thus also only in the existence of
what was hitherto the external world. His whole ego thus lives from this
time forth only in that which he had hitherto regarded as non‐ego: for the
difference between external and internal ceases. We call to mind here that
the better man is he who makes the least difference between himself and
others, does not regard them as absolute non‐ego, while for the bad man
this difference is great, nay, absolute. I have worked this out in my
prize essay on the foundation of morals. According to what was said above,
the degree in which death can be regarded as the annihilation of the man
is in proportion to this difference. But if we start from the fact that
the distinction of outside me and in me, as a spatial distinction, is only
founded in the phenomenon, not in the thing in itself, thus is no
absolutely real distinction, then we shall see in the losing of our own
individuality only the loss of a phenomenon, thus only an apparent loss.
However much reality that distinction has in the empirical consciousness,
yet from the metaphysical standpoint the propositions, “I perish, but the
world endures,” and “The world perishes but I endure,” are at bottom not
really different.

But, besides all this, death is the great opportunity no longer to be
I;—to him who uses it. During life the will of man is without freedom: his
action takes place with necessity upon the basis of his unalterable
character in the chain of motives. But every one remembers much that he
has done, and on account of which he is by no means satisfied with
himself. If now he were to go on living, he would go on acting in the same
way, on account of the unalterable nature of his character. Accordingly he
must cease to be what he is in order to be able to arise out of the germ
of his nature as a new and different being. Therefore death looses these
bonds; the will again becomes free; for freedom lies in the _Esse_, not in
the _Operari_. “_Finditur nodus cordis, dissolvuntur omnes dubitationes,
ejusque opera evanescunt_,” is a very celebrated saying of the Vedas,
which all Vedantic writers frequently repeat.(33) Death is the moment of
that deliverance from the one‐sidedness of an individuality which does not
constitute the inmost kernel of our being, but is rather to be thought of
as a kind of aberration of it. The true original freedom re‐enters at this
moment, which, in the sense indicated, may be regarded as a _restitutio in
integrum_. The peace and quietness upon the countenance of most dead
persons seems to have its origin in this. Quiet and easy is, as a rule,
the death of every good man: but to die willingly, to die gladly, to die
joyfully, is the prerogative of the resigned, of him who surrenders and
denies the will to live. For only he wills to die _really_, and not merely
_apparently_, and consequently he needs and desires no continuance of his
person. The existence which we know he willingly gives up: what he gets
instead of it is in our eyes _nothing_, because our existence is, with
reference to that, _nothing_. The Buddhist faith calls it Nirvana,(34)
_i.e._, extinction.




Chapter XLII. The Life Of The Species.


In the preceding chapter it was called to mind that the (Platonic) Ideas
of the different grades of beings, which are the adequate objectification
of the will to live, exhibit themselves in the knowledge of the
individual, which is bound to the form of time, as the _species_, _i.e._,
as the successive individuals of one kind connected by the bond of
generation, and that therefore the species is the Idea (εἰδος, _species_)
broken up in time. Accordingly the true nature of every living thing lies
primarily in its species: yet the species again has its existence only in
the individuals. Now, although the will only attains to self‐consciousness
in the individual, thus knows itself immediately only as the individual,
yet the deep‐seated consciousness that it is really the species in which
his true nature objectifies itself appears in the fact that for the
individual the concerns of the species as such, thus the relations of the
sexes, the production and nourishment of the offspring, are of
incomparably greater importance and consequence than everything else.
Hence, then, arises in the case of the brutes, heat or rut (an excellent
description of the vehemence of which will be found in Burdach’s
“Physiology,” vol. i. §§ 247, 257), and, in the case of man, the careful
and capricious selection of the other individual for the satisfaction of
the sexual impulse, which can rise to the height of passionate love, to
the fuller investigation of which I shall devote a special chapter: hence
also, finally the excessive love of parents for their offspring.

In the supplements to the second book the will was compared to the root
and the intellect to the crown of the tree; and this is the case inwardly
or psychologically. But outwardly or physiologically the genitals are the
root and the head the crown. The nourishing part is certainly not the
genitals, but the villi of the intestines: yet not the latter but the
former are the root; because through them the individual is connected with
the species in which it is rooted. For physically the individual is a
production of the species, metaphysically a more or less perfect picture
of the Idea, which, in the form of time, exhibits itself as species. In
agreement with the relation expressed here, the greatest vitality, and
also the decrepitude of the brain and the genital organs, is simultaneous
and stands in connection. The sexual impulse is to be regarded as the
inner life of the tree (the species) upon which the life of the individual
grows, like a leaf that is nourished by the tree, and assists in
nourishing the tree; this is why that impulse is so strong, and springs
from the depths of our nature. To castrate an individual means to cut him
off from the tree of the species upon which he grows, and thus severed,
leave him to wither: hence the degradation of his mental and physical
powers. That the service of the species, _i.e._, fecundation, is followed
in the case of every animal individual by momentary exhaustion and
debility of all the powers, and in the case of most insects indeed by
speedy death, on account of which Celsus said, “_Seminis emissio est
partis animæ jactura_;” that in the case of man the extinction of the
generative power shows that the individual approaches death; that
excessive use of this power at every age shortens life, while, on the
other hand, temperance in this respect increases all the powers, and
especially the muscular powers, on which account it was part of the
training of the Greek athletes; that the same restraint lengthens the life
of the insect even to the following spring; all this points to the fact
that the life of the individual is at bottom only borrowed from the
species, and that all vital force is, as it were, force of the species
restricted by being dammed up. But this is to be explained from the fact
that the metaphysical substratum of life reveals itself directly in the
species and only by means of this in the individual. Accordingly the
Lingam with the Yoni, as the symbol of the species and its immortality, is
worshipped in India, and, as the counterpoise of death, is ascribed as an
attribute to the very divinity who presides over death, Siva.

But without myth or symbol, the vehemence of the sexual impulse, the keen
intentness and profound seriousness with which every animal, including
man, pursues its concerns, shows that it is through the function which
serves it that the animal belongs to that in which really and principally
its true being lies, the _species_; while all other functions and organs
directly serve only the individual, whose existence is at bottom merely
secondary. In the vehemence of that impulse, which is the concentration of
the whole animal nature, the consciousness further expresses itself that
the individual does not endure, and therefore all must be staked on the
maintenance of the species, in which its true existence lies.

To illustrate what has been said, let us now imagine a brute in rut, and
in the act of generation. We see a seriousness and intentness never known
in it at any other time. Now what goes on in it? Does it know that it must
die, and that through its present occupation a new individual, which yet
entirely resembles itself, will arise in order to take its place? Of all
this it knows nothing, for it does not think. But it is as intently
careful for the continuance of the species in time as if it knew all that.
For it is conscious that it desires to live and exist, and it expresses
the highest degree of this volition in the act of generation; this is all
that then takes place in its consciousness. This is also quite sufficient
for the permanence of the kind; just because the will is the radical and
knowledge the adventitious. On this account the will does not require to
be guided by knowledge throughout; but whenever in its primitive
originality it has resolved, this volition will objectify itself of its
own accord in the world of the idea. If now in this way it is that
definite animal form which we have thought of that wills life and
existence, it does not will life and existence in general, but in this
particular form. Therefore it is the sight of its form in the female of
its species that stimulates the will of the brute to the act of
generation. This volition of the brute, when regarded from without and
under the form of time, presents itself as such an animal form maintained
through an infinite time by the constantly repeated replacement of one
individual by another, thus by the alternation of death and reproduction,
which so regarded appear only as the pulse‐beats of that form (ιδεα,
εἰδος, _species_) which endures through all time. They may be compared to
the forces of attraction and repulsion in which matter consists. That
which is shown here in the brute holds good also of man; for although in
him the act of generation is accompanied by complete knowledge of its
final cause, yet it is not guided by this knowledge, but proceeds directly
from the will to live as its concentration. It is accordingly to be
reckoned among instinctive actions. For in reproduction the brute is just
as little guided by knowledge of the end as in mechanical instincts; in
these also the will manifests itself, in the main, without the mediation
of knowledge, which here, as there, is only concerned with details.
Reproduction is, to a certain extent, the most marvellous of all
instincts, and its work the most astonishing.

These considerations explain why the sexual desire has a very different
character from every other; it is not only the strongest, but even
specifically of a more powerful kind than any other. It is everywhere
tacitly assumed as necessary and inevitable, and is not, like other
desires, a matter of taste and disposition. For it is the desire which
even constitutes the nature of man. In conflict with it no motive is so
strong that it would be certain of victory. It is so pre‐eminently the
chief concern that no other pleasures make up for the deprivation of its
satisfaction; and, moreover, for its sake both brute and man undertake
every danger and every conflict. A very naïve expression of this
disposition is the well‐known inscription on the door of the _fornix_ at
Pompeii, decorated with the phallus: “_Heic habitat felicitas_:” this was
for those going in naïve, for those coming out ironical, and in itself
humorous. On the other hand, the excessive power of the sexual passion is
seriously and worthily expressed in the inscription which (according to
Theon of Smyrna, _De Musica_, c. 47), Osiris had placed upon the column he
erected to the eternal gods: “To Eros, the spirit, the heaven, the sun,
the moon, the earth, the night, the day, and the father of all that is and
that shall be;” also in the beautiful apostrophe with which Lucretius
begins his work:


    “_Æneadum genetrix, hominum divomque voluptas,_
    _Alma Venus cet._”


To all this corresponds the important _rôle_ which the relation of the
sexes plays in the world of men, where it is really the invisible central
point of all action and conduct, and peeps out everywhere in spite of all
veils thrown over it. It is the cause of war and the end of peace, the
basis of what is serious, and the aim of the jest, the inexhaustible
source of wit, the key to all allusions, and the meaning of all mysterious
hints, of all unspoken offers and all stolen glances, the daily meditation
of the young, and often also of the old, the hourly thought of the
unchaste, and even against their will the constantly recurring imagination
of the chaste, the ever ready material of a joke, just because the
profoundest seriousness lies at its foundation. It is, however, the
piquant element and the joke of life that the chief concern of all men is
secretly pursued and ostensibly ignored as much as possible. But, in fact,
we see it every moment seat itself, as the true and hereditary lord of the
world, out of the fulness of its own strength, upon the ancestral throne,
and looking down from thence with scornful glances, laugh at the
preparations which have been made to bind it, imprison it, or at least to
limit it and wherever it is possible to keep it concealed, or even so to
master it that it shall only appear as a subordinate, secondary concern of
life. But all this agrees with the fact that the sexual passion is the
kernel of the will to live, and consequently the concentration of all
desire; therefore in the text I have called the genital organs the focus
of the will. Indeed, one may say man is concrete sexual desire; for his
origin is an act of copulation and his wish of wishes is an act of
copulation, and this tendency alone perpetuates and holds together his
whole phenomenal existence. The will to live manifests itself indeed
primarily as an effort to sustain the individual; yet this is only a step
to the effort to sustain the species, and the latter endeavour must be
more powerful in proportion as the life of the species surpasses that of
the individual in duration, extension, and value. Therefore sexual passion
is the most perfect manifestation of the will to live, its most distinctly
expressed type; and the origin of the individual in it, and its primacy
over all other desires of the natural man, are both in complete agreement
with this.

One other remark of a physiological nature is in place here, a remark
which throws light upon my fundamental doctrine expounded in the second
book. As the sexual impulse is the most vehement of desires, the wish of
wishes, the concentration of all our volition, and accordingly the
satisfaction of it which exactly corresponds to the individual wish of any
one, that is, the desire fixed upon a definite individual, is the summit
and crown of his happiness, the ultimate goal of his natural endeavours,
with the attainment of which everything seems to him to have been
attained, and with the frustrating of which everything seems to him to
have been lost:—so we find, as its physiological correlative, in the
objectified will, thus in the human organism, the sperm or semen as the
secretion of secretions, the quintessence of all animal fluids, the last
result of all organic functions, and have in it a new proof of the fact
that the body is only the objectivity of the will, _i.e._, is the will
itself under the form of the idea.

With reproduction is connected the maintenance of the offspring, and with
the sexual impulse, parental love; and thus through these the life of the
species is carried on. Accordingly the love of the brute for its young
has, like the sexual impulse, a strength which far surpasses that of the
efforts which merely concerns itself as an individual. This shows itself
in the fact that even the mildest animals are ready to undertake for the
sake of their young even the most unequal battle for life and death, and
with almost all species of animals the mother encounters any danger for
the protection of her young, nay, in many cases even faces certain death.
In the case of man this instinctive parental love is guided and directed
by reason, _i.e._, by reflection. Sometimes, however, it is also in this
way restricted, and with bad characters this may extend to the complete
repudiation of it. Therefore we can observe its effects most purely in the
lower animals. In itself, however, it is not less strong in man; here
also, in particular cases, we see it entirely overcome self‐love, and even
extend to the sacrifice of life. Thus, for example, the French newspapers
have just announced that at Cahors, in the department of Lot, a father has
taken his own life in order that his son, who had been drawn for military
service, should be the eldest son of a widow, and therefore exempt
(_Galignani’s Messenger_ of 22d June 1843). Yet in the case of the lower
animals, since they are capable of no reflection, the instinctive maternal
affection (the male is generally ignorant of his paternity) shows itself
directly and unsophisticated, and therefore with perfect distinctness and
in its whole strength. At bottom it is the expression of the consciousness
in the brute that its true being lies more immediately in the species than
in the individual, and therefore, when necessary, it sacrifices its life
that the species may be maintained in the young. Thus here, as also in the
sexual impulse, the will to live becomes to a certain extent transcendent,
for its consciousness extends beyond the individual, in which it is
inherent, to the species. In order to avoid expressing this second
manifestation of the life of the species in a merely abstract manner, and
to present it to the reader in its magnitude and reality, I will give a
few examples of the extraordinary strength of instinctive maternal
affection.

The sea‐otter, when pursued, seizes its young one and dives with it; when
it comes up again to take breath, it covers the young one with its body,
and receives the harpoon of the hunter while the young one is escaping. A
young whale is killed merely to attract the mother, who hurries to it and
seldom forsakes it so long as it still lives, even although she is struck
with several harpoons (Scoresby’s “Journal of a Whaling Voyage;” from the
English of Kreis, p. 196). At Three Kings Island, near New Zealand, there
are colossal seals called sea‐elephants (_phoca proboscidea_). They swim
round the island in regular herds and feed upon fishes, but yet have
certain terrible enemies below water unknown to us, by whom they are often
severely wounded; hence their swimming together requires special tactics.
The females bring forth their young upon the shore; while they are
suckling them, which lasts from seven to eight weeks, all the males form a
circle round them in order to prevent them, driven by hunger, from
entering the sea, and if this is attempted they prevent it by biting. Thus
they all fast together for between seven and eight weeks, and all become
very thin, simply in order that the young may not enter the sea before
they are able to swim well and observe the necessary tactics which are
then taught them with blows and bites (Freycinet, _Voy. aux terres
Australes_, 1826). We also see here how parental affection, like every
strong exertion of the will (_cf._ chap. xix. 6), heightens the
intelligence. Wild ducks, white‐throats, and many other birds, when the
sportsman comes near their nest, fly in front of him with loud cries and
flap about as if their wings were injured, in order to attract his
attention from their young to themselves. The lark tries to entice the dog
away from its nest by exposing itself. In the same way hinds and does
induce the hunter to pursue them in order that their young may not be
attacked. Swallows have flown into burning houses to rescue their young or
perish with them. At Delft, in a great fire, a stork allowed itself to be
burnt in its nest rather than forsake its tender young, which could not
yet fly (Hadr. Junius, _Descriptio Hollandiæ_). Mountain‐cocks and
woodcocks allow themselves to be taken upon the nest when brooding.
_Muscicapa tyrannus_ protects its nest with remarkable courage, and
defends itself against eagles. An ant has been cut in two, and the fore
half been seen to bring the pupæ to a place of safety. A bitch whose
litter had been cut out of her belly crept up to them dying, caressed
them, and began to whine violently only when they were taken from her
(Burdach, _Physiologie als Erfahrungswissenschaft_, vol. ii. and iii.).




Chapter XLIII. On Heredity.


The most ordinary experience teaches that in generation the combined seed
of the parents not only propagates the peculiarities of the species, but
also those of the individual, as far as bodily (objective, external)
qualities are concerned, and this has also always been recognised—


    “_Naturæ sequitur semina quisque suæ._”

    —CATULL.


Now whether this also holds good of mental (subjective, internal)
qualities, so that these also are transmitted by the parents to the
children, is a question which has already often been raised, and almost
always answered in the affirmative. More difficult, however, is the
problem whether it is possible to distinguish what belongs to the father
and what to the mother, thus what is the mental inheritance which we
receive from each of our parents. If now we cast upon this problem the
light of our fundamental knowledge that the will is the true being, the
kernel, the radical element in man, and the intellect, on the other hand,
is what is secondary, adventitious, the accident of that substance; before
questioning experience we will assume it as at least probable that the
father, as _sexus potior_ and the procreative principle, imparts the
basis, the radical element, of the new life, thus the _will_, and the
mother, as _sexus sequior_ and merely conceiving principle, imparts the
secondary element, the _intellect_; that thus the man inherits his moral
nature, his character, his inclinations, his heart, from the father, and,
on the other hand, the grade, quality, and tendency of his intelligence
from the mother. Now this assumption actually finds its confirmation in
experience; only this cannot be decided by a physical experiment upon the
table, but results partly from the careful and acute observation of many
years, and partly from history.

One’s own experience has the advantage of complete certainty and the
greatest speciality, and this outweighs the disadvantage that arises from
it, that its sphere is limited and its examples not generally known.
Therefore, primarily, I refer every one to his own experience. First of
all let him consider himself, confess to himself his inclinations and
passions, his characteristic errors and weaknesses, his vices, and also
his excellences and virtues, if he has any. Then let him think of his
father, and he cannot fail to recognise all these characteristic traits in
him also. On the other hand, he will often find his mother of an entirely
different character, and a moral agreement with her will very seldom
occur, indeed only through the exceptional accident of a similarity of the
character of the two parents. Let him make this examination, for example,
with reference to quick temper or patience, avarice or prodigality,
inclination to sensuality, or to intemperance, or to gambling, hard‐
heartedness or kindliness, honesty or hypocrisy, pride or condescension,
courage or cowardice, peaceableness or quarrelsomeness, placability or
resentfulness, &c. Then let him make the same investigation with regard to
all those whose characters and whose parents he has accurately known. If
he proceeds attentively, with correct judgment, and candidly, the
confirmation of our principle will not be lacking. Thus, for example, he
will find the special tendency to lie, which belongs to many men, equally
present in two brothers, because they have inherited it from the father;
on this account also the comedy, “The Liar and his Son,” is
psychologically correct. However, two inevitable limitations must here be
borne in mind, which only open injustice could interpret as evasions.
First, _pater semper incertus_. Only a decided physical resemblance to the
father removes this limitation; a superficial resemblance, on the other
hand, is not sufficient to do so; for there is an after‐effect of earlier
impregnation by virtue of which the children of the second marriage have
sometimes still a slight resemblance to the first husband, and children
begotten in adultery to the legitimate father. Such an after‐effect has
been still more distinctly observed in the case of brutes. The second
limitation is, that in the son the moral character of the father certainly
appears, yet under the modification which it has received through another
and often very different _intellect_ (the inheritance from the mother),
and thus a correction of the observation becomes necessary. This
modification may be important or trifling in proportion to that
difference, but it can never be so great that the fundamental traits of
the paternal character do not always appear under it recognisably enough,
like a man who has disguised himself by an entirely different kind of
dress, wig, and beard. For example, if by inheritance from the mother a
man is pre‐eminently endowed with reason, thus with the power of
reflection and deliberation, the passions inherited from his father are
partly bridled by this, partly concealed, and accordingly only attain to a
methodical, systematic, or secret manifestation, and thus a very different
phenomenon from that of the father, who perhaps had only a very limited
mind, will then result; and in the same way the converse case may occur.
The inclinations and passions of the mother, on the other hand, do not
reappear at all in the children, often indeed their opposite.

Historical examples have the advantage over those of private life of being
universally known; but, on the other hand, they are of course impaired by
the uncertainty and frequent falsification of all tradition, and
especially also by the fact that as a rule they only contain the public,
not the private life, and consequently only the political actions, not the
finer manifestations of character. However, I wish to support the truth we
are speaking of by a few historical examples, to which those who have made
a special study of history can no doubt add a far larger number of equally
pertinent cases.

It is well known that P. Decius Mus sacrificed his life for his country
with heroic nobleness; for, solemnly committing himself and the enemy to
the infernal deities, with covered face he plunged into the army of the
Latins. About forty years later his son, of the same name, did exactly the
same thing in the war against the Gauls (Liv. viii. 6; x. 28). Thus a
thorough proof of the Horatian _fortes creantur fortibus et bonis_: the
converse of which is thus given by Shakspeare—


    “Cowards father cowards, and base things sire base.”

    —CYMBELINE, iv. 2.


Early Roman history presents to us whole families whose members in long
succession distinguished themselves by devoted patriotism and courage;
such were the _gens Fabia_ and the _gens Fabricia_. Again, Alexander the
Great was fond of power and conquest, like his father Philip. The pedigree
of Nero which, with a moral intention, Suetonius (c. 4 _et_ 5) gives at
the beginning of his sketch of this monster is very well worth
considering. It is the _gens Claudia_ he describes, which flourished in
Rome through six centuries, and produced not only capable, but arrogant
and cruel men. From it sprang Tiberius, Caligula, and finally Nero. In his
grandfather, and still more strongly in his father, all those atrocious
qualities show themselves, which could only attain their perfect
development in Nero, partly because his higher position afforded them
freer scope, partly because he had for his mother the irrational
Bacchante, Agrippina, who could impart to him no intellect to bridle his
passions. Quite in our sense, therefore, Suetonius relates that at his
birth _præsagio fuit etiam Domitii, patris, vox, inter gratulationes
amicorum, negantis, quidquam ex se __ et Agrippina, nisi detestabile et
malo publico nasci potuisse_. On the other hand, Cimon was the son of
Miltiades, and Hannibal of Hamilcar, and the Scipios make up a whole
family of heroes and noble defenders of their country. But the son of Pope
Alexander VI. was his hideous image, Cæsar Borgia. The son of the
notorious Duke of Alba was just as cruel and wicked a man as his father.
The malicious and unjust Philip IV. of France, who is specially known by
his cruel torture and execution of the knights templars, had for his
daughter Isabella, wife of Edward II. of England, who rebelled against her
husband, took him prisoner, and after he had signed his abdication, since
the attempt to kill him by ill‐usage was unsuccessful, caused him to be
put to death in prison in a manner which is too horrible for me to care to
relate. The blood‐thirsty tyrant and _defensor fidei_, Henry VIII. of
England had a daughter by his first marriage, Queen Mary, equally
distinguished for bigotry and cruelty, who from her numerous burnings of
heretics has won the name of Bloody Mary. His daughter by his second
marriage, Elizabeth, received an excellent understanding from her mother,
Anne Boleyn, which prevented bigotry and curbed the parental character in
her, yet did not do away with it; so that it still always shone through on
occasions, and distinctly appeared in her cruel treatment of Mary of
Scotland. Van Geuns(35) tells a story, after Marcus Donatus, of a Scotch
girl whose father had been burnt as a highway robber and a cannibal when
she was only one year old. Although she was brought up among quite
different people, there developed in her the same craving for human flesh,
and being caught in the act of satisfying it, she was buried alive. In the
_Freimüthigen_ of the 13th July 1821 we read that in the department of
Aube the police pursued a girl because she had murdered two children, whom
she ought to have taken to the foundling hospital, in order to keep the
little money given to the children. At last the police found the girl on
the road to Paris, near Romilly, drowned, and her own father gave himself
up as her murderer. Finally, let me mention a couple of cases which have
occurred recently, and have therefore only the newspapers as their
vouchers. In October 1836 a Count Belecznai was condemned to death in
Hungary because he had murdered an official and severely wounded his own
relations. His elder brother was executed earlier as a patricide, and his
father also had been a murderer (_Frankfurter Postzeitung_ of the 26th
October 1836). A year later the youngest brother of this Count, in the
same street where the latter had murdered the official, fired a pistol at
the steward of his estates, but missed him (_Frankfurter Journal_, 16th
September 1837). In the _Frankfurter Postzeitung_ of the 19th November
1857 a correspondent in Paris announces the condemnation to death of a
very dangerous highway robber, Lemaire, and his companions, and adds: “The
criminal tendency seems hereditary in his family and in those of his
confederates, as several of their race have died on the scaffold.” It
follows from a passage in the Laws of Plato that similar cases were
already known in Greece (_Stob. Flor._, vol. ii. p. 213). The annals of
crime will certainly have many similar pedigrees to show. The tendency to
suicide is specially hereditary.

On the other hand, when we see the excellent Marcus Aurelius have the
wicked Commodus for a son, this does not not lead us astray; for we know
that the _Diva Faustina_ was a _uxor infamis_. On the contrary, we mark
this case in order in analogous cases to presume an analogous reason; for
example, that Domitian was the full brother of Titus I can never believe,
but that Vespasian also was a deceived husband.

Now, as regards the second part of the principle set up thus the
inheritance of the intellect from the mother, this enjoys a far more
general acceptance than the first part, which in itself appeals to the
_liberum arbitrium indifferentiæ_, while its separate apprehension is
opposed by the doctrine of the simplicity and indivisibility of the soul.
Even the old and popular expression “mother‐wit” shows the early
recognition of this second truth, which depends upon the experience both
with regard to small and great intellectual endowments, that they are the
possession of those whose mothers proportionately distinguished themselves
by their intelligence. That, on the other hand, the intellectual qualities
of the father are not transmitted to the son is proved both by the fathers
and the sons of men distinguished by the most eminent faculties, for, as a
rule, they are quite ordinary men, without a trace of the paternal mental
gifts. But if now an isolated exception to this experience, so often
confirmed, should appear; such, for example, as is presented by Pitt and
his father, Lord Chatham, we are warranted in ascribing it to accident,
nay, obliged to do so, although, on account of the exceptional rarity of
great talents, it is certainly an accident of a most extraordinary kind.
Here, however, the rule holds good: it is improbable that the improbable
_never_ happens. Besides, great statesmen (as was already mentioned in
chapter 22) are so just as much through the qualities of their character,
thus through what is inherited from the father, as through the superiority
of their mind. On the other hand, among artists, poets, and philosophers,
to whose works alone _genius_ is properly ascribed, I know of no case
analogous to that. Raphael’s father was certainly a painter, but not a
great one; Mozart’s father, and also his son, were musicians, but not
great ones. However, it is indeed wonderful that the fate which had
destined a very short life to both of these men, each the greatest in his
own sphere, as it were by way of compensation, took care, by letting them
be born already in their workshop, that, without suffering the loss of
time in youth which for the most part occurs in the case of other men of
genius, they received even from childhood, through paternal example and
instruction, the necessary introduction into the art to which they were
exclusively destined. This secret and mysterious power which seems to
guide the individual life I have made the subject of special
investigations, which I have communicated in the essay, “_Ueber die
scheinbare Absichtlichkeit im Schicksale des Einzelnen_” (_Parerga_, vol.
i.). It is further to be observed here that there are certain scientific
occupations which certainly presuppose good native faculties, yet not
those which are really rare and extraordinary; while the principal
requirements are zealous efforts, diligence, patience, early instruction,
sustained study, and much practice. From this, and not from the
inheritance of the intellect of the father, the fact is to be explained
that, since the son always willingly follows the path that has been opened
up by the father, and almost all businesses are hereditary in certain
families, in some sciences also, which before everything demand diligence
and persistence, individual families can show a succession of men of
merit; such are the Scaligers, the Bernouillis, the Cassinis, the
Herschels.

The number of proofs of the actual inheritance of the intellect of the
mother would be much greater than it appears if it were not that the
character and disposition of the female sex is such that women rarely give
public proof of their mental faculties; and therefore these do not become
historical, and thus known to posterity. Besides, on account of the weaker
nature in general of the female sex, these faculties themselves can never
reach the grade in them to which they may afterwards rise in the son;
thus, with reference to themselves, we have to estimate their achievements
higher in this proportion. Accordingly, in the first instance, only the
following examples present themselves as proofs of our truth. Joseph II.
was the son of Maria Theresia. Cardanus says in the third chapter, “_De
vita propria_:” “_Mater mea fuit memoria et ingenio pollens_.” J. J.
Rousseau says in the first book of the “Confessions:” “_La beauté de ma
mère, son __ esprit, ses talents,—elle en avait de trop brillans pour son
état_,” &c., and then quotes some delightful lines of hers. D’Alembert was
the illegitimate son of Claudine de Tencin, a woman of superior mind, and
the author of several romances and similar works, which met with great
approbation in her day, and should even still be enjoyable (see her
biography in the “_Blätter für litterarische Unterhaltung_,” March 1845,
Nos. 71‐73). That Buffon’s mother was a remarkable woman is shown by the
following passage from the “_Voyage à Montbar, par Hérault de Sechelles_,”
which Flourens quotes in his “_Histoire des travaux de Buffon_,” p. 288:
“_Buffon avait ce principe qu’en général les enfants tenaient de leur mère
leurs qualités intellectuelles et morales: et lorsqu’il l’avait développé
dans la conversation, il en faisait sur‐le‐champ l’application à lui‐même,
en faisant un éloge pompeux de sa mère, qui avait en effet, beaucoup
d’esprit, des connaissances étandues, et une tête très bien organisée._”
That he includes the moral qualities is an error which is either committed
by the reporter, or depends upon the fact that his mother had accidentally
the same character as himself and his father. The contrary of this is
shown in innumerable cases in which the mother and the son have opposite
characters. Hence the greatest dramatists could present, in Orestes and
Hamlet, mother and son in hostile conflict, in which the son appears as
the moral representative and avenger of his father. On the other hand, the
converse case, that the son should appear as the moral representative and
avenger of the mother against the father, would be revolting and, at the
same time, almost absurd. This depends upon the fact that between father
and son there is actual identity of nature, which is the will, but between
mother and son there is merely identity of intellect, and even this only
in a conditioned manner. Between mother and son the greatest moral
opposition can exist, between father and son only an intellectual
opposition. From this point of view, also, one should recognise the
necessity of the Salic law: the woman cannot carry on the race. Hume says
in his short autobiography: “Our mother was a woman of singular merit.” It
is said of Kant’s mother in the most recent biography by F. W. Schubert:
“According to the judgment of her son himself, she was a woman of great
natural understanding. For that time, when there was so little opportunity
for the education of girls, she was exceptionally well instructed, and she
also continued later to care for her further education by herself. In the
course of walks she drew the attention of her son to all kinds of natural
phenomena, and tried to explain to him through them the power of God.”
What a remarkably able, clever, and superior woman Goethe’s mother was is
now universally known. How much she has been spoken of in literature!
while his father has not been spoken of at all; Goethe himself describes
him as a man of subordinate faculties. Schiller’s mother was susceptible
to poetry, and made verses herself, a fragment of which will be found in
his biography by Schwab. Bürger, that genuine poetic genius, to whom
perhaps the first place after Goethe among German poets belongs—for
compared with his ballads those of Schiller seem cold and laboured—has
given an account of his parents which for us is significant, and which his
friend and physician, Althof repeats in his biography which appeared in
1798, in these words: “Bürger’s father was certainly provided with a
variety of knowledge after the manner of study prevalent at the time, and
was also a good, honourable man; but he loved his quiet comfort and his
pipe of tobacco so much, that, as my friend used to say, he had always
first to pull himself together if he was going to apply himself for a
quarter of an hour or so to the instruction of his son. His wife was a
woman of extraordinary mental endowments, which, however, were so little
cultivated that she had scarcely learnt to write legibly. Bürger thought
that with proper culture his mother would have been the most famous of her
sex, although he several times expressed a strong disapproval of different
traits of her moral character. However, he believed that he inherited from
his mother some mental gifts, and from his father an agreement with his
moral character.” Walter Scott’s mother was a poetess, and was in
communication with the wits of her time, as we learn from the obituary
notice of Walter Scott in the _Globe_ of 24th September 1832. That poems
of hers appeared in print in 1789 I find from an article entitled “Mother‐
wit,” in the _Blätter für litterarische Unterhaltung_ of 4th October 1841,
published by Brockhaus, which gives a long list of clever mothers of
distinguished men, from which I shall only take two: “Bacon’s mother was a
distinguished linguist, wrote and translated several works, and in all of
them showed learning, acuteness, and taste. Boerhave’s mother
distinguished herself through medical knowledge.” On the other hand,
Haller has preserved for us a strong proof of the inheritance of the
mental weakness of the mother, for he says: “_E duabus patriciis
sororibus, ob divitias maritos nactis, quum tamen fatuis essent proximæ,
novimus in nobilissimas gentes nunc a seculo retro ejus morbi manasse
semina, ut etiam in quarta generatione, quintave, omnium posterorum aliqui
fatui supersint_” (_Elementa physiol._, Lib. xxix. § 8). Also, according
to Esquirol, madness is more frequently inherited from the mother than the
father. If, however, it is inherited from the father, I attribute this to
the disposition of the character whose influence occasions it.

It seems to follow from our principle that sons of the same mother have
equal mental capacity, and if one should be highly gifted the other must
be so also. Sometimes it is so. Examples of this are the Carracci, Joseph
and Michael Haydn, Bernard and Andreas Romberg, George and Frederic
Cuvier. I would also add the brothers Schlegel, if it were not that the
younger, Friedrich, made himself unworthy of the honour of being named
along with his excellent, blameless, and highly distinguished brother,
August Wilhelm, by the disgraceful obscurantism which in the last quarter
of his life he pursued along with Adam Müller. For obscurantism is a sin,
possibly not against the Holy Spirit, but yet against the human spirit,
which one ought therefore never to forgive, but always and everywhere
implacably to remember against whoever has been guilty of it, and take
every opportunity of showing contempt for him so long as he lives, nay,
after he is dead. But just as often the above result does not take place;
for example, Kant’s brother was quite an ordinary man. To explain this I
must remind the reader of what is said in the thirty‐first chapter on the
physiological conditions of genius. Not only an extraordinarily developed
and absolutely correctly formed brain (the share of the mother) is
required, but also a very energetic action of the heart to animate it,
_i.e._, subjectively a passionate will, a lively temperament: this is the
inheritance from the father. But this quality is at its height only during
the father’s strongest years; and the mother ages still more quickly.
Accordingly the highly gifted sons will, as a rule, be the eldest,
begotten in the full strength of both parents; thus Kant’s brother was
eleven years younger than him. Even in the case of two distinguished
brothers, as a rule, the elder will be the superior. But not only the age,
but every temporary ebb of the vital force or other disturbance of health
in the parents at the time when the child is begotten may interfere with
the part of one or other, and prevent the appearance of a man of eminent
talent, which is therefore so exceedingly rare a phenomenon. It may be
said, in passing, that in the case of twins the absence of all the
differences just mentioned is the cause of the quasi‐identity of their
nature.

If single cases should be found in which a highly gifted son had a mother
who was not mentally distinguished at all, this may be explained from the
fact that this mother herself had a phlegmatic father, and on this account
her more than ordinarily developed brain was not adequately excited by a
corresponding energy of the circulation—a necessary condition, as I have
explained above in chapter 31. Nevertheless, her highly perfected nervous
and cerebral system was transmitted to the son, in whose case a father
with a lively and passionate disposition and an energetic action of the
heart was added, and thus the other physical condition of great mental
power first appeared here. Perhaps this was Byron’s case, since we nowhere
find the mental advantages of his mother mentioned. The same explanation
is also to be applied to the case in which the mother of a son of genius
who was herself distinguished for mental gifts had a mother who was by no
means clever, for the father of the latter has been a man of a phlegmatic
disposition.

The inharmonious, disproportionate, ambiguous element in the character of
most men might perhaps be referred to the fact that the individual has not
a simple origin, but derives the will from the father and the intellect
from the mother. The more heterogeneous and ill‐adapted to each other the
two parents were, the greater will that want of harmony, that inner
variance, be. While some excel through their heart and others through
their head, there are still others whose excellence lies in a certain
harmony and unity of the whole nature, which arises from the fact that in
them heart and head are so thoroughly adapted that they mutually support
and advance each other; which leads us to assume that the parents were
peculiarly suited to each other, and agreed in an exceptional measure.

With reference to the physiological side of the theory set forth, I wish
now to mention that Burdach, who erroneously assumes that the same
psychical qualities may be inherited now from the father, now from the
mother, yet adds (_Physiologie als Erfahrungswissenschaft_, vol. i. §
306): “As a whole, the male element has more influence in determining the
irritable life, and the female element, on the other hand, has more
influence on the sensibility.” What Linné says in the “_Systema naturæ_,”
Tom. i. p. 8, is also in point here: “_Mater prolifera promit, ante
generationem, __ vivum compendium medullare novi animalis suique
simillimi, carinam Malpighianam dictum, tanquam plumulam vegetabilium: hoc
ex genitura Cor adsociat ramificandum in corpus. Punctum emin saliens ovi
incubantis avis ostendit primum cor micans, cerebrumque cum medulla:
corculum hoc, cessans a frigore, excitatur calido halitu, premitque bulla
aërea, sensim dilatata, liquores, secundum canales fluxiles. Punctum
vitalitatis itaque in viventibus est tanquam a prima creatione continuata
medullaris vitæ ramificatio, cum ovum sit gemma medullaris matris a
primordio viva, licet non sua ante proprium cor paternum._”

If we now connect the conviction we have gained here of the inheritance of
the character from the father and the intellect from the mother with our
earlier investigation of the wide gulf which nature has placed between man
and man in a moral as in an intellectual regard, and also with our
knowledge of the absolute unalterableness both of the character and of the
mental faculties, we shall be led to the view that a real and thorough
improvement of the human race might be attained to not so much from
without as from within, thus not so much by instruction and culture as
rather upon the path of generation. Plato had already something of the
kind in his mind when in the fifth book of his Republic he set forth his
wonderful plan for increasing and improving his class of warriors. If we
could castrate all scoundrels, and shut up all stupid geese in
monasteries, and give persons of noble character a whole harem, and
provide men, and indeed complete men, for all maidens of mind and
understanding, a generation would soon arise which would produce a better
age than that of Pericles. But, without entering into such utopian plans,
it might be taken into consideration that if, as, if I am not mistaken,
was actually the case among certain ancient nations, castration was the
severest punishment after death, the world would be delivered from whole
races of scoundrels, all the more certainly as it is well known that most
crimes are committed between the age of twenty and thirty.(36) In the same
way, it might be considered whether, as regards results, it would not be
more advantageous to give the public dowries which upon certain occasions
have to be distributed, not, as is now customary, to the girls who are
supposed to be the most virtuous, but to those who have most understanding
and are the cleverest; especially as it is very difficult to judge as to
virtue, for, as it is said, only God sees the heart. The opportunities for
displaying a noble character are rare, and a matter of chance; besides,
many a girl has a powerful support to her virtue in her plainness; on the
other hand, as regards understanding, those who themselves are gifted with
it can judge with great certainty after some examination. The following is
another practical application. In many countries, among others in South
Germany, the bad custom prevails of women carrying burdens, often very
considerable, upon the head. This must act disadvantageously upon the
brain, which must thereby gradually deteriorate in the female sex of the
nation; and since from that sex the male sex receives its brain, the whole
nation becomes ever more stupid; which in many cases is by no means
necessary. Accordingly by the abolition of this custom the quantum of
intelligence in the whole nation would be increased, which would
positively be the greatest increase of the national wealth.

But if now, leaving such practical applications to others, we return to
our special point of view, the ethico‐metaphysical standpoint—since we
connect the content of chapter 41 with that of the present chapter—the
following result will present itself to us, which, with all its
transcendence, has yet a direct empirical support. It is the same
character, thus the same individually determined will, that lives in all
the descendants of one stock, from the remote ancestor to the present
representative of the family. But in each of these a different intellect
is given with it, thus a different degree and a different kind of
knowledge. Thus in each of these life presents itself to it from another
side and in a different light: it receives a new fundamental view of it, a
new instruction. It is true that, since the intellect is extinguished with
the individual, that will cannot supplement the insight of one course of
life with that of another. But in consequence of each fundamentally new
view of life, such as only a renewed personality can impart to it, its
willing itself receives a different tendency, thus experiences a
modification from it, and what is the chief concern, the will, has, in
this new direction, either to assert life anew or deny it. In this way
does the arrangement of nature of an ever‐changing connection of a will
with an intellect, which arises from the necessity of two sexes for
reproduction, become the basis of a method of salvation. For by virtue of
this arrangement life unceasingly presents new sides to the will (whose
image and mirror it is), turns itself about, as it were, without
intermission before its sight, allows different and ever different modes
of perception to try their effect upon it, so that upon each of these it
must decide for assertion or denial, both of which constantly stand open
to it, only that, if once denial is chosen, the whole phenomenon ceases
for it with death. Now because, according to this, it is just the constant
renewal and complete alteration of the intellect for the same will which,
as imparting a new view of the world, holds open the path of salvation,
and because the intellect comes from the mother, the profound reason may
lie here on account of which all nations (with very few and doubtful
exceptions) abominate and forbid the marriage of brothers and sisters,
nay, even on account of which sexual love does not arise at all between
brothers and sisters, unless in very rare exceptions, which depend upon an
unnatural perversity of the instinct, if not upon the fact that one of the
two is illegitimate. For from a marriage of brothers and sisters nothing
could proceed but constantly ever the same will with the same intellect,
as both already exist united in both the parents, thus the hopeless
repetition of the phenomenon which has already been.

But if now, in the particular case and close at hand, we contemplate the
incredibly great and yet manifest difference of characters—find one so
good and philanthropic, another so wicked, nay, ferocious; again, behold
one just, honest, and upright, and another completely false, as a sneak, a
swindler, a traitor, an incorrigible scoundrel—there discloses itself to
us a chasm in our investigation, for in vain we ponder, reflecting on the
origin of such a difference. Hindus and Buddhists solve the problem by
saying, “It is the consequence of the deeds of the preceding courses of
life.” This solution is certainly the oldest, also the most
comprehensible, and has come from the wisest of mankind; but it only
pushes the question further back. Yet a more satisfactory answer will
hardly be found. From the point of view of my whole teaching, it remains
for me to say that here, where we are speaking of the will as thing in
itself, the principle of sufficient reason, as merely the form of the
phenomenon, is no longer applicable; with it, however, all why and whence
disappear. Absolute freedom just consists in this, that something is not
subject at all to the principle of sufficient reason, as the principle of
all necessity. Such freedom, therefore, only belongs to the thing in
itself. And this is just the will. Accordingly, in its phenomenal
manifestation, consequently in the _Operari_, it is subject to necessity;
but in the _Esse_, where it has determined itself as thing in itself, it
is free. Whenever, therefore, we come to this, as happens here, all
explanation by means of reasons and consequents ceases, and nothing
remains for us but to say that here manifests itself the true freedom of
the will, which belongs to it because it is the thing in itself, which,
however, just as such, is groundless, _i.e._, knows no why. But on this
account all understanding ceases for us here, because all our
understanding depends upon the principle of sufficient reason, for it
consists in the mere application of that principle.




Chapter XLIV. The Metaphysics Of The Love Of The Sexes.


    “Ye wise men, highly, deeply learned,
    Who think it out and know,
    How, when, and where do all things pair?
    Why do they kiss and love?
    Ye men of lofty wisdom, say
    What happened to me then;
    Search out and tell me where, how, when,
    And why it happened thus.”

    —BÜRGER.


This chapter is the last of four whose various reciprocal relations, by
virtue of which, to a certain extent, they constitute a subordinate whole,
the attentive reader will recognise without it being needful for me to
interrupt my exposition by recalling them or referring to them.

We are accustomed to see poets principally occupied with describing the
love of the sexes. This is as a rule the chief theme of all dramatic
works, tragical as well as comical, romantic as well as classical, Indian
as well as European. Not less is it the material of by far the largest
part of lyrical and also of epic poetry, especially if we class with the
latter the enormous piles of romances which for centuries every year has
produced in all the civilised countries of Europe as regularly as the
fruits of the earth. As regards their main contents, all these works are
nothing else than many‐sided brief or lengthy descriptions of the passion
we are speaking of. Moreover, the most successful pictures of it—such, for
example, as Romeo and Juliet, _La Nouvelle Hélöise_, and _Werther_—have
gained immortal fame. Yet, when Rochefoucauld imagines that it is the same
with passionate love as with ghosts, of which every one speaks, but which
no one has seen; and Lichtenberg also in his essay, “_Ueber die Macht der
Liebe_,” disputes and denies the reality and naturalness of that passion,
they are greatly in error. For it is impossible that something which is
foreign and contrary to human nature, thus a mere imaginary caricature,
could be unweariedly represented by poetic genius in all ages, and
received by mankind with unaltered interest; for nothing that is
artistically beautiful can be without truth:—


    “_Rien n’est beau que le vrai; le vrai seul est aimable_.”

    —BOIL.


Certainly, however, it is also confirmed by experience, although not by
the experience of every day, that that which as a rule only appears as a
strong yet still controllable inclination may rise under certain
circumstances to a passion which exceeds all others in vehemence, and
which then sets aside all considerations, overcomes all obstacles with
incredible strength and perseverance, so that for its satisfaction life is
risked without hesitation, nay, if that satisfaction is still withheld, is
given as the price of it. Werthers and Jacopo Ortis exist not only in
romance, but every year can show at least half a dozen of them in Europe:
_Sed ignotis perierunt mortibus illi_; for their sorrows find no other
chroniclers than the writers of official registers or the reporters of the
newspapers. Yet the readers of the police news in English and French
journals will attest the correctness of my assertion. Still greater,
however, is the number of those whom the same passion brings to the
madhouse. Finally, every year can show cases of the double suicide of a
pair of lovers who are opposed by outward circumstances. In such cases,
however, it is inexplicable to me how those who, certain of mutual love,
expect to find the supremest bliss in the enjoyment of this, do not
withdraw themselves from all connections by taking the extremest steps,
and endure all hardships, rather than give up with life a pleasure which
is greater than any other they can conceive. As regards the lower grades
of that passion, and the mere approaches to it, every one has them daily
before his eyes, and, as long as he is not old, for the most part also in
his heart.

So then, after what has here been called to mind, no one can doubt either
the reality or the importance of the matter; and therefore, instead of
wondering that a philosophy should also for once make its own this
constant theme of all poets, one ought rather to be surprised that a thing
which plays throughout so important a part in human life has hitherto
practically been disregarded by philosophers altogether, and lies before
us as raw material. The one who has most concerned himself with it is
Plato, especially in the “Symposium” and the “Phædrus.” Yet what he says
on the subject is confined to the sphere of myths, fables, and jokes, and
also for the most part concerns only the Greek love of youths. The little
that Rousseau says upon our theme in the “_Discours sur l’inégalité_” (p.
96, ed. Bip.) is false and insufficient. Kant’s explanation of the subject
in the third part of the essay, “_Ueber das Gefühl des Schönen und
Erhabenen_” (p. 435 _seq._ of Rosenkranz’s edition), is very superficial
and without practical knowledge, therefore it is also partly incorrect.
Lastly, Platner’s treatment of the matter in his “Anthropology” (§ 1347
_seq._) every one will find dull and shallow. On the other hand, Spinoza’s
definition, on account of its excessive naïveté, deserves to be quoted for
the sake of amusement: “_Amor est titillatio, concomitante idea causæ
externæ_” (_Eth._ iv., prop. 44, _dem._) Accordingly I have no
predecessors either to make use of or to refute. The subject has pressed
itself upon me objectively, and has entered of its own accord into the
connection of my consideration of the world. Moreover, least of all can I
hope for approbation from those who are themselves under the power of this
passion, and who accordingly seek to express the excess of their feelings
in the sublimest and most ethereal images. To them my view will appear too
physical, too material, however metaphysical and even transcendent it may
be at bottom. Meanwhile let them reflect that if the object which to‐day
inspires them to write madrigals and sonnets had been born eighteen years
earlier it would scarcely have won a glance from them.

For all love, however ethereally it may bear itself, is rooted in the
sexual impulse alone, nay, it absolutely is only a more definitely
determined, specialised, and indeed in the strictest sense individualised
sexual impulse. If now, keeping this in view, one considers the important
part which the sexual impulse in all its degrees and nuances plays not
only on the stage and in novels, but also in the real world, where, next
to the love of life, it shows itself the strongest and most powerful of
motives, constantly lays claim to half the powers and thoughts of the
younger portion of mankind, is the ultimate goal of almost all human
effort, exerts an adverse influence on the most important events,
interrupts the most serious occupations every hour, sometimes embarrasses
for a while even the greatest minds, does not hesitate to intrude with its
trash interfering with the negotiations of statesmen and the
investigations of men of learning, knows how to slip its love letters and
locks of hair even into ministerial portfolios and philosophical
manuscripts, and no less devises daily the most entangled and the worst
actions, destroys the most valuable relationships, breaks the firmest
bonds, demands the sacrifice sometimes of life or health, sometimes of
wealth, rank, and happiness, nay, robs those who are otherwise honest of
all conscience, makes those who have hitherto been faithful, traitors;
accordingly, on the whole, appears as a malevolent demon that strives to
pervert, confuse, and overthrow everything;—then one will be forced to
cry, Wherefore all this noise? Wherefore the straining and storming, the
anxiety and want? It is merely a question of every Hans finding his
Grethe.(37) Why should such a trifle play so important a part, and
constantly introduce disturbance and confusion into the well‐regulated
life of man? But to the earnest investigator the spirit of truth gradually
reveals the answer. It is no trifle that is in question here; on the
contrary, the importance of the matter is quite proportionate to the
seriousness and ardour of the effort. The ultimate end of all love
affairs, whether they are played in sock or cothurnus, is really more
important than all other ends of human life, and is therefore quite worthy
of the profound seriousness with which every one pursues it. That which is
decided by it is nothing less than _the composition of the next
generation_. The _dramatis personæ_ who shall appear when we are withdrawn
are here determined, both as regards their existence and their nature, by
these frivolous love affairs. As the being, the _existentia_, of these
future persons is absolutely conditioned by our sexual impulse generally,
so their nature, _essentia_, is determined by the individual selection in
its satisfaction, _i.e._, by sexual love, and is in every respect
irrevocably fixed by this. This is the key of the problem: we shall arrive
at a more accurate knowledge of it in its application if we go through the
degrees of love, from the passing inclination to the vehement passion,
when we shall also recognise that the difference of these grades arises
from the degree of the individualisation of the choice.

The collective love affairs of the present generation taken together are
accordingly, of the whole human race, the serious _meditatio compositionis
generationis futuræ, e qua iterum pendent innumeræ generationes_. This
high importance of the matter, in which it is not a question of individual
weal or woe, as in all other matters, but of the existence and special
nature of the human race in future times, and therefore the will of the
individual appears at a higher power as the will of the species;—this it
is on which the pathetic and sublime elements in affairs of love depend,
which for thousands of years poets have never wearied of representing in
innumerable examples; because no theme can equal in interest this one,
which stands to all others which only concern the welfare of individuals
as the solid body to the surface, because it concerns the weal and woe of
the species. Just on this account, then, is it so difficult to impart
interest to a drama without the element of love, and, on the other hand,
this theme is never worn out even by daily use.

That which presents itself in the individual consciousness as sexual
impulse in general, without being directed towards a definite individual
of the other sex, is in itself, and apart from the phenomenon, simply the
will to live. But what appears in consciousness as a sexual impulse
directed to a definite individual is in itself the will to live as a
definitely determined individual. Now in this case the sexual impulse,
although in itself a subjective need, knows how to assume very skilfully
the mask of an objective admiration, and thus to deceive our
consciousness; for nature requires this stratagem to attain its ends. But
yet that in every case of falling in love, however objective and sublime
this admiration may appear, what alone is looked to is the production of
an individual of a definite nature is primarily confirmed by the fact that
the essential matter is not the reciprocation of love, but possession,
_i.e._, the physical enjoyment. The certainty of the former can therefore
by no means console us for the want of the latter; on the contrary, in
such a situation many a man has shot himself. On the other hand, persons
who are deeply in love, and can obtain no return of it, are contented with
possession, _i.e._, with the physical enjoyment. This is proved by all
forced marriages, and also by the frequent purchase of the favour of a
woman, in spite of her dislike, by large presents or other sacrifices,
nay, even by cases of rape. That this particular child shall be begotten
is, although unknown to the parties concerned, the true end of the whole
love story; the manner in which it is attained is a secondary
consideration. Now, however loudly persons of lofty and sentimental soul,
and especially those who are in love, may cry out here about the gross
realism of my view, they are yet in error. For is not the definite
determination of the individualities of the next generation a much higher
and more worthy end than those exuberant feelings and super‐sensible soap
bubbles of theirs? Nay, among earthly aims, can there be one which is
greater or more important? It alone corresponds to the profoundness with
which passionate love is felt, to the seriousness with which it appears,
and the importance which it attributes even to the trifling details of its
sphere and occasion. Only so far as this end is assumed as the true one do
the difficulties encountered, the infinite exertions and annoyances made
and endured for the attainment of the loved object, appear proportionate
to the matter. For it is the future generation, in its whole individual
determinateness, that presses into existence by means of those efforts and
toils. Nay, it is itself already active in that careful, definite, and
arbitrary choice for the satisfaction of the sexual impulse which we call
love. The growing inclination of two lovers is really already the will to
live of the new individual which they can and desire to produce; nay, even
in the meeting of their longing glances its new life breaks out, and
announces itself as a future individuality harmoniously and well composed.
They feel the longing for an actual union and fusing together into a
single being, in order to live on only as this; and this longing receives
its fulfilment in the child which is produced by them, as that in which
the qualities transmitted by them both, fused and united in one being,
live on. Conversely, the mutual, decided and persistent aversion between a
man and a maid is a sign that what they could produce would only be a
badly organised, in itself inharmonious and unhappy being. Hence there
lies a deeper meaning in the fact that Calderon, though he calls the
atrocious Semiramis the daughter of the air, yet introduces her as the
daughter of rape followed by the murder of the husband.

But, finally, what draws two individuals of different sex exclusively to
each other with such power is the will to live, which exhibits itself in
the whole species, and which here anticipates in the individual which
these two can produce an objectification of its nature answering to its
aims. This individual will have the will, or character, from the father,
the intellect from the mother, and the corporisation from both; yet, for
the most part, the figure will take more after the father, the size after
the mother,—according to the law which comes out in the breeding of
hybrids among the brutes, and principally depends upon the fact that the
size of the fœtus must conform to the size of the uterus. Just as
inexplicable as the quite special individuality of any man, which is
exclusively peculiar to him, is also the quite special and individual
passion of two lovers; indeed at bottom the two are one and the same: the
former is _explicite_ what the latter was _implicite_. The moment at which
the parents begin to love each other—to fancy each other, as the very
happy English expression has it—is really to be regarded as the first
appearance of a new individual and the true _punctum saliens_ of its life,
and, as has been said, in the meeting and fixing of their longing glances
there appears the first germ of the new being, which certainly, like all
germs, is generally crushed out. This new individual is to a certain
extent a new (Platonic) Idea; and now, as all Ideas strive with the
greatest vehemence to enter the phenomenal world, eagerly seizing for this
end upon the matter which the law of causality divides among them all, so
also does this particular Idea of a human individuality strive with the
greatest eagerness and vehemence towards its realisation in the
phenomenon. This eagerness and vehemence is just the passion of the two
future parents for each other. It has innumerable degrees, the two
extremes of which may at any rate be described as Αφροδιτη πανδημος and
ουρανια; in its nature, however, it is everywhere the same. On the other
hand, it will be in degree so much the more powerful the more
_individualised_ it is; that is, the more the loved individual is
exclusively suited, by virtue of all his or her parts and qualities, to
satisfy the desire of the lover and the need established by his or her own
individuality. What is really in question here will become clear in the
further course of our exposition. Primarily and essentially the
inclination of love is directed to health, strength, and beauty,
consequently also to youth; because the will first of all seeks to exhibit
the specific character of the human species as the basis of all
individuality: ordinary amorousness (Αφροδιτη πανδημος) does not go much
further. To these, then, more special claims link themselves on, which we
shall investigate in detail further on, and with which, when they see
satisfaction before them, the passion increases. But the highest degrees
of this passion spring from that suitableness of two individualities to
each other on account of which the will, _i.e._, the character, of the
father and the intellect of the mother, in their connection, make up
precisely that individual towards which the will to live in general which
exhibits itself in the whole species feels a longing proportionate to this
its magnitude, and which therefore exceeds the measure of a mortal heart,
and the motives of which, in the same way, lie beyond the sphere of the
individual intellect. This is thus the soul of a true and great passion.
Now the more perfect is the mutual adaptation of two individuals to each
other in each of the many respects which have further to be considered,
the stronger will be their mutual passion. Since there do not exist two
individuals exactly alike, there must be for each particular man a
particular woman—always with reference to what is to be produced—who
corresponds most perfectly. A really passionate love is as rare as the
accident of these two meeting. Since, however, the possibility of such a
love is present in every one, the representations of it in the works of
the poets are comprehensible to us. Just because the passion of love
really turns about that which is to be produced, and its qualities, and
because its kernel lies here, a friendship without any admixture of sexual
love can exist between two young and good‐looking persons of different
sex, on account of the agreement of their disposition, character, and
mental tendencies; nay, as regards sexual love there may even be a certain
aversion between them. The reason of this is to be sought in the fact that
a child produced by them would have physical or mental qualities which
were inharmonious; in short, its existence and nature would not answer the
ends of the will to live as it exhibits itself in the species. On the
other hand, in the case of difference of disposition, character, and
mental tendency, and the dislike, nay, enmity, proceeding from this,
sexual love may yet arise and exist; when it then blinds us to all that;
and if it here leads to marriage it will be a very unhappy one.

Let us now set about the more thorough investigation of the matter. Egoism
is so deeply rooted a quality of all individuals in general, that in order
to rouse the activity of an individual being egoistical ends are the only
ones upon which we can count with certainty. Certainly the species has an
earlier, closer, and greater claim upon the individual than the perishable
individuality itself. Yet when the individual has to act, and even make
sacrifices for the continuance and quality of the species, the importance
of the matter cannot be made so comprehensible to his intellect, which is
calculated merely with regard to individual ends, as to have its
proportionate effect. Therefore in such a case nature can only attain its
ends by implanting a certain illusion in the individual, on account of
which that which is only a good for the species appears to him as a good
for himself, so that when he serves the species he imagines he is serving
himself; in which process a mere chimera, which vanishes immediately
afterwards, floats before him, and takes the place of a real thing as a
motive. This illusion is instinct. In the great majority of cases this is
to be regarded as the sense of the species, which presents what is of
benefit to _it_ to the will. Since, however, the will has here become
individual, it must be so deluded that it apprehends through the sense of
the individual what the sense of the species presents to it, thus imagines
it is following individual ends while in truth it is pursuing ends which
are merely general (taking this word in its strictest sense). The external
phenomenon of instinct we can best observe in the brutes where its rôle is
most important; but it is in ourselves alone that we arrive at a knowledge
of its internal process, as of everything internal. Now it is certainly
supposed that man has almost no instinct; at any rate only this, that the
new‐born babe seeks for and seizes the breast of its mother. But, in fact,
we have a very definite, distinct, and complicated instinct, that of the
selection of another individual for the satisfaction of the sexual
impulse, a selection which is so fine, so serious, and so arbitrary. With
this satisfaction in itself, _i.e._, so far as it is a sensual pleasure
resting upon a pressing want of the individual, the beauty or ugliness of
the other individual has nothing to do. Thus the regard for this which is
yet pursued with such ardour, together with the careful selection which
springs from it, is evidently connected, not with the chooser
himself—although he imagines it is so—but with the true end, that which is
to be produced, which is to receive the type of the species as purely and
correctly as possible. Through a thousand physical accidents and moral
aberrations there arise a great variety of deteriorations of the human
form; yet its true type, in all its parts, is always again established:
and this takes place under the guidance of the sense of beauty, which
always directs the sexual impulse, and without which this sinks to the
level of a disgusting necessity. Accordingly, in the first place, every
one will decidedly prefer and eagerly desire the most beautiful
individuals, _i.e._, those in whom the character of the species is most
purely impressed; but, secondly, each one will specially regard as
beautiful in another individual those perfections which he himself lacks,
nay, even those imperfections which are the opposite of his own. Hence,
for example, little men love big women, fair persons like dark, &c. &c.
The delusive ecstasy which seizes a man at the sight of a woman whose
beauty is suited to him, and pictures to him a union with her as the
highest good, is just the _sense of the species_, which, recognising the
distinctly expressed stamp of the same, desires to perpetuate it with this
individual. Upon this decided inclination to beauty depends the
maintenance of the type of the species: hence it acts with such great
power. We shall examine specially further on the considerations which it
follows. Thus what guides man here is really an instinct which is directed
to doing the best for the species, while the man himself imagines that he
only seeks the heightening of his own pleasure. In fact, we have in this
an instructive lesson concerning the inner nature of all instinct, which,
as here, almost always sets the individual in motion for the good of the
species. For clearly the pains with which an insect seeks out a particular
flower, or fruit, or dung, or flesh, or, as in the case of the
ichneumonidæ, the larva of another insect, in order to deposit its eggs
there only, and to attain this end shrinks neither from trouble nor
danger, is thoroughly analogous to the pains with which for his sexual
satisfaction a man carefully chooses a woman with definite qualities which
appeal to him individually, and strives so eagerly after her that in order
to attain this end he often sacrifices his own happiness in life, contrary
to all reason, by a foolish marriage, by love affairs which cost him
wealth, honour, and life, even by crimes such as adultery or rape, all
merely in order to serve the species in the most efficient way, although
at the cost of the individual, in accordance with the will of nature which
is everywhere sovereign. Instinct, in fact, is always an act which seems
to be in accordance with the conception of an end, and yet is entirely
without such a conception. Nature implants it wherever the acting
individual is incapable of understanding the end, or would be unwilling to
pursue it. Therefore, as a rule, it is given only to the brutes, and
indeed especially to the lowest of them which have least understanding;
but almost only in the case we are here considering it is also given to
man, who certainly could understand the end, but would not pursue it with
the necessary ardour, that is, even at the expense of his individual
welfare. Thus here, as in the case of all instinct, the truth assumes the
form of an illusion, in order to act upon the will. It is a voluptuous
illusion which leads the man to believe he will find a greater pleasure in
the arms of a woman whose beauty appeals to him than in those of any
other; or which indeed, exclusively directed to a single individual,
firmly convinces him that the possession of her will ensure him excessive
happiness. Therefore he imagines he is taking trouble and making
sacrifices for his own pleasure, while he does so merely for the
maintenance of the regular type of the species, or else a quite special
individuality, which can only come from these parents, is to attain to
existence. The character of instinct is here so perfectly present, thus an
action which seems to be in accordance with the conception of an end, and
yet is entirely without such a conception, that he who is drawn by that
illusion often abhors the end which alone guides it, procreation, and
would like to hinder it; thus it is in the case of almost all illicit love
affairs. In accordance with the character of the matter which has been
explained, every lover will experience a marvellous disillusion after the
pleasure he has at last attained, and will wonder that what was so
longingly desired accomplishes nothing more than every other sexual
satisfaction; so that he does not see himself much benefited by it. That
wish was related to all his other wishes as the species is related to the
individual, thus as the infinite to the finite. The satisfaction, on the
other hand, is really only for the benefit of the species, and thus does
not come within the consciousness of the individual, who, inspired by the
will of the species, here served an end with every kind of sacrifice,
which was not his own end at all. Hence, then, every lover, after the
ultimate consummation of the great work, finds himself cheated; for the
illusion has vanished by means of which the individual was here the dupe
of the species, Accordingly Plato very happily says: “ἡδονη ἁπαντων
αλαζονεστατον” (_voluptas ommlum maxime vaniloqua_), _Phileb._ 319.

But all this reflects light on the instincts and mechanical tendencies of
the brutes. They also are, without doubt, involved in a kind of illusion,
which deceives them with the prospect of their own pleasure, while they
work so laboriously and with so much self‐denial for the species, the bird
builds its nest, the insect seeks the only suitable place for its eggs, or
even hunts for prey which, unsuited for its own enjoyment, must be laid
beside the eggs as food for the future larvæ, the bees, the wasps, the
ants apply themselves to their skilful dwellings and highly complicated
economy. They are all guided with certainty by an illusion, which conceals
the service of the species under the mask of an egotistical end. This is
probably the only way to comprehend the inner or subjective process that
lies at the foundation of the manifestations of instinct. Outwardly,
however, or objectively, we find in those creatures which are to a large
extent governed by instinct, especially in insects, a preponderance of the
ganglion system, _i.e._, the _subjective_ nervous system, over the
objective or cerebral system; from which we must conclude that they are
moved, not so much by objective, proper apprehension as by subjective
ideas exciting desire, which arise from the influence of the ganglion
system upon the brain, and accordingly by a kind of illusion; and this
will be the _physiological_ process in the case of all instinct. For the
sake of illustration I will mention as another example of instinct in the
human species, although a weak one, the capricious appetite of women who
are pregnant. It seems to arise from the fact that the nourishment of the
embryo sometimes requires a special or definite modification of the blood
which flows to it, upon which the food which produces such a modification
at once presents itself to the pregnant woman as an object of ardent
longing, thus here also an illusion arises. Accordingly woman has one
instinct more than man; and the ganglion system is also much more
developed in the woman. That man has fewer instincts than the brutes and
that even these few can be easily led astray, may be explained from the
great preponderance of the brain in his case. The sense of beauty which
instinctively guides the selection for the satisfaction of sexual passion
is led astray when it degenerates into the tendency to pederasty;
analogous to the fact that the blue‐bottle (_Musca vomitoria_), instead of
depositing its eggs, according to instinct, in putrefying flesh, lays them
in the blossom of the _Arum dracunculus_, deceived by the cadaverous smell
of this plant.

Now that an instinct entirely directed to that which is to be produced
lies at the foundation of all sexual love will receive complete
confirmation from the fuller analysis of it, which we cannot therefore
avoid. First of all we have to remark here that by nature man is inclined
to inconstancy in love, woman to constancy. The love of the man sinks
perceptibly from the moment it has obtained satisfaction; almost every
other woman charms him more than the one he already possesses; he longs
for variety. The love of the woman, on the other hand, increases just from
that moment. This is a consequence of the aim of nature which is directed
to the maintenance, and therefore to the greatest possible increase, of
the species. The man can easily beget over a hundred children a year; the
woman, on the contrary, with however many men, can yet only bring one
child a year into the world (leaving twin births out of account).
Therefore the man always looks about after other women; the woman, again,
sticks firmly to the one man; for nature moves her, instinctively and
without reflection, to retain the nourisher and protector of the future
offspring. Accordingly faithfulness in marriage is with the man
artificial, with the woman it is natural, and thus adultery on the part of
the woman is much less pardonable than on the part of the man, both
objectively on account of the consequences and also subjectively on
account of its unnaturalness.

But in order to be thorough and gain full conviction that the pleasure in
the other sex, however objective it may seem to us, is yet merely
disguised instinct, _i.e._, sense of the species, which strives to
maintain its type, we must investigate more fully the considerations which
guide us in this pleasure, and enter into the details of this, rarely as
these details which will have to be mentioned here may have figured in a
philosophical work before. These considerations divide themselves into
those which directly concern the type of the species, _i.e._, beauty,
those which are concerned with physical qualities, and lastly, those which
are merely relative, which arise from the requisite correction or
neutralisation of the one‐sided qualities and abnormities of the two
individuals by each other. We shall go through them one by one.

The first consideration which guides our choice and inclination is age. In
general we accept the age from the years when menstruation begins to those
when it ceases, yet we give the decided preference to the period from the
eighteenth to the twenty‐eighth year. Outside of those years, on the other
hand, no woman can attract us: an old woman, _i.e._, one who no longer
menstruates, excites our aversion. Youth without beauty has still always
attraction; beauty without youth has none. Clearly the unconscious end
which guides us here is the possibility of reproduction in general:
therefore every individual loses attraction for the opposite sex in
proportion as he or she is removed from the fittest period for begetting
or conceiving. The second consideration is that of health. Acute diseases
only temporarily disturb us, chronic diseases or cachexia repel us,
because they are transmitted to the child. The third consideration is the
skeleton, because it is the basis of the type of the species. Next to age
and disease nothing repels us so much as a deformed figure; even the most
beautiful face cannot atone for it; on the contrary, even the ugliest face
when accompanied by a straight figure is unquestionably preferred.
Further, we feel every disproportion of the skeleton most strongly; for
example, a stunted, dumpy, short‐boned figure, and many such; also a
halting gait, where it is not the result of an extraneous accident. On the
other hand, a strikingly beautiful figure can make up for all defects: it
enchants us. Here also comes in the great value which all attach to the
smallness of the feet: it depends upon the fact that they are an essential
characteristic of the species, for no animal has the tarsus and the
metatarsus taken together so small as man, which accords with his upright
walk; he is a plantigrade. Accordingly Jesus Sirach also says (xxvi. 23,
according to the revised translation by Kraus): “A woman with a straight
figure and beautiful feet is like columns of gold in sockets of silver.”
The teeth also are important; because they are essential for nourishment
and quite specially hereditary. The fourth consideration is a certain
fulness of flesh; thus a predominance of the vegetative function, of
plasticity; because this promises abundant nourishment for the fœtus;
hence great leanness repels us in a striking degree. A full female bosom
exerts an exceptional charm upon the male sex; because, standing in direct
connection with the female functions of propagation, it promises abundant
nourishment to the new‐born child. On the other hand, excessively fat
women excite our disgust: the cause is that this indicates atrophy of the
uterus, thus barrenness; which is not known by the head, but by instinct.
The last consideration of all is the beauty of the face. Here also before
everything else the bones are considered; therefore we look principally
for a beautiful nose, and a short turned‐up nose spoils everything. A
slight inclination of the nose downwards or upwards has decided the
happiness in life of innumerable maidens, and rightly so, for it concerns
the type of the species. A small mouth, by means of small maxillæ, is very
essential as specifically characteristic of the human countenance, as
distinguished from the muzzle of the brutes. A receding or, as it were,
cut‐away chin is especially disagreeable, because _mentum prominulum_ is
an exclusive characteristic of our species. Finally comes the regard for
beautiful eyes and forehead; it is connected with the psychical qualities,
especially the intellectual which are inherited from the mother.

The unconscious considerations which, on the other hand, the inclination
of women follows naturally cannot be so exactly assigned. In general the
following may be asserted: They give the preference to the age from thirty
to thirty‐five years, especially over that of youths who yet really
present the height of human beauty. The reason is that they are not guided
by taste but by instinct, which recognises in the age named the acme of
reproductive power. In general they look less to beauty, especially of the
face. It is as if they took it upon themselves alone to impart this to the
child. They are principally won by the strength of the man, and the
courage which is connected with this; for these promise the production of
stronger children, and also a brave protector for them. Every physical
defect of the man, every divergence from the type, may with regard to the
child be removed by the woman in reproduction, through the fact that she
herself is blameless in these respects, or even exceeds in the opposite
direction. Only those qualities of the man have to be excepted which are
peculiar to his sex, and which therefore the mother cannot give to the
child: such are the manly structure of the skeleton, broad shoulders,
slender hips, straight bones, muscular power, courage, beard, &c. Hence it
arises that women often love ugly men, but never an unmanly man, because
they cannot neutralise his defects.

The second class of the considerations which lie at the foundation of
sexual love are those which regard psychical qualities. Here we shall find
that the woman is throughout attracted by the qualities of the heart or
character in the man, as those which are inherited from the father. The
woman is won especially by firmness of will, decision, and courage, and
perhaps also by honesty and good‐heartedness. On the other hand,
intellectual gifts exercise no direct and instinctive power over her, just
because they are not inherited from the father. Want of understanding does
a man no harm with women; indeed extraordinary mental endowment, or even
genius, might sooner influence them unfavourably as an abnormity. Hence
one often sees an ugly, stupid, and coarse fellow get the better of a
cultured, able, and amiable man with women. Also marriages from love are
sometimes consummated between natures which are mentally very different:
for example, the man is rough, powerful, and stupid; the woman tenderly
sensitive, delicately thoughtful, cultured, æsthetic, &c.; or the man is a
genius and learned, the woman a goose:


    “_Sic visum Veneri; cui placet impares_
    _Formas atque animos sub juga aënea_
          _Sævo mittere cum joco._”


The reason is, that here quite other considerations than the intellectual
predominate,—those of instinct. In marriage what is looked to is not
intellectual entertainment, but the production of children: it is a bond
of the heart, not of the head. It is a vain and absurd pretence when women
assert that they have fallen in love with the mind of a man, or else it is
the over‐straining of a degenerate nature. Men, on the other hand, are not
determined in their instinctive love by the qualities of character of the
woman; hence so many Socrateses have found their Xantippes; for example,
Shakspeare, Albrecht Dürer, Byron, &c. The intellectual qualities,
however, certainly influence here, because they are inherited from the
mother. Yet their influence is easily outweighed by that of physical
beauty, which acts directly, as concerning a more essential point.
However, it happens, either from the feeling or the experience of that
influence, that mothers have their daughters taught the fine arts,
languages, and so forth in order to make them attractive to men, whereby
they wish to assist the intellect by artificial means, just as, in case of
need, they assist the hips and the bosom. Observe that here we are
speaking throughout only of that entirely immediate instinctive attraction
from which alone love properly so called grows. That a woman of culture
and understanding prizes understanding and intellect in a man, that a man
from rational reflection should test and have regard to the character of
his bride, has nothing to do with the matter with which we are dealing
here. Such things lie at the bottom of a rational choice in marriage, but
not of the passionate love, which is our theme.

Hitherto I have only taken account of the _absolute_ considerations,
_i.e._, those which hold good for every one: I come now to the _relative_
considerations, which are individual, because in their case what is looked
to is the rectification of the type of the species, which is already
defectively presented, the correction of the divergences from it which the
chooser’s own person already bears in itself, and thus the return to the
pure presentation of the type. Here, then, each one loves what he lacks.
Starting from the individual constitution, and directed to the individual
constitution, the choice which rests upon such relative considerations is
much more definite, decided, and exclusive than that which proceeds merely
from the absolute considerations; therefore the source of really
passionate love will lie, as a rule, in these relative considerations, and
only that of the ordinary and slighter inclination in the absolute
considerations. Accordingly it is not generally precisely correct and
perfect beauties that kindle great passions. For such a truly passionate
inclination to arise something is required which can only be expressed by
a chemical metaphor: two persons must neutralise each other, like acid and
alkali, to a neutral salt. The essential conditions demanded for this are
the following. First: all sex is one‐sided. This one‐sidedness is more
distinctly expressed in one individual than in another; therefore in every
individual it can be better supplemented and neutralised by one than by
another individual of the opposite sex, for each one requires a one‐
sidedness which is the opposite of his own to complete the type of
humanity in the new individual that is to be produced, the constitution of
which is always the goal towards which all tends. Physiologists know that
manhood and womanhood admit of innumerable degrees, through which the
former sinks to the repulsive gynander and hypospadæus, and the latter
rises to the graceful androgyne; from both sides complete hermaphrodism
can be reached, at which point stand those individuals who, holding the
exact mean between the two sexes, can be attributed to neither, and
consequently are unfit to propagate the species. Accordingly, the
neutralisation of two individualities by each other, of which we are
speaking, demands that the definite degree of _his_ manhood shall exactly
correspond to the definite degree of _her_ womanhood; so that the one‐
sidedness of each exactly annuls that of the other. Accordingly, the most
manly man will seek the most womanly woman, and _vice versâ_, and in the
same way every individual will seek another corresponding to him or her in
degree of sex. Now how far the required relation exists between two
individuals is instinctively felt by them, and, together with the other
relative considerations, lies at the foundation of the higher degrees of
love. While, therefore, the lovers speak pathetically of the harmony of
their souls, the heart of the matter is for the most part the agreement or
suitableness pointed out here with reference to the being which is to be
produced and its perfection, and which is also clearly of much more
importance than the harmony of their souls, which often, not long after
the marriage, resolves itself into a howling discord. Now, here come in
the further relative considerations, which depend upon the fact that every
one endeavours to neutralise by means of the other his weaknesses,
defects, and deviations from the type, so that they will not perpetuate
themselves, or even develop into complete abnormities in the child which
is to be produced. The weaker a man is as regards muscular power the more
will he seek for strong women; and the woman on her side will do the same.
But since now a less degree of muscular power is natural and regular in
the woman, women as a rule will give the preference to strong men.
Further, the size is an important consideration. Little men have a decided
inclination for big women, and _vice versâ_; and indeed in a little man
the preference for big women will be so much the more passionate if he
himself was begotten by a big father, and only remains little through the
influence of his mother; because he has inherited from his father the
vascular system and its energy, which was able to supply a large body with
blood. If, on the other hand, his father and grandfather were both little,
that inclination will make itself less felt. At the foundation of the
aversion of a big woman to big men lies the intention of nature to avoid
too big a race, if with the strength which _this_ woman could impart to
them they would be too weak to live long. If, however, such a woman
selects a big husband, perhaps for the sake of being more presentable in
society, then, as a rule, her offspring will have to atone for her folly.
Further, the consideration as to the complexion is very decided. Blondes
prefer dark persons, or brunettes; but the latter seldom prefer the
former. The reason is, that fair hair and blue eyes are in themselves a
variation from the type, almost an abnormity, analogous to white mice, or
at least to grey horses. In no part of the world, not even in the vicinity
of the pole, are they indigenous, except in Europe, and are clearly of
Scandinavian origin. I may here express my opinion in passing that the
white colour of the skin is not natural to man, but that by nature he has
a black or brown skin, like our forefathers the Hindus; that consequently
a white man has never originally sprung from the womb of nature, and that
thus there is no such thing as a white race, much as this is talked of,
but every white man is a faded or bleached one. Forced into the strange
world, where he only exists like an exotic plant, and like this requires
in winter the hothouse, in the course of thousands of years man became
white. The gipsies, an Indian race which immigrated only about four
centuries ago, show the transition from the complexion of the Hindu to our
own.(38) Therefore in sexual love nature strives to return to dark hair
and brown eyes as the primitive type; but the white colour of the skin has
become a second nature, though not so that the brown of the Hindu repels
us. Finally, each one also seeks in the particular parts of the body the
corrective of his own defects and aberrations, and does so the more
decidedly the more important the part is. Therefore snub‐nosed individuals
have an inexpressible liking for hook‐noses, parrot‐faces; and it is the
same with regard to all other parts. Men with excessively slim, long
bodies and limbs can find beauty in a body which is even beyond measure
stumpy and short. The considerations with regard to temperament act in an
analogous manner. Each will prefer the temperament opposed to his own; yet
only in proportion as his one is decided. Whoever is himself in some
respect very perfect does not indeed seek and love imperfection in this
respect, but is yet more easily reconciled to it than others; because he
himself insures the children against great imperfection of this part. For
example, whoever is himself very white will not object to a yellow
complexion; but whoever has the latter will find dazzling whiteness
divinely beautiful. The rare case in which a man falls in love with a
decidedly ugly woman occurs when, besides the exact harmony of the degree
of sex explained above, the whole of her abnormities are precisely the
opposite, and thus the corrective, of his. The love is then wont to reach
a high degree.

The profound seriousness with which we consider and ponder each bodily
part of the woman, and she on her part does the same, the critical
scrupulosity with which we inspect a woman who begins to please us, the
capriciousness of our choice, the keen attention with which the bridegroom
observes his betrothed, his carefulness not to be deceived in any part,
and the great value which he attaches to every excess or defect in the
essential parts, all this is quite in keeping with the importance of the
end. For the new being to be produced will have to bear through its whole
life a similar part. For example, if the woman is only a little crooked,
this may easily impart to her son a hump, and so in all the rest.
Consciousness of all this certainly does not exist. On the contrary, every
one imagines that he makes that careful selection in the interest of his
own pleasure (which at bottom cannot be interested in it at all); but he
makes it precisely as, under the presupposition of his own corporisation,
is most in keeping with the interest of the species, to maintain the type
of which as pure as possible is the secret task. The individual acts here,
without knowing it, by order of something higher than itself, the species;
hence the importance which it attaches to things which may and indeed must
be, indifferent to itself as such. There is something quite peculiar in
the profound unconscious seriousness with which two young persons of
opposite sex who see each other for the first time regard each other, in
the searching and penetrating glance they cast at one another, in the
careful review which all the features and parts of their respective
persons have to endure. This investigating and examining is the
_meditation of the genius of the species_ on the individual which is
possible through these two and the combination of its qualities. According
to the result of this meditation is the degree of their pleasure in each
other and their yearning for each other. This yearning, even after it has
attained a considerable degree, may be suddenly extinguished again by the
discovery of something that had previously remained unobserved. In this
way, then, the genius of the species meditates concerning the coming race
in all who are capable of reproduction. The nature of this race is the
great work with which Cupid is occupied, unceasingly active, speculating,
and pondering. In comparison with the importance of his great affair,
which concerns the species and all coming races, the affairs of
individuals in their whole ephemeral totality are very trifling; therefore
he is always ready to sacrifice these regardlessly. For he is related to
them as an immortal to mortals, and his interests to theirs as infinite to
finite. Thus, in the consciousness of managing affairs of a higher kind
than all those which only concern individual weal or woe, he carries them
on sublimely, undisturbed in the midst of the tumult of war, or in the
bustle of business life, or during the raging of a plague, and pursues
them even into the seclusion of the cloister.

We have seen in the above that the intensity of love increases with its
individualisation, because we have shown that the physical qualities of
two individuals can be such that, for the purpose of restoring as far as
possible the type of the species, the one is quite specially and perfectly
the completion or supplement of the other, which therefore desires it
exclusively. Already in this case a considerable passion arises, which at
once gains a nobler and more sublime appearance from the fact that it is
directed to an individual object, and to it alone; thus, as it were,
arises at the special order of the species. For the opposite reason, the
mere sexual impulse is ignoble, because without individualisation it is
directed to all, and strives to maintain the species only as regards
quantity, with little respect to quality. But the individualising, and
with it the intensity of the love, can reach so high a degree that without
its satisfaction all the good things in the world, and even life itself,
lose their value. It is then a wish which attains a vehemence that no
other wish ever reaches, and therefore makes one ready for any sacrifice,
and in case its fulfilment remains unalterably denied, may lead to madness
or suicide. At the foundation of such an excessive passion there must lie,
besides the considerations we have shown above, still others which we have
not thus before our eyes. We must therefore assume that here not only the
corporisation, but the _will_ of the man and the _intellect_ of the woman
are specially suitable to each other, in consequence of which a perfectly
definite individual can be produced by them alone, whose existence the
genius of the species has here in view, for reasons which are inaccessible
to us, since they lie in the nature of the thing in itself. Or, to speak
more exactly, the will to live desires here to objectify itself in a
perfectly definite individual, which can only be produced by this father
with this mother. This metaphysical desire of the will in itself has
primarily no other sphere of action in the series of existences than the
hearts of the future parents, which accordingly are seized with this
ardent longing, and now imagine themselves to desire on their own account
what really for the present has only a purely metaphysical end, _i.e._, an
end which lies outside the series of actually existing things. Thus it is
the ardent longing to enter existence of the future individual which has
first become possible here, a longing which proceeds from the primary
source of all being, and exhibits itself in the phenomenal world as the
lofty passion of the future parents for each other, paying little regard
to all that is outside itself; in fact, as an unparalleled illusion, on
account of which such a lover would give up all the good things of this
world to enjoy the possession of this woman, who yet can really give him
nothing more than any other. That yet it is just this possession that is
kept in view here is seen from the fact that even this lofty passion, like
all others, is extinguished in its enjoyment—to the great astonishment of
those who are possessed by it. It also becomes extinct when, through the
woman turning out barren (which, according to Hufeland, may arise from
nineteen accidental constitutional defects), the real metaphysical end is
frustrated; just as daily happens in millions of germs trampled under
foot, in which yet the same metaphysical life principle strives for
existence; for which there is no other consolation than that an infinity
of space, time, and matter, and consequently inexhaustible opportunity for
return, stands open to the will to live.

The view which is here expounded must once have been present to the mind
of Theophrastus Paracelsus, even if only in a fleeting form, though he has
not handled this subject, and my whole system of thought was foreign to
him; for, in quite a different context and in his desultory manner, he
wrote the following remarkable words: “_Hi sunt, quos Deus copulavit, ut
eam, quæ fuit Uriæ et David; quamvis ex diametro (sic enim sibi humana
mens persuadebat) cum justo et legitimo matrimonio pugnaret hoc.... sed
propter Salomonem_, QUI ALIUNDE NASCI NON POTUIT, _nisi ex Bathseba,
conjuncto David semine, quamvis meretrice, conjunxit eos Deus_” (_De vita
longa_, i. 5).

The longing of love, the ἱμερος, which the poets of all ages are
unceasingly occupied with expressing in innumerable forms, and do not
exhaust the subject, nay, cannot do it justice, this longing, which
attaches the idea of endless happiness to the possession of a particular
woman, and unutterable pain to the thought that this possession cannot be
attained,—this longing and this pain cannot obtain their material from the
wants of an ephemeral individual; but they are the sighs of the spirit of
the species, which sees here, to be won or lost, a means for the
attainment of its ends which cannot be replaced, and therefore groans
deeply. The species alone has infinite life, and therefore is capable of
infinite desires, infinite satisfaction, and infinite pain. But these are
here imprisoned in the narrow breast of a mortal. No wonder, then, if such
a breast seems like to burst, and can find no expression for the
intimations of infinite rapture or infinite misery with which it is
filled. This, then, affords the materials for all erotic poetry of a
sublime kind, which accordingly rises into transcendent metaphors, soaring
above all that is earthly. This is the theme of Petrarch, the material for
the St. Preuxs, Werthers, and Jacopo Ortis, who apart from it could not be
understood nor explained. For that infinite esteem for the loved one
cannot rest upon some spiritual excellences, or in general upon any
objective, real qualities of hers; for one thing, because she is often not
sufficiently well known to the lover, as was the case with Petrarch. The
spirit of the species alone can see at one glance what _worth_ she has for
_it_, for its ends. And great passions also arise, as a rule, at the first
glance:


    “Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?”

    —SHAKSPEARE, “As You Like it,” iii. 5.


In this regard a passage in the romance of “_Guzman de Alfarache_,” by
Mateo Aleman, which has been famous for 250 years, is remarkable: “_No es
necessario, para que uno ame, que pase distancia de tiempo, que siga
discurso, ni haga eleccion, sino que con aquella primera y sola vista,
concurran juntamente cierta correspondencia ó consonancia, ó lo que acá __
solemos vulgarmente decir, una confrontacion de sangre, a que por
particular influxo suelen mover las estrellas._” (For one to love it is
not necessary that much time should pass, that he should set about
reflecting and make a choice; but only that at that first and only glance
a certain correspondence and consonance should be encountered on both
sides, or that which in common life we are wont to call a _sympathy of the
blood_, and to which a special influence of the stars generally impels),
P. ii. lib. iii. c. 5. Accordingly the loss of the loved one, through a
rival, or through death, is also for the passionate lover a pain that
surpasses all others, just because it is of a transcendental kind, since
it affects him not merely as an individual, but attacks him in his
_essentia æterna_, in the life of the species into whose special will and
service he was here called. Hence jealousy is such torment and so grim,
and the surrender of the loved one is the greatest of all sacrifices. A
hero is ashamed of all lamentations except the lamentation of love,
because in this it is not he but the species that laments. In Calderon’s
“Zenobia the Great” there is in the first act a scene between Zenobia and
Decius in which the latter says:


    “_Cielos, luego tu me quieres? Perdiera cien mil victorias,
    Volviérame_,” &c.

    (Heaven! then thou lovest me? For this I would lose a thousand
    victories, would turn about, &c.)


Here, honour, which hitherto outweighed every interest, is beaten out of
the field as soon as sexual love, _i.e._, the interest of the species,
comes into play, and sees before it a decided advantage; for this is
infinitely superior to every interest of mere individuals, however
important it may be. Therefore to this alone honour, duty, and fidelity
yield after they have withstood every other temptation, including the
threat of death. In the same way we find in private life that
conscientiousness is in no point so rare as in this: it is here sometimes
set aside even by persons who are otherwise honest and just, and adultery
is recklessly committed when passionate love, _i.e._, the interest of the
species, has mastered them. It even seems as if in this they believed
themselves to be conscious of a higher right than the interests of
individuals can ever confer; just because they act in the interest of the
species. In this reference Chamfort’s remark is worth noticing: “_Quand un
homme et une femme ont l’un pour l’autre une passion violente, il me
semble toujours que quelque soient les obstacles qui les séparent, un
mari, des parens, etc., les deux amans sont l’un a l’autre, de par la
Nature, qu’ils s’appartiennent de droit divin, malgré les lois et les
conventions humaines_.” Whoever is inclined to be incensed at this should
be referred to the remarkable indulgence which the Saviour shows in the
Gospel to the woman taken in adultery, in that He also assumes the same
guilt in the case of all present. From this point of view the greater part
of the “Decameron” appears as mere mocking and jeering of the genius of
the species at the rights and interests of individuals which it tramples
under foot. Differences of rank and all similar circumstances, when they
oppose the union of passionate lovers, are set aside with the same ease
and treated as nothing by the genius of the species, which, pursuing its
ends that concern innumerable generations, blows off as spray such human
laws and scruples. From the same deep‐lying grounds, when the ends of
passionate love are concerned, every danger is willingly encountered, and
those who are otherwise timorous here become courageous. In plays and
novels also we see, with ready sympathy, the young persons who are
fighting the battle of their love, _i.e._, the interest of the species,
gain the victory over their elders, who are thinking only of the welfare
of the individuals. For the efforts of the lovers appear to us as much
more important, sublime, and therefore right, than anything that can be
opposed to them, as the species is more important than the individual.
Accordingly the fundamental theme of almost all comedies is the appearance
of the genius of the species with its aims, which are opposed to the
personal interest of the individuals presented, and therefore threaten to
undermine their happiness. As a rule it attains its end, which, as in
accordance with poetical justice, satisfies the spectator, because he
feels that the aims of the species are much to be preferred to those of
the individual. Therefore at the conclusion he leaves the victorious
lovers quite confidently, because he shares with them the illusion that
they have founded their own happiness, while they have rather sacrificed
it to the choice of the species, against the will and foresight of their
elders. It has been attempted in single, abnormal comedies to reverse the
matter and bring about the happiness of the individuals at the cost of the
aims of the species; but then the spectator feels the pain which the
genius of the species suffers, and is not consoled by the advantages which
are thereby assured to the individuals. As examples of this kind two very
well‐known little pieces occur to me: “_La reine de 16 ans_,” and “_Le
marriage de raison_.” In tragedies containing love affairs, since the aims
of the species are frustrated, the lovers who were its tools, generally
perish also; for example, in “Romeo and Juliet,” “Tancred,” “Don Carlos,”
“Wallenstein,” “The Bride of Messina,” and many others.

The love of a man often affords comical, and sometimes also tragical
phenomena; both because, taken possession of by the spirit of the species,
he is now ruled by this, and no longer belongs to himself: his conduct
thereby becomes unsuited to the individual. That which in the higher
grades of love imparts such a tinge of poetry and sublimeness to his
thoughts, which gives them even a transcendental and hyperphysical
tendency, on account of which he seems to lose sight altogether of his
real, very physical aim, is at bottom this, that he is now inspired by the
spirit of the species whose affairs are infinitely more important than all
those which concern mere individuals, in order to find under the special
directions of this spirit the whole existence of an indefinitely long
posterity with this individual and exactly determined nature, which it can
receive only from him as father and the woman he loves as mother, and
which otherwise could never, _as such_, attain to existence, while the
objectification of the will to live expressly demands this existence. It
is the feeling that he is acting in affairs of such transcendent
importance which raises the lover so high above everything earthly, nay,
even above himself, and gives such a hyperphysical clothing to his very
physical desires, that love becomes a poetical episode even in the life of
the most prosaic man; in which last case the matter sometimes assumes a
comical aspect. That mandate of the will which objectifies itself in the
species exhibits itself in the consciousness of the lover under the mask
of the anticipation of an infinite blessedness which is to be found for
him in the union with this female individual. Now, in the highest grades
of love this chimera becomes so radiant that if it cannot be attained life
itself loses all charm, and now appears so joyless, hollow, and
insupportable that the disgust at it even overcomes the fear of death, so
that it is then sometimes voluntarily cut short. The will of such a man
has been caught in the vortex of the will of the species, or this has
obtained such a great predominance over the individual will that if such a
man cannot be effective in the first capacity, he disdains to be so in the
last. The individual is here too weak a vessel to be capable of enduring
the infinite longing of the will of the species concentrated upon a
definite object. In this case, therefore, the issue is suicide, sometimes
the double suicide of the two lovers; unless, to save life, nature allows
madness to intervene, which then covers with its veil the consciousness of
that hopeless state. No year passes without proving the reality of what
has been expounded by several cases of all these kinds.

Not only, however, has the unsatisfied passion of love sometimes a tragic
issue, but the satisfied passion also leads oftener to unhappiness than to
happiness. For its demands often conflict so much with the personal
welfare of him who is concerned that they undermine it, because they are
incompatible with his other circumstances, and disturb the plan of life
built upon them. Nay, not only with external circumstances is love often
in contradiction, but even with the lover’s own individuality, for it
flings itself upon persons who, apart from the sexual relation, would be
hateful, contemptible, and even abhorrent to the lover. But so much more
powerful is the will of the species than that of the individual that the
lover shuts his eyes to all those qualities which are repellent to him,
overlooks all, ignores all, and binds himself for ever to the object of
his passion—so entirely is he blinded by that illusion, which vanishes as
soon as the will of the species is satisfied, and leaves behind a detested
companion for life. Only from this can it be explained that we often see
very reasonable and excellent men bound to termagants and she‐devils, and
cannot conceive how they could have made such a choice. On this account
the ancients represented love as blind. Indeed, a lover may even know
distinctly and feel bitterly the faults of temperament and character of
his bride, which promise him a miserable life, and yet not be frightened
away:—


    “I ask not, I care not,
      If guilt’s in thy heart,
    I know that I love thee
      Whatever thou art.”


For ultimately he seeks not his own things, but those of a third person,
who has yet to come into being, although he is involved in the illusion
that what he seeks is his own affair. But it is just this not seeking of
one’s own things which is everywhere the stamp of greatness, that gives to
passionate love also a touch of sublimity, and makes it a worthy subject
of poetry. Finally, sexual love is compatible even with the extremest
hatred towards its object: therefore Plato has compared it to the love of
the wolf for the sheep. This case appears when a passionate lover, in
spite of all efforts and entreaties, cannot obtain a favourable hearing on
any condition:—


    “I love and hate her.”

    —SHAKSPEARE, _Cymb._, iii. 5.


The hatred of the loved one which then is kindled sometimes goes so far
that the lover murders her, and then himself. One or two examples of this
generally happen every year; they will be found in the newspapers.
Therefore Goethe’s lines are quite correct:—


    “By all despised love! By hellish element!
    Would that I knew a worse, that I might swear by!”


It is really no hyperbole if a lover describes the coldness of his beloved
and the delight of her vanity, which feeds on his sufferings, as cruelty;
for he is under the influence of an impulse which, akin to the instinct of
insects, compels him, in spite of all grounds of reason, to pursue his end
unconditionally, and to undervalue everything else: he cannot give it up.
Not one but many a Petrarch has there been who was compelled to drag
through life the unsatisfied ardour of love, like a fetter, an iron weight
at his foot, and breathe his sighs in lonely woods; but only in the one
Petrarch dwelt also the gift of poetry; so that Goethe’s beautiful lines
hold good of him:—


    “And when in misery the man was dumb
    A god gave me the power to tell my sorrow.”


In fact, the genius of the species wages war throughout with the guardian
geniuses of individuals, is their pursuer and enemy, always ready
relentlessly to destroy personal happiness in order to carry out its ends;
nay, the welfare of whole nations has sometimes been sacrificed to its
humours. An example of this is given us by Shakspeare in “Henry VI.,” pt.
iii., act 3, sc. 2 and 3. All this depends upon the fact that the species,
as that in which the root of our being lies, has a closer and earlier
right to us than the individual; hence its affairs take precedence. From
the feeling of this the ancients personified the genius of the species in
Cupid, a malevolent, cruel, and therefore ill‐reputed god, in spite of his
childish appearance; a capricious, despotic demon, but yet lord of gods
and men:


    “Συ δ᾽ω θεων τυραννε κ᾽ανθρωπων, Ερως!”

    (_Tu, deorum hominumque tyranne, Amor!_)


A deadly shot, blindness, and wings are his attributes. The latter signify
inconstancy; and this appears, as a rule, only with the disillusion which
is the consequence of satisfaction.

Because the passion depended upon an illusion, which represented that
which has only value for the species as valuable for the individual, the
deception must vanish after the attainment of the end of the species. The
spirit of the species which took possession of the individual sets it free
again. Forsaken by this spirit, the individual falls back into its
original limitation and narrowness, and sees with wonder that after such a
high, heroic, and infinite effort nothing has resulted for its pleasure
but what every sexual gratification affords. Contrary to expectation, it
finds itself no happier than before. It observes that it has been the dupe
of the will of the species. Therefore, as a rule, a Theseus who has been
made happy will forsake his Ariadne. If Petrarch’s passion had been
satisfied, his song would have been silenced from that time forth, like
that of the bird as soon as the eggs are laid.

Here let me remark in passing that however much my metaphysics of love
will displease the very persons who are entangled in this passion, yet if
rational considerations in general could avail anything against it, the
fundamental truth disclosed by me would necessarily fit one more than
anything else to subdue it. But the saying of the old comedian will, no
doubt, remain true: “_Quæ res in se __ neque consilium, neque modum habet
ullum, eam consilio regere non potes._”

Marriages from love are made in the interest of the species, not of the
individuals. Certainly the persons concerned imagine they are advancing
their own happiness; but their real end is one which is foreign to
themselves, for it lies in the production of an individual which is only
possible through them. Brought together by this aim, they ought henceforth
to try to get on together as well as possible. But very often the pair
brought together by that instinctive illusion, which is the essence of
passionate love, will, in other respects, be of very different natures.
This comes to light when the illusion vanishes, as it necessarily must.
Accordingly love marriages, as a rule, turn out unhappy; for through them
the coming generation is cared for at the expense of the present. “_Quien
se casa por amores, ha de vivir con dolores_” (Who marries from love must
live in sorrow), says the Spanish proverb. The opposite is the case with
marriages contracted for purposes of convenience, generally in accordance
with the choice of the parents. The considerations prevailing here, of
whatever kind they may be, are at least real, and cannot vanish of
themselves. Through them, however, the happiness of the present generation
is certainly cared for, to the disadvantage of the coming generation, and
notwithstanding this it remains problematical. The man who in his marriage
looks to money more than to the satisfaction of his inclination lives more
in the individual than in the species; which is directly opposed to the
truth; hence it appears unnatural, and excites a certain contempt. A girl
who, against the advice of her parents, rejects the offer of a rich and
not yet old man, in order, setting aside all considerations of
convenience, to choose according to her instinctive inclination alone,
sacrifices her individual welfare to the species. But just on this account
one cannot withhold from her a certain approbation; for she has preferred
what is of most importance, and has acted in the spirit of nature (more
exactly, of the species), while the parents advised in the spirit of
individual egoism. In accordance with all this, it appears as if in making
a marriage either the individual or the interests of the species must come
off a loser. And this is generally the case; for that convenience and
passionate love should go hand in hand is the rarest of lucky accidents.
The physical, moral, or intellectual deficiency of the nature of most men
may to some extent have its ground in the fact that marriages are
ordinarily entered into not from pure choice and inclination, but from all
kinds of external considerations, and on account of accidental
circumstances. If, however, besides convenience, inclination is also to a
certain extent regarded, this is, as it were, an agreement with the genius
of the species. Happy marriages are well known to be rare; just because it
lies in the nature of marriage that its chief end is not the present but
the coming generation. However, let me add, for the consolation of tender,
loving natures, that sometimes passionate sexual love associates itself
with a feeling of an entirely different origin—real friendship based upon
agreement of disposition, which yet for the most part only appears when
sexual love proper is extinguished in its satisfaction. This friendship
will then generally spring from the fact that the supplementing and
corresponding physical, moral, and intellectual qualities of the two
individuals, from which sexual love arose, with reference to the child to
be produced, are, with reference also to the individuals themselves,
related to each other in a supplementary manner as opposite qualities of
temperament and mental gifts, and thereby form the basis of a harmony of
disposition.

The whole metaphysics of love here dealt with stands in close connection
with my metaphysics in general, and the light which it throws upon this
may be summed up as follows.

We have seen that the careful selection for the satisfaction of the sexual
impulse, a selection which rises through innumerable degrees up to that of
passionate love, depends upon the highly serious interest which man takes
in the special personal constitution of the next generation. Now this
exceedingly remarkable interest confirms two truths which have been set
forth in the preceding chapters. (1.) The indestructibility of the true
nature of man, which lives on in that coming generation. For that interest
which is so lively and eager, and does not spring from reflection and
intention, but from the inmost characteristics and tendencies of our
nature, could not be so indelibly present and exercise such great power
over man if he were absolutely perishable, and were merely followed in
time by a race actually and entirely different from him. (2.) That his
true nature lies more in the species than in the individual. For that
interest in the special nature of the species, which is the root of all
love, from the passing inclination to the serious passion, is for every
one really the highest concern, the success or failure of which touches
him most sensibly; therefore it is called _par excellence_ the affair of
the heart. Moreover, when this interest has expressed itself strongly and
decidedly, everything which merely concerns one’s own person is postponed
and necessarily sacrificed to it. Through this, then, man shows that the
species lies closer to him than the individual, and he lives more
immediately in the former than in the latter. Why does the lover hang with
complete abandonment on the eyes of his chosen one, and is ready to make
every sacrifice for her? Because it is his immortal part that longs after
her; while it is only his mortal part that desires everything else. That
vehement or intense longing directed to a particular woman is accordingly
an immediate pledge of the indestructibility of the kernel of our being,
and of its continued existence in the species. But to regard this
continued existence as something trifling and insufficient is an error
which arises from the fact that under the conception of the continued life
of the species one thinks nothing more than the future existence of beings
similar to us, but in no regard identical with us; and this again because,
starting from knowledge directed towards without, one takes into
consideration only the external form of the species as we apprehend it in
perception, and not its inner nature. But it is just this inner nature
which lies at the foundation of our own consciousness as its kernel, and
hence indeed is more immediate than this itself, and, as thing in itself,
free from the _principium individuationis_, is really the same and
identical in all individuals, whether they exist together or after each
other. Now this is the will to live, thus just that which desires life and
continuance so vehemently. This accordingly is spared and unaffected by
death. It can attain to no better state than its present one; and
consequently for it, with life, the constant suffering and striving of the
individuals is certain. To free it from this is reserved for the denial of
the will to live, as the means by which the individual will breaks away
from the stem of the species, and surrenders that existence in it. We lack
conceptions for that which it now is; indeed all data for such conceptions
are wanting. We can only describe it as that which is free to be will to
live or not. Buddhism denotes the latter case by the word Nirvana, the
etymology of which was given in the note at the end of chapter 41. It is
the point which remains for ever unattainable to all human knowledge, just
as such.

If now, from the standpoint of this last consideration, we contemplate the
turmoil of life, we behold all occupied with its want and misery,
straining all their powers to satisfy its infinite needs and to ward off
its multifarious sorrows, yet without daring to hope anything else than
simply the preservation of this tormented existence for a short span of
time. In between, however, in the midst of the tumult, we see the glances
of two lovers meet longingly: yet why so secretly, fearfully, and
stealthily? Because these lovers are the traitors who seek to perpetuate
the whole want and drudgery, which would otherwise speedily reach an end;
this they wish to frustrate, as others like them have frustrated it
before. This consideration already passes over into the subject of the
following chapter.(39)




Chapter XLV.(40) On The Assertion Of The Will To Live.


If the will to live exhibited itself merely as an impulse to self‐
preservation, this would only be an assertion of the individual phenomenon
for the span of time of its natural duration. The cares and troubles of
such a life would not be great, and consequently existence would be easy
and serene. Since, on the contrary, the will wills life absolutely and for
all time, it exhibits itself also as sexual impulse, which has in view an
endless series of generations. This impulse does away with that
carelessness, serenity, and innocence which would accompany a merely
individual existence, for it brings unrest and melancholy into the
consciousness; misfortunes, cares, and misery into the course of life. If,
on the other hand, it is voluntarily suppressed, as we see in rare
exceptions, then this is the turning of the will, which changes its
course. The will does not then transcend the individual, but is abolished
in it. Yet this can only take place by means of the individual doing
painful violence to itself. If, however, it does take place, then the
freedom from care and the serenity of the purely individual existence is
restored to the consciousness, and indeed in a higher degree. On the other
hand, to the satisfaction of that most vehement of all impulses and
desires is linked the origin of a new existence, thus the carrying out of
life anew, with all its burdens, cares, wants, and pains; certainly in
another individual; yet if the two who are different in the phenomenon
were so absolutely and in themselves, where would then be eternal justice?
Life presents itself as a problem, a task to be worked out, and therefore,
as a rule, as a constant conflict with necessity. Accordingly every one
tries to get through with it and come off as well as he can. He performs
life as a compulsory service which he owes. But who has contracted the
debt?—His begetter, in the enjoyment of sensual pleasure. Thus, because
the one has enjoyed this, the other must live, suffer, and die. However,
we know and look back here to the fact that the difference of the similar
is conditioned by space and time, which in this sense I have called the
_principium individuationis_. Otherwise eternal justice could not be
vindicated. Paternal love, on account of which the father is ready to do,
to suffer, and to risk more for his child than for himself, and at the
same time knows that he owes this, depends simply upon the fact that the
begetter recognises himself in the begotten.

The life of a man, with its endless care, want, and suffering, is to be
regarded as the explanation and paraphrase of the act of procreation,
_i.e._, the decided assertion of the will to live; and further, it is also
due to this that he owes to nature the debt of death, and thinks with
anxiety of this debt. Is this not evidence of the fact that our existence
involves guilt? At any rate, we always exist, subject to the periodical
payment of the toll, birth and death, and successively partake of all the
sorrows and joys of life, so that none can escape us: this is just the
fruit of the assertion of the will to live. Thus the fear of death, which
in spite of all the miseries of life holds us firmly to it, is really
illusory; but just as illusory is the impulse which has enticed us into
it. This enticement itself may be seen objectively in the reciprocal
longing glances of two lovers; they are the purest expression of the will
to live, in its assertion. How soft and tender it is here! It wills well‐
being, and quiet pleasure, and mild joys for itself, for others, for all.
It is the theme of Anacreon. Thus by allurements and flattery it makes its
way into life. But when once it is there, misery introduces crime, and
crime misery; horror and desolation fill the scene. It is the theme of
Æschylus.

But now the act through which the will asserts itself and man arises is
one of which all are, in their inmost being, ashamed, which they therefore
carefully conceal; nay, if they are caught in it, are terrified as if they
had been taken in a crime. It is an action of which in cold reflection one
generally thinks with dislike, and in a lofty mood with loathing.
Reflections which in this regard approach the matter more closely are
offered by Montaigne in the fifth chapter of the third book, under the
marginal heading: “_Ce que c’est que l’amour_.” A peculiar sadness and
repentance follows close upon it, is yet most perceptible after the first
performance of the act, and in general is the more distinct the nobler is
the character. Hence even Pliny, the pagan, says: “_Homini tantum primi
coitus pœnitentia, augurium scilicet vitæ, a pœnitenda origine_” (_Hist.
Nat._, x. 83). And, on the other hand, in Goethe’s “Faust,” what do devil
and witches practise and sing of on their Sabbath? Lewdness and obscenity.
And in the same work (in the admirable “Paralipomena” to “Faust”) what
does incarnate Satan preach before the assembled multitude? Lewdness and
obscenity. But simply and solely by means of the continual practice of
such an act as this does the human race subsist. If now optimism were
right, if our existence were to be thankfully recognised as the gift of
the highest goodness guided by wisdom, and accordingly in itself
praiseworthy, commendable, and agreeable, then certainly the act which
perpetuates it would necessarily have borne quite another physiognomy. If,
on the other hand, this existence is a kind of false step or error; if it
is the work of an originally blind will, whose most fortunate development
is that it comes to itself in order to abolish itself; then the act which
perpetuates that existence must appear precisely as it does appear.

With reference to the first fundamental truth of my doctrine, the remark
deserves a place here that the shame mentioned above which attaches to the
act of generation extends even to the parts which are concerned in this,
although, like all other parts, they are given us by nature. This is again
a striking proof that not only the actions but even the body of man is to
be regarded as the manifestation, the objectification, of his will, and as
its work. For he could not be ashamed of a thing which existed without his
will.

The act of generation is further related to the world, as the answer is
related to the riddle. The world is wide in space and old in time, and of
an inexhaustible multiplicity of forms. Yet all this is only the
manifestation of the will to live; and the concentration, the focus of
this will is the act of generation. Thus in this act the inner nature of
the world expresses itself most distinctly. In this regard it is indeed
worth noticing that this act itself is also distinctly called “the will”
in the very significant German phrase, “_Er verlangte von ihr, sie sollte
ihm zu Willen sein_” (He desired her to comply with his wishes). As the
most distinct expression of the will, then, this act is the kernel, the
compendium, the quintessence of the world. Therefore from it we obtain
light as to the nature and tendency of the world: it is the answer to the
riddle. Accordingly it is understood under “the tree of knowledge,” for
after acquaintance with it the eyes of every one are opened as to life, as
Byron also says:


    “The tree of knowledge has been plucked,—all’s known.”

    —_Don Juan_, i. 128.


It is not less in keeping with this quality that it is the great αρρητον,
the open secret, which must never and nowhere be distinctly mentioned, but
always and everywhere is understood as the principal matter, and is
therefore constantly present to the thoughts of all, wherefore also the
slightest allusion to it is instantly understood. The leading part which
that act, and what is connected with it, plays in the world, because love
intrigues are everywhere, on the one hand, pursued, and, on the other
hand, assumed, is quite in keeping with the importance of this _punctum
saliens_ of the egg of the world. The source of the amusing is simply the
constant concealment of the chief concern.

But see now how the young, innocent, human intellect, when that great
secret of the world first becomes known to it, is startled at the
enormity! The reason of this is that in the long course which the
originally unconscious will had to traverse before it rose to intellect,
especially to human, rational intellect, it became so strange to itself
that it no longer knows its origin, that _pœnitenda origo_, and now, from
the standpoint of pure, and therefore innocent, knowing, is horrified at
it.

Since now the focus of the will, _i.e._, its concentration and highest
expression, is the sexual impulse and its satisfaction, this is very
significantly and naïvely expressed in the symbolical language of nature
through the fact that the individualised will, that is, the man and the
brute, makes its entrance into the world through the door of the sexual
organs.

The assertion of the will to live, which accordingly has its centre in the
act of generation, is in the case of the brute infallible. For the will,
which is the _natura naturans_, first arrives at reflection in man. To
arrive at reflection means, not merely to know the momentary necessity of
the individual will, how to serve it in the pressing present—as is the
case with the brute, in proportion to its completeness and its
necessities, which go hand in hand—but to have attained a greater breadth
of knowledge, by virtue of a distinct remembrance of the past, an
approximate anticipation of the future, and thereby a general survey of
the individual life, both one’s own life and that of others, nay, of
existence in general. Really the life of every species of brute, through
the thousands of years of its existence, is to a certain extent like a
single moment; for it is mere consciousness of the present, without that
of the past and the future, and consequently without that of death. In
this sense it is to be regarded as a permanent moment, a _Nunc stans_.
Here we see, in passing, most distinctly that in general the form of life,
or the manifestation of the will with consciousness, is primarily and
immediately merely the present. Past and future are added only in the case
of man, and indeed merely in conception, are known _in abstracto_, and
perhaps illustrated by pictures of the imagination. Thus after the will to
live, _i.e._, the inner being of nature, in the ceaseless striving towards
complete objectification and complete enjoyment, has run through the whole
series of the brutes,—which often occurs in the various periods of
successive animal series each arising anew on the same planet,—it arrives
at last at reflection in the being who is endowed with reason, man. Here
now to him the thing begins to be doubtful, the question forces itself
upon him whence and wherefore all this is, and chiefly whether the care
and misery of his life and effort is really repaid by the gain? “_Le jeu
vaut‐il bien la chandelle?_” Accordingly here is the point at which, in
the light of distinct knowledge, he decides for the assertion or denial of
the will to live; although as a rule he can only bring the latter to
consciousness in a mythical form. We have consequently no ground for
assuming that a still more highly developed objectification of the will is
ever reached, anywhere; for it has already reached its turning‐point here.




Chapter XLVI.(41) On The Vanity And Suffering Of Life.


Awakened to life out of the night of unconsciousness, the will finds
itself an individual, in an endless and boundless world, among innumerable
individuals, all striving, suffering, erring; and as if through a troubled
dream it hurries back to its old unconsciousness. Yet till then its
desires are limitless, its claims inexhaustible, and every satisfied
desire gives rise to a new one. No possible satisfaction in the world
could suffice to still its longings, set a goal to its infinite cravings,
and fill the bottomless abyss of its heart. Then let one consider what as
a rule are the satisfactions of any kind that a man obtains. For the most
part nothing more than the bare maintenance of this existence itself,
extorted day by day with unceasing trouble and constant care in the
conflict with want, and with death in prospect. Everything in life shows
that earthly happiness is destined to be frustrated or recognised as an
illusion. The grounds of this lie deep in the nature of things.
Accordingly the life of most men is troubled and short. Those who are
comparatively happy are so, for the most part, only apparently, or else,
like men of long life, they are the rare exceptions, a possibility of
which there had to be,—as decoy‐birds. Life presents itself as a continual
deception in small things as in great. If it has promised, it does not
keep its word, unless to show how little worth desiring were the things
desired: thus we are deluded now by hope, now by what was hoped for. If it
has given, it did so in order to take. The enchantment of distance shows
us paradises which vanish like optical illusions when we have allowed
ourselves to be mocked by them. Happiness accordingly always lies in the
future, or else in the past, and the present may be compared to a small
dark cloud which the wind drives over the sunny plain: before and behind
it all is bright, only it itself always casts a shadow. The present is
therefore always insufficient; but the future is uncertain, and the past
irrevocable. Life with its hourly, daily, weekly, yearly, little, greater,
and great misfortunes, with its deluded hopes and its accidents destroying
all our calculations, bears so distinctly the impression of something with
which we must become disgusted, that it is hard to conceive how one has
been able to mistake this and allow oneself to be persuaded that life is
there in order to be thankfully enjoyed, and that man exists in order to
be happy. Rather that continual illusion and disillusion, and also the
nature of life throughout, presents itself to us as intended and
calculated to awaken the conviction that nothing at all is worth our
striving, our efforts and struggles, that all good things are vanity, the
world in all its ends bankrupt, and life a business which does not cover
its expenses;—so that our will may turn away from it.

The way in which this vanity of all objects of the will makes itself known
and comprehensible to the intellect which is rooted in the individual, is
primarily _time_. It is the form by means of which that vanity of things
appears as their perishableness; for on account of this all our pleasures
and joys disappear in our hands, and we afterwards ask astonished where
they have remained. That nothingness itself is therefore the only
_objective_ element in time, _i.e._, that which corresponds to it in the
inner nature of things, thus that of which it is the expression. Just on
this account time is the _a priori_ necessary form of all our perceptions;
in it everything must present itself, even we ourselves. Accordingly,
first of all, our life is like a payment which one receives in nothing but
copper pence, and yet must then give a discharge for: the copper pence are
the days; the discharge is death. For at last time makes known the
judgment of nature concerning the work of all the beings which appear in
it, in that it destroys them:—


    “And rightly so, for all that arises
    Is worthy only of being destroyed.
    Hence were it better that nothing arose.”


Thus old age and death, to which every life necessarily hurries on, are
the sentence of condemnation on the will to live, coming from the hands of
nature itself, and which declares that this will is an effort which
frustrates itself. “What thou hast wished,” it says, “ends thus: desire
something better.” Hence the instruction which his life affords to every
one consists, as a whole, in this, that the objects of his desires
continually delude, waver, and fall, and accordingly bring more misery
than joy, till at last the whole foundation upon which they all stand
gives way, in that his life itself is destroyed and so he receives the
last proof that all his striving and wishing was a perversity, a false
path:—


    “Then old age and experience, hand in hand,
    Lead him to death, and make him understand,
    After a search so painful and so long,
    That all his life he has been in the wrong.”


We shall, however, enter into the details of the matter, for it is in
these views that I have met with most contradiction. First of all, I have
to confirm by the following remarks the proof given in the text of the
negative nature of all satisfaction, thus of all pleasure and all
happiness, in opposition to the positive nature of pain.

We feel pain, but not painlessness; we feel care, but not the absence of
care; fear, but not security. We feel the wish as we feel hunger and
thirst; but as soon as it has been fulfilled, it is like the mouthful that
has been taken, which ceases to exist for our feeling the moment it is
swallowed. Pleasures and joys we miss painfully whenever they are wanting;
but pains, even when they cease after having long been present, are not
directly missed, but at the most are intentionally thought of by means of
reflection. For only pain and want can be felt positively, and therefore
announce themselves; well‐being, on the other hand, is merely negative.
Therefore we do not become conscious of the three greatest blessings of
life, health, youth, and freedom, so long as we possess them, but only
after we have lost them; for they also are negations. We only observe that
days of our life were happy after they have given place to unhappy ones.
In proportion as pleasures increase, the susceptibility for them
decreases: what is customary is no longer felt as a pleasure. Just in this
way, however, is the susceptibility for suffering increased, for the loss
of what we are accustomed to is painfully felt. Thus the measure of what
is necessary increases through possession, and thereby the capacity for
feeling pain. The hours pass the quicker the more agreeably they are
spent, and the slower the more painfully they are spent; because pain, not
pleasure, is the positive, the presence of which makes itself felt. In the
same way we become conscious of time when we are bored, not when we are
diverted. Both these cases prove that our existence is most happy when we
perceive it least, from which it follows that it would be better not to
have it. Great and lively joy can only be conceived as the consequence of
great misery, which has preceded it; for nothing can be added to a state
of permanent satisfaction but some amusement, or the satisfaction of
vanity. Hence all poets are obliged to bring their heroes into anxious and
painful situations, so that they may be able to free them from them.
Dramas and Epics accordingly always describe only fighting, suffering,
tormented men; and every romance is a rareeshow in which we observe the
spasms and convulsions of the agonised human heart. Walter Scott has
naïvely expressed this æsthetic necessity in the conclusion to his novel,
“Old Mortality.” Voltaire, who was so highly favoured both by nature and
fortune, says, in entire agreement with the truth proved by me: “_Le
bonheur n’est qu’un rève, et la douleur est réelle_.” And he adds: “_Il y
a quatre‐vingts ans que je l’éprouve. Je n’y sais autre chose que me
résigner, et me dire que les mouches sont nées pour être mangées par les
araignées, et les hommes pour être dévorés par les chagrins._”

Before so confidently affirming that life is a blessing worth desiring or
giving thanks for, let one compare calmly the sum of the possible
pleasures which a man can enjoy in his life with the sum of the possible
sorrows which may come to him in his life. I believe the balance will not
be hard to strike. At bottom, however, it is quite superfluous to dispute
whether there is more good or evil in the world: for the mere existence of
evil decides the matter. For the evil can never be annulled, and
consequently can never be balanced by the good which may exist along with
it or after it.


    “_Mille piacer’ non vagliono un tormento._”—Petr.
    (A thousand pleasures are not worth one torment.)


For that a thousand had lived in happiness and pleasure would never do
away with the anguish and death‐agony of a single one; and just as little
does my present well‐being undo my past suffering. If, therefore, the
evils in the world were a hundred times less than is the case, yet their
mere existence would be sufficient to establish a truth which may be
expressed in different ways, though always somewhat indirectly, the truth
that we have not to rejoice but rather to mourn at the existence of the
world;—that its non‐existence would be preferable to its existence;—that
it is something which at bottom ought not to be, &c., &c. Very beautiful
is Byron’s expression of this truth:—


    “_Our life is a false nature_,—’tis not in
    The harmony of things, this hard decree,
    This uneradicable taint of sin,
    This boundless Upas, this all‐blasting tree
    Whose root is earth, whose leaves and branches be
    The skies, which rain their plagues on men like dew—
    Disease, death, bondage—all the woes we see—
    And worse, the woes we see not—which throb through
    The immedicable soul, with heart‐aches ever new.”


If the world and life were an end in themselves, and accordingly required
theoretically no justification and practically no indemnification or
compensation, but existed, for instance, as Spinoza and the Spinozists of
the present day represent it, as the single manifestation of a God, who,
_animi causa_, or else in order to mirror himself, undertook such an
evolution of himself; and hence its existence neither required to be
justified by reasons nor redeemed by results;—then the sufferings and
miseries of life would not indeed have to be fully equalled by the
pleasures and well‐being in it; for this, as has been said, is impossible,
because my present pain is never abolished by future joys, for the latter
fill their time as the former fills its time: but there would have to be
absolutely no suffering, and death also would either have not to be, or
else to have no terrors for us. Only thus would life pay for itself.

But since now our state is rather something which had better not be,
everything about us bears the trace of this,—just as in hell everything
smells of sulphur—for everything is always imperfect and illusory,
everything agreeable is displaced by something disagreeable, every
enjoyment is only a half one, every pleasure introduces its own
disturbance, every relief new difficulties, every aid of our daily and
hourly need leaves us each moment in the lurch and denies its service, the
step upon which we place our foot so often gives way under us, nay,
misfortunes great and small are the element of our life; and, in a word,
we are like Phineus, whose food was all tainted and made uneatable by the
harpies.(42) Two remedies for this are tried: first, ευλαβεια, _i.e._,
prudence, foresight, cunning; it does not fully instruct us, is
insufficient, and leads to defeat. Secondly, the stoical equanimity which
seeks to arm us against all misfortunes by preparedness for everything and
contempt of all: practically it becomes cynical renunciation, which
prefers once for all to reject all means of relief and all alleviations—it
reduces us to the position of dogs, like Diogenes in his tub. The truth
is, we ought to be wretched, and we are so. The chief source of the
serious evils which affect men is man himself: _homo homini lupus_.
Whoever keeps this last fact clearly in view beholds the world as a hell,
which surpasses that of Dante in this respect, that one man must be the
devil of another. For this, one is certainly more fitted than another; an
arch‐fiend, indeed, more fitted than all others, appearing in the form of
a conqueror, who places several hundred thousand men opposite each other,
and says to them: “To suffer and die is your destiny; now shoot each other
with guns and cannons,” and they do so.

In general, however, the conduct of men towards each other is
characterised as a rule by injustice, extreme unfairness, hardness, nay,
cruelty: an opposite course of conduct appears only as an exception. Upon
this depends the necessity of the State and legislation, and upon none of
your false pretences. But in all cases which do not lie within the reach
of the law, that regardlessness of his like, peculiar to man, shows itself
at once; a regardlessness which springs from his boundless egoism, and
sometimes also from wickedness. How man deals with man is shown, for
example, by negro slavery, the final end of which is sugar and coffee. But
we do not need to go so far: at the age of five years to enter a cotton‐
spinning or other factory, and from that time forth to sit there daily,
first ten, then twelve, and ultimately fourteen hours, performing the same
mechanical labour, is to purchase dearly the satisfaction of drawing
breath. But this is the fate of millions, and that of millions more is
analogous to it.

We others, however, can be made perfectly miserable by trifling
misfortunes; perfectly happy, not by the world. Whatever one may say, the
happiest moment of the happy man is the moment of his falling asleep, and
the unhappiest moment of the unhappy that of his awaking. An indirect but
certain proof of the fact that men feel themselves unhappy, and
consequently are so, is also abundantly afforded by the fearful envy which
dwells in us all, and which in all relations of life, on the occasion of
any superiority, of whatever kind it may be, is excited, and cannot
contain its poison. Because they feel themselves unhappy, men cannot
endure the sight of one whom they imagine happy; he who for the moment
feels himself happy would like to make all around him happy also, and
says:


    “_Que tout le monde ici soit heureux de ma joie._”


If life were in itself a blessing to be prized, and decidedly to be
preferred to non‐existence, the exit from it would not need to be guarded
by such fearful sentinels as death and its terrors. But who would continue
in life as it is if death were less terrible? And again, who could even
endure the thought of death if life were a pleasure! But thus the former
has still always this good, that it is the end of life, and we console
ourselves with regard to the suffering of life with death, and with regard
to death with the suffering of life. The truth is, that the two
inseparably belong to each other, for together they constitute a deviation
from the right path, to return to which is as difficult as it is
desirable.

If the world were not something which, expressed _practically_, ought not
to be, it would also not be _theoretically_ a problem; but its existence
would either require no explanation, inasmuch as it would be so entirely
self‐evident that wonder concerning it or a question about it could arise
in no mind, or its end would present itself unmistakably. Instead of this,
however, it is indeed an insoluble problem; for even the most perfect
philosophy will yet always contain an unexplained element, like an
insoluble deposit or the remainder which the irrational relation of two
quantities always leaves over. Therefore if one ventures to raise the
question why there is not rather nothing than this world, the world cannot
be justified from itself, no ground, no final cause of its existence can
be found in itself, it cannot be shown that it exists for its own sake,
_i.e._, for its own advantage. In accordance with my teaching, this can
certainly be explained from the fact that the principle of its existence
is expressly one which is without ground, a blind will to live, which as
thing in itself cannot be made subject to the principle of sufficient
reason, which is merely the form of the phenomenon, and through which
alone every why is justified. But this also agrees with the nature of the
world, for only a blind will, no seeing will, could place itself in the
position in which we behold ourselves. A seeing will would rather have
soon made the calculation that the business did not cover the cost, for
such a mighty effort and struggle with the straining of all the powers,
under constant care, anxiety, and want, and with the inevitable
destruction of every individual life, finds no compensation in the
ephemeral existence itself, which is so obtained, and which passes into
nothing in our hands. Hence, then, the explanation of the world from the
Anaxagorean νους, _i.e._, from a will accompanied by _knowledge_,
necessarily demands optimism to excuse it, which accordingly is set up and
maintained in spite of the loudly crying evidence of a whole world full of
misery. Life is there given out to be a gift, while it is evident that
every one would have declined such a gift if he could have seen it and
tested it beforehand; just as Lessing admired the understanding of his
son, who, because he had absolutely declined to enter life, had to be
forcibly brought into it with the forceps, but was scarcely there when he
hurried away from it again. On the other hand, it is then well said that
life should be, from one end to the other, only a lesson; to which,
however, any one might reply: “For this very reason I wish I had been left
in the peace of the all‐sufficient nothing, where I would have had no need
of lessons or of anything else.” If indeed it should now be added that he
must one day give an account of every hour of his life, he would be more
justified in himself demanding an account of why he had been transferred
from that rest into such a questionable, dark, anxious, and painful
situation. To this, then, we are led by false views. For human existence,
far from bearing the character of a _gift_, has entirely the character of
a _debt_ that has been contracted. The calling in of this debt appears in
the form of the pressing wants, tormenting desires, and endless misery
established through this existence. As a rule, the whole lifetime is
devoted to the paying off of this debt; but this only meets the interest.
The payment of the capital takes place through death. And when was this
debt contracted? At the begetting.

Accordingly, if we regard man as a being whose existence is a punishment
and an expiation, we then view him in a right light. The myth of the fall
(although probably, like the whole of Judaism, borrowed from the Zend‐
Avesta: Bundahish, 15), is the only point in the Old Testament to which I
can ascribe metaphysical, although only allegorical, truth; indeed it is
this alone that reconciles me to the Old Testament. Our existence
resembles nothing so much as the consequence of a false step and a guilty
desire. New Testament Christianity, the ethical spirit of which is that of
Brahmanism and Buddhism, and is therefore very foreign to the otherwise
optimistic spirit of the Old Testament, has also, very wisely, linked
itself on precisely to that myth: indeed, without this it would have found
no point of connection with Judaism at all. If any one desires to measure
the degree of guilt with which our existence is tainted, then let him look
at the suffering that is connected with it. Every great pain, whether
bodily or mental, declares what we deserve: for it could not come to us if
we did not deserve it. That Christianity also regards our existence in
this light is shown by a passage in Luther’s Commentary on Galatians,
chap. 3, which I only have beside me in Latin: “_Sumus autem nos omnes
corporibus et rebus subjecti Diabolo, et hospites sumus in mundo, cujus
ipse princeps et Deus est. Ideo panis, quem edimus, potus, quem bibimus,
vestes, quibus utimur, imo aër et totum quo vivimus in carne, sub ipsius
imperio est._” An outcry has been made about the melancholy and
disconsolate nature of my philosophy; yet it lies merely in the fact that
instead of inventing a future hell as the equivalent of sin, I show that
where guilt lies in the world there is also already something akin to
hell; but whoever is inclined to deny this can easily experience it.

And to this world, to this scene of tormented and agonised beings, who
only continue to exist by devouring each other, in which, therefore, every
ravenous beast is the living grave of thousands of others, and its self‐
maintenance is a chain of painful deaths; and in which the capacity for
feeling pain increases with knowledge, and therefore reaches its highest
degree in man, a degree which is the higher the more intelligent the man
is; to this world it has been sought to apply the system of optimism, and
demonstrate to us that it is the best of all possible worlds. The
absurdity is glaring. But an optimist bids me open my eyes and look at the
world, how beautiful it is in the sunshine, with its mountains and
valleys, streams, plants, animals, &c. &c. Is the world, then, a
rareeshow? These things are certainly beautiful to _look at_, but to _be_
them is something quite different. Then comes a teleologist, and praises
to me the wise arrangement by virtue of which it is taken care that the
planets do not run their heads together, that land and sea do not get
mixed into a pulp, but are held so beautifully apart, also that everything
is neither rigid with continual frost nor roasted with heat; in the same
way, that in consequence of the obliquity of the ecliptic there is no
eternal spring, in which nothing could attain to ripeness, &c. &c. But
this and all like it are mere _conditiones sine quibus non_. If in general
there is to be a world at all, if its planets are to exist at least as
long as the light of a distant fixed star requires to reach them, and are
not, like Lessing’s son, to depart again immediately after birth, then
certainly it must not be so clumsily constructed that its very framework
threatens to fall to pieces. But if one goes on to the results of this
applauded work, considers the players who act upon the stage which is so
durably constructed, and now sees how with sensibility pain appears, and
increases in proportion as the sensibility develops to intelligence, and
then how, keeping pace with this, desire and suffering come out ever more
strongly, and increase till at last human life affords no other material
than this for tragedies and comedies, then whoever is honest will scarcely
be disposed to set up hallelujahs. David Hume, in his “Natural History of
Religion,” §§ 6, 7, 8, and 13, has also exposed, mercilessly but with
convincing truth, the real though concealed source of these last. He also
explains clearly in the tenth and eleventh books of his “Dialogues on
Natural Religion,” with very pertinent arguments, which are yet of quite a
different kind from mine, the miserable nature of this world and the
untenableness of all optimism; in doing which he attacks this in its
origin. Both works of Hume’s are as well worth reading as they are unknown
at the present day in Germany, where, on the other hand, incredible
pleasure is found, patriotically, in the most disgusting nonsense of home‐
bred boastful mediocrities, who are proclaimed great men. Hamann, however,
translated these dialogues; Kant went through the translation, and late in
life wished to induce Hamann’s son to publish them because the translation
of Platner did not satisfy him (see Kant’s biography by F. W. Schubert,
pp. 81 and 165). From every page of David Hume there is more to be learned
than from the collected philosophical works of Hegel, Herbart, and
Schleiermacher together.

The founder of systematic optimism, again, is Leibnitz whose philosophical
merit I have no intention of denying although I have never succeeded in
thinking myself into the monadology, pre‐established harmony, and
_identitas indiscernibilium_. His “_Nouveaux essays sur l’entendement_”
are, however, merely an excerpt, with a full yet weak criticism, with a
view to correction, of Locke’s work which is justly of world‐wide
reputation. He here opposes Locke with just as little success as he
opposes Newton in the “_Tentamen de motuum cœlestium causis_,” directed
against the system of gravitation. The “Critique of Pure Reason” is
specially directed against this Leibnitz‐Wolfian philosophy, and has a
polemical, nay, a destructive relation to it, just as it is related to
Locke and Hume as a continuation and further construction. That at the
present day the professors of philosophy are on all sides engaged in
setting Leibnitz, with his juggling, upon his legs again, nay, in
glorifying him, and, on the other hand, in depreciating and setting aside
Kant as much as possible, has its sufficient reason in the _primum
vivere_; the “Critique of Pure Reason” does not admit of one giving out
Judaistic mythology as philosophy, nor of one speaking, without ceremony,
of the “soul” as a given reality, a well‐known and well‐accredited person,
without giving account of how one arrived at this conception, and what
justification one has for using it scientifically. But _primum vivere,
deinde philosophari_! Down with Kant, _vivat_ our Leibnitz! To return,
then, to Leibnitz, I cannot ascribe to the Théodicée, as a methodical and
broad unfolding of optimism, any other merit than this, that it gave
occasion later for the immortal “_Candide_” of the great Voltaire; whereby
certainly Leibnitz’s often‐repeated and lame excuse for the evil of the
world, that the bad sometimes brings about the good, received a
confirmation which was unexpected by him. Even by the name of his hero
Voltaire indicates that it only requires sincerity to recognise the
opposite of optimism. Really upon this scene of sin, suffering, and death
optimism makes such an extraordinary figure that one would be forced to
regard it as irony if one had not a sufficient explanation of its origin
in the secret source of it (insincere flattery, with insulting confidence
in its success), which, as was mentioned above, is so delightfully
disclosed by Hume.

But indeed to the palpably sophistical proofs of Leibnitz that this is the
best of all possible worlds, we may seriously and honestly oppose the
proof that it is the worst of all possible worlds. For possible means, not
what one may construct in imagination, but what can actually exist and
continue. Now this world is so arranged as to be able to maintain itself
with great difficulty; but if it were a little worse, it could no longer
maintain itself. Consequently a worse world, since it could not continue
to exist, is absolutely impossible: thus this world itself is the worst of
all possible worlds. For not only if the planets were to run their heads
together, but even if any one of the actually appearing perturbations of
their course, instead of being gradually balanced by others, continued to
increase, the world would soon reach its end. Astronomers know upon what
accidental circumstances—principally the irrational relation to each other
of the periods of revolution—this depends, and have carefully calculated
that it will always go on well; consequently the world also can continue
and go on. We will hope that, although Newton was of an opposite opinion,
they have not miscalculated, and consequently that the mechanical
perpetual motion realised in such a planetary system will not also, like
the rest, ultimately come to a standstill. Again, under the firm crust of
the planet dwell the powerful forces of nature which, as soon as some
accident affords them free play, must necessarily destroy that crust, with
everything living upon it, as has already taken place at least three times
upon our planet, and will probably take place oftener still. The
earthquake of Lisbon, the earthquake of Haiti, the destruction of Pompeii,
are only small, playful hints of what is possible. A small alteration of
the atmosphere, which cannot even be chemically proved, causes cholera,
yellow fever, black death, &c., which carry off millions of men; a
somewhat greater alteration would extinguish all life. A very moderate
increase of heat would dry up all the rivers and springs. The brutes have
received just barely so much in the way of organs and powers as enables
them to procure with the greatest exertion sustenance for their own lives
and food for their offspring; therefore if a brute loses a limb, or even
the full use of one, it must generally perish. Even of the human race,
powerful as are the weapons it possesses in understanding and reason,
nine‐tenths live in constant conflict with want, always balancing
themselves with difficulty and effort upon the brink of destruction. Thus
throughout, as for the continuance of the whole, so also for that of each
individual being the conditions are barely and scantily given, but nothing
over. The individual life is a ceaseless battle for existence itself;
while at every step destruction threatens it. Just because this threat is
so often fulfilled provision had to be made, by means of the enormous
excess of the germs, that the destruction of the individuals should not
involve that of the species, for which alone nature really cares. The
world is therefore as bad as it possibly can be if it is to continue to be
at all. _Q. E. D._ The fossils of the entirely different kinds of animal
species which formerly inhabited the planet afford us, as a proof of our
calculation, the records of worlds the continuance of which was no longer
possible, and which consequently were somewhat worse than the worst of
possible worlds.

Optimism is at bottom the unmerited self‐praise of the real originator of
the world, the will to live, which views itself complacently in its works;
and accordingly it is not only a false, but also a pernicious doctrine.
For it presents life to us as a desirable condition, and the happiness of
man as the end of it. Starting from this, every one then believes that he
has the most just claim to happiness and pleasure; and if, as is wont to
happen, these do not fall to his lot, then he believes that he is wronged,
nay, that he loses the end of his existence; while it is far more correct
to regard work, privation, misery, and suffering, crowned by death, as the
end of our life (as Brahmanism and Buddhism, and also genuine Christianity
do); for it is these which lead to the denial of the will to live. In the
New Testament the world is represented as a valley of tears, life as a
process of purifying or refining, and the symbol of Christianity is an
instrument of torture. Therefore, when Leibnitz, Shaftesbury, Bolingbroke,
and Pope brought forward optimism, the general offence which it gave
depended principally upon the fact that optimism is irreconcilable with
Christianity; as Voltaire states and explains in the preface to his
excellent poem, “_Le désastre de Lisbonne_,” which is also expressly
directed against optimism. This great man, whom I so gladly praise, in
opposition to the abuse of venal German ink‐slingers, is placed decidedly
higher than Rousseau by the insight to which he attained in three
respects, and which prove the greater depth of his thinking: (1) the
recognition of the preponderating magnitude of the evil and misery of
existence with which he is deeply penetrated; (2) that of the strict
necessity of the acts of will; (3) that of the truth of Locke’s principle,
that what thinks may also be material: while Rousseau opposes all this
with declamations in his “_Profession de foi du vicaire Savoyard_,” a
superficial Protestant pastor’s philosophy; as he also in the same spirit
attacks the beautiful poem of Voltaire which has just been referred to
with ill‐founded, shallow, and logically false reasoning, in the interests
of optimism, in his long letter to Voltaire of 18th August 1756, which is
devoted simply to this purpose. Indeed, the fundamental characteristic and
the πρωτον ψευδος of Rousseau’s whole philosophy is this, that in the
place of the Christian doctrine of original sin, and the original
depravity of the human race, he puts an original goodness and unlimited
perfectibility of it, which has only been led astray by civilisation and
its consequences, and then founds upon this his optimism and humanism.

As in “_Candide_” Voltaire wages war in his facetious manner against
optimism, Byron has also done so in his serious and tragic style, in his
immortal masterpiece, “Cain,” on account of which he also has been
honoured with the invectives of the obscurantist, Friedrich Schlegel. If
now, in conclusion, to confirm my view, I were to give what has been said
by great men of all ages in this anti‐optimistic spirit, there would be no
end to the quotations, for almost every one of them has expressed in
strong language his knowledge of the misery of this world. Thus, not to
confirm, but merely to embellish this chapter, a few quotations of this
kind may be given at the end of it.

First of all, let me mention here that the Greeks, far as they were from
the Christian and lofty Asiatic conception of the world, and although they
decidedly stood at the point of view of the assertion of the will, were
yet deeply affected by the wretchedness of existence. This is shown even
by the invention of tragedy, which belongs to them. Another proof of it is
afforded us by the custom of the Thracians, which is first mentioned by
Herodotus, though often referred to afterwards—the custom of welcoming the
new‐born child with lamentations, and recounting all the evils which now
lie before it; and, on the other hand, burying the dead with mirth and
jesting, because they are no longer exposed to so many and great
sufferings. In a beautiful poem preserved for us by Plutarch (_De audiend.
poët. in fine_) this runs thus:—


    “Τον φυντα θρηνειν, εις ὁσ᾽ ερχεται κακα
    Τον δ᾽αυ θανοντα και πονων πεπαυμενον
    Χαιροντας ευφημουντας εκπεμπειν δομων.”

    (_Lugere genitum, tanta qui intrarit mala:_
    _At morte si quis finiisset miserias,_
    _Hunc laude amicos atque lætitia exsequi._)


It is not to be attributed to historical relationship, but to the moral
identity of the matter, that the Mexicans welcomed the new‐born child with
the words, “My child, thou art born to endure; therefore endure, suffer,
and keep silence.” And, following the same feeling, Swift (as Walter Scott
relates in his Life of Swift) early adopted the custom of keeping his
birthday not as a time of joy but of sadness, and of reading on that day
the passage of the Bible in which Job laments and curses the day on which
it was said in the house of his father a man‐child is born.

Well known and too long for quotation is the passage in the “Apology of
Socrates,” in which Plato makes this wisest of mortals say that death,
even if it deprives us of consciousness for ever, would be a wonderful
gain, for a deep, dreamless sleep every day is to be preferred even to the
happiest life.

A saying of Heraclitus runs: “Τῳ ουν βιῳ ονομα μεν βιος, εργον δε
θανατος.” (_Vitæ nomen quidem est vita, opus autem mors. Etymologicum
magnum, voce_ Βιος; also _Eustath. ad Iliad._, i. p. 31.)

The beautiful lines of the “Theogony” are famous:—


    “Αρχην μεν μη φυναι επιχθονιοισιν αριστον,
    Μηδ᾽ εισιδειν αυγας οξεος ἡελιου;
      Φυντα δ᾽ ὁπως ωκιστα πυλας Αϊδαο περησαι,
      Και κεισθαι πολλην γην επαμησαμενον.”

    (_Optima sors homini natum non esse, nec unquam._
    _Adspexisse diem, flammiferumque jubar._
    _Altera jam genitum demitti protinus Orco,_
    _Et pressum multa mergere corpus humo._)


Sophocles, in “Œdipus Colonus” (1225), has the following abbreviation of
the same:—


    “Μη φυναι τον ἁπαντα νικα
    λογον; το δ᾽ επει φανῃ,
    βηναι κειθεν, ὁθεν περ ἡκει,
    πολυ δευτερον, ὡς ταχιστα.”

    (_Natum non esse sortes vincit alias omnes: proxima autem est, ubi
    quis in lucem editus fuerit, eodem redire, unde venit, quam
    ocissime._)


Euripides says:—


    “Πας δ᾽οδυνηρος βιος ανθρωπων,
    Κ᾽ουκ εστι πονων αναπαυσις.”

    (_Omnis hominum vita est plena dolore,_
    _Nec datur laborum remissio._)

    —HIPPOL, 189.


And Homer already said:—


    “Ου μεν γαρ τι εστιν οϊζυρωτερον ανδρος
    Παντων, ὁσσα δε γαιαν επι πνεει τε και ἑρπει.”

    (_Non enim quidquam alicubi est calamitosius homine_
    _Omnium, quotquot super terram spirantque et moventur._)

    —II. xvii. 446.


Even Pliny says: “_Quapropter hoc primum quisque in remediis animi sui
habeat, ex omnibus bonis, quæ homini natura tribuit, nullum melius esse
tempestiva morte_” (_Hist. Nat._ 28, 2).

Shakspeare puts the words in the mouth of the old king Henry IV.:—


    “O heaven! that one might read the book of fate,
    And see the revolution of the times,
    ... how chances mock,
    And changes fill the cup of alteration
    With divers liquors! O, if this were seen,
    The happiest youth,—viewing his progress through,
    What perils past, what crosses to ensue,—
    Would shut the book, and sit him down and die.”


Finally, Byron:—


    “Count o’er the joys thine hours have seen,
      Count o’er thy days from anguish free,
    And know, whatever thou hast been,
      ’Tis something better not to be.”


Baltazar Gracian also brings the misery of our existence before our eyes
in the darkest colours in the “Criticon,” Parte i., Crisi 5, just at the
beginning, and Crisi 7 at the end, where he explicitly represents life as
a tragic farce.

Yet no one has so thoroughly and exhaustively handled this subject as, in
our own day, Leopardi. He is entirely filled and penetrated by it: his
theme is everywhere the mockery and wretchedness of this existence; he
presents it upon every page of his works, yet in such a multiplicity of
forms and applications, with such wealth of imagery that he never wearies
us, but, on the contrary, is throughout entertaining and exciting.




Chapter XLVII.(43) On Ethics.


Here is the great gap which occurs in these supplements, on account of the
circumstance that I have already dealt with moral philosophy in the
narrower sense in the two prize essays published under the title, “_Die
Grundprobleme der Ethik_,” an acquaintance with which is assumed, as I
have said, in order to avoid useless repetition. Therefore there only
remains for me here a small gleaning of isolated reflections which could
not be discussed in that work, the contents of which were, in the main,
prescribed by the Academies; least of all those reflections which demand a
higher point of view than that which is common to all, and which I was
there obliged to adhere to. Accordingly it will not surprise the reader to
find these reflections here in a very fragmentary collection. This
collection again has been continued in the eighth and ninth chapters of
the second volume of the Parerga.

That moral investigations are incomparably more difficult than physical,
and in general than any others, results from the fact that they are almost
immediately concerned with the thing in itself, namely, with that
manifestation of it in which, directly discovered by the light of
knowledge, it reveals its nature as _will_. Physical truths, on the other
hand, remain entirely in the province of the idea, _i.e._, of the
phenomenon, and merely show how the lowest manifestations of the will
present themselves in the idea in conformity to law. Further, the
consideration of the world from the _physical_ side, however far and
successfully it may be pursued, is in its results without any consolation
for us: on the _moral_ side alone is consolation to be found; for here the
depths of our own inner nature disclose themselves to the consideration.

But my philosophy is the only one which confers upon ethics its complete
and whole rights; for only if the true nature of man is his own _will_,
and consequently he is, in the strictest sense, his own work, are his
deeds really entirely his and to be ascribed to him. On the other hand,
whenever he has another origin, or is the work of a being different from
himself, all his guilt falls back upon this origin, or originator. For
_operari sequitur esse_.

To connect the force which produces the phenomenon of the world, and
consequently determines its nature, with the morality of the disposition
or character, and thus to establish a _moral_ order of the world as the
foundation of the _physical_,—this has been since Socrates the problem of
philosophy. Theism solved it in a childish manner, which could not satisfy
mature humanity. Therefore pantheism opposed itself to it whenever it
ventured to do so, and showed that nature bears in itself the power by
virtue of which it appears. With this, however, ethics had necessarily to
be given up. Spinoza, indeed, attempts here and there to preserve it by
means of sophistry, but for the most part gives it up altogether, and,
with a boldness which excites astonishment and repugnance, explains the
distinction between right and wrong, and in general between good and evil,
as merely conventional, thus in itself empty (for example, _Eth._ iv.,
prop. 37, schol. 2). After having met with unmerited neglect for more than
a hundred years, Spinoza has, in general, become too much esteemed in this
century through the reaction caused by the swing of the pendulum of
opinion. All pantheism must ultimately be overthrown by the inevitable
demands of ethics, and then by the evil and suffering of the world. If the
world is a theophany, then all that man, or even the brute, does is
equally divine and excellent; nothing can be censurable, and nothing more
praiseworthy than the rest: thus there is no ethics. Hence, in consequence
of the revived Spinozism of our own day, thus of pantheism, the treatment
of ethics has sunk so low and become so shallow that it has been made a
mere instruction as to the proper life of a citizen and a member of a
family, in which the ultimate end of human existence is supposed to
consist: thus in methodical, complete, smug, and comfortable philistinism.
Pantheism, indeed, has only led to such shallow vulgarisms through the
fact that (by a shameful misuse of the _e quovis ligno fit Mercurius_) a
common mind, Hegel, has, by the well‐known means, been falsely stamped as
a great philosopher, and a herd of his disciples, at first suborned,
afterwards only stupid, received his weighty words. Such outrages on the
human mind do not remain unpunished: the seed has sprouted. In the same
spirit it was then asserted that ethics should have for its material not
the conduct of individuals, but that of nations, that this alone was a
theme worthy of it. Nothing can be more perverse than this view, which
rests on the most vulgar realism. For in every individual appears the
whole undivided will to live, the thing in itself, and the microcosm is
like the macrocosm. The masses have no more content than each individual.
Ethics is concerned not with actions and their results, but with willing,
and willing itself takes place only in the individual. Not the fate of
nations, which exists only in the phenomenon, but that of the individual
is decided _morally_. Nations are really mere abstractions; individuals
alone actually exist. Thus, then, is pantheism related to ethics. But the
evil and misery of the world are not in accord even with theism; hence it
sought assistance from all kinds of evasions, theodicies, which yet were
irretrievably overthrown by the arguments of Hume and Voltaire. Pantheism,
however, is completely untenable in the presence of that bad side of the
world. Only when the world is regarded entirely from without and from the
_physical_ side alone, and nothing else is kept in view but the constant
restorative order, and the comparative imperishableness of the whole which
is thereby introduced, is it perhaps possible to explain it as a god, yet
always only symbolically. But if one enters within, thus considers also
the _subjective_ and _moral_ side, with its preponderance of want,
suffering, and misery, of dissension, wickedness, madness, and perversity,
then one soon becomes conscious with horror that the last thing imaginable
one has before one is a theophany. I, however, have shown, and especially
in my work “_Ueber den Willen in der Natur_” have proved, that the force
which works and acts in nature is identical with the will in us. Thereby
the moral order of the world is brought into direct connection with the
force which produces the phenomenon of the world. For the phenomenon of
the will must exactly correspond to its nature. Upon this depends the
exposition of eternal justice given in §§ 63 and 64 of the first volume,
and the world, although subsisting by its own power, receives throughout a
_moral_ tendency. Accordingly the problem which has been discussed from
the time of Socrates is now for the first time really solved, and the
demand of thinking reason directed to morality is satisfied. Yet I have
never professed to propound a philosophy which leaves no questions
unanswered. In this sense philosophy is really impossible: it would be the
science of omniscience. But _est quadam prodire tenus, si non datur
ultra_: there is a limit to which reflection can penetrate and can so far
lighten the night of our existence, although the horizon always remains
dark. My doctrine reaches this limit in the will to live, which in its own
manifestation asserts or denies itself. To wish, however, to go beyond
this is, in my eyes, like wishing to fly beyond the atmosphere. We must
stop there; even although new problems arise out of those which have been
solved. Besides this, however, we must refer to the fact that the validity
of the principle of sufficient reason is limited to the phenomenon; this
was the theme of my first essay on that principle, which was published as
early as 1813.

I now go on to supplement particular points, and shall begin by
supporting, with two passages from classical poetry, my explanation of
weeping given in § 67 of the first volume, that it springs from sympathy
the object of which is one’s own self. At the end of the eighth book of
the “Odyssey,” Ulysses, who in all his many sorrows is never represented
as weeping, bursts into tears, when, still unknown, he hears his early
heroic life and deeds sung by the bard Demodocus in the palace of the
Phæacian king, for this remembrance of the brilliant period of his life
contrasts with his present wretchedness. Thus not this itself directly,
but the objective consideration of it, the picture of his present summoned
up by his past, calls forth his tears; he feels sympathy with himself.
Euripides makes the innocently condemned Hypolytus, bemoaning his own
fate, express the same feeling:


    “Φευ ειθ᾽ ην εμαυτον προσβλεπειν εναντιον
    στανθ᾽, ὡς εδακρυς᾽, ὁια πασχομεν κακα” (1084).

    (_Heu, si liceret mihi, me ipsum extrinsecus spectare, quantopere
    deflerem mala, quæ patior._)


Finally, as a proof of my explanation, an anecdote may be given here which
I take from the English journal _The Herald_ of the 16th July 1836. A
client, when he had heard his case set forth by his counsel in court,
burst into a flood of tears, and cried, “I never knew I had suffered half
so much till I heard it here to‐day.”

I have shown in § 55 of the first volume how, notwithstanding the
unalterable nature of the character, _i.e._, of the special fundamental
will of a man, a real moral repentance is yet possible. I wish, however,
to add the following explanation, which I must preface by a few
definitions. _Inclination_ is every strong susceptibility of the will for
motives of a certain kind. _Passion_ is an inclination so strong that the
motives which excite it exercise a power over the will, which is stronger
than that of every possible motive that can oppose them; thus its mastery
over the will becomes absolute, and consequently with reference to it the
will is _passive_ or _suffering_. It must, however, be remarked here that
passions seldom reach the degree at which they fully answer to the
definition, but rather bear their name as mere approximations to it:
therefore there are then still counter‐motives which are able at least to
restrict their effect, if only they appear distinctly in consciousness.
The _emotion_ is just as irresistible, but yet only a passing excitement
of the will, by a motive which receives its power, not from a deeply
rooted inclination, but merely from the fact that, appearing suddenly, it
excludes for the moment the counter‐effect of all other motives, for it
consists of an idea, which completely obscures all others by its excessive
vividness, or, as it were, conceals them entirely by its too close
proximity, so that they cannot enter consciousness and act on the will,
whereby, therefore, the capacity for reflection, and with it _intellectual
freedom_, is to a certain extent abolished. Accordingly the emotion is
related to the passion as delirium to madness.

Moral repentance is now conditioned by the fact that before the act the
inclination to it did not leave the intellect free scope, because it did
not allow it to contemplate clearly and fully the counter‐motives, but
rather turned it ever anew to the motives in its own favour. But now,
after the act has been performed, these motives are, by this itself,
neutralised, and consequently have become ineffective. Now reality brings
before the intellect the counter‐motives as the consequences of the act
which have already appeared; and the intellect now knows that they would
have been the stronger if it had only adequately contemplated and weighed
them. Thus the man becomes conscious that he has done what was really not
in accordance with his will. This knowledge is repentance, for he has not
acted with full intellectual freedom; for all the motives did not attain
to efficiency. What excluded the motives opposed to the action was in the
case of the hasty action the emotion, and in the case of the deliberate
action the passion. It has also often depended upon the circumstance that
his reason certainly presented to him the counter‐motives in the abstract,
but was not supported by a sufficiently strong imagination to present to
him their whole content and true significance in images. Examples of what
has been said are the cases in which revenge, jealousy, or avarice have
led to murder. After it is committed they are extinguished, and now
justice, sympathy, the remembrance of former friendship, raise their
voices and say all that they would have said before if they had been
allowed to speak. Then enters the bitter repentance, which says, “If it
were not done it would never happen.” An incomparable representation of
this is afforded by the old Scottish ballad, which has also been
translated by Herder, “Edward, Edward.” In an analogous manner, the
neglect of one’s own good may occasion an egotistical repentance. For
example, when an otherwise unadvisable marriage is concluded in
consequence of passionate love, which now is extinguished just by the
marriage, and for the first time the counter‐motives of personal interest,
lost independence, &c., &c., come into consciousness, and speak as they
would have spoken before if they had been allowed utterance. All such
actions accordingly spring from a relative weakness of intellect, because
it lets itself be mastered by the will, just where its function as the
presenter of motives ought to have been inexorably fulfilled, without
allowing itself to be disturbed by the will. The vehemence of the will is
here only _indirectly_ the cause, in that it interferes with the
intellect, and thereby prepares for itself repentance. The
_reasonableness_ of the character σωφροσυνη, which is opposed to
passionateness, really consists in this, that the will never overpowers
the intellect to such an extent as to prevent it from correctly exercising
its function of the distinct, full, and clear exposition of the motives in
the abstract for the reason, in the concrete for the imagination. Now this
may just as well depend upon the moderation and mildness of the will as
upon the strength of the intellect. All that is required is that the
latter should be _relatively_ strong enough for the will that is present,
thus that the two should stand in a suitable relation to each other.

The following explanations have still to be added to the fundamental
characteristics of the philosophy of law expounded in § 62 of the first
volume, and also in my prize essay on the foundation of morals, § 17.

Those who, with Spinoza, deny that there is a right apart from the State,
confound the means for enforcing the right with the right itself.
Certainly the right is insured protection only in the State. But it itself
exists independently of the State. For by force it can only be suppressed,
never abolished. Accordingly the State is nothing more than an institution
for protection, which has become necessary through the manifold attacks to
which man is exposed, and which he would not be able to ward off alone,
but only in union with others. So, then, the aims of the State are—

(1.) First of all, outward protection, which may just as well become
needful against lifeless forces of nature or wild beasts as against men,
consequently against other nations; although this case is the most
frequent and important, for the worst enemy of man is man: _homo homini
lupus_. Since, in consequence of this aim, nations always set up the
principle, in words if not with deeds, that they wish to stand to each
other in a purely defensive, never in an aggressive relation, they
recognise _the law of nations_. This is at bottom nothing but natural law,
in the only sphere of its practical activity that remains to it, between
nation and nation, where it alone must reign, because its stronger son,
positive law, cannot assert itself, since it requires a judge and an
executive. Accordingly the law of nations consists of a certain degree of
morality in the dealings of nations with each other, the maintenance of
which is a question of honour for mankind. The bar at which cases based on
this law are tried is that of public opinion.

(2.) Protection within, thus protection of the members of a State against
each other, consequently security of private right, by means of the
maintenance of an honest state of things, which consists in this, that the
concentrated forces of all protect each individual, from which arises an
appearance as if all were honest, _i.e._, just, thus as if no one wished
to injure the others.

But, as is always the way in human affairs, the removal of one evil
generally opens the way for a new one; thus the granting of that double
protection introduces the need of a third, namely: (3.) Protection against
the protector, _i.e._, against him or those to whom the society has
transferred the management of the protection, thus the guarantee of public
right. This appears most completely attainable by dividing and separating
from each other the threefold unity of the protective power, thus the
legislature, the judicature, and the executive, so that each is managed by
others, and independently of the rest. The great value, indeed the
fundamental idea of the monarchy appears to me to lie in the fact that
because men remain men one must be placed so high, and so much power,
wealth, security, and absolute inviolability given him that there remains
nothing for him to desire, to hope, and to fear for himself; whereby the
egoism which dwells in him, as in every one, is annihilated, as it were,
by neutralisation, and he is now able, as if he were no longer a man, to
practise justice, and to keep in view no longer his own but only the
public good. This is the source of the seemingly superhuman nature that
everywhere accompanies royalty, and distinguishes it so infinitely from
the mere presidency. Therefore it must also be hereditary, not elective;
partly in order that no one may see his equal in the king; partly that the
king himself may only be able to provide for his successors by caring for
the welfare of the State, which is absolutely one with that of his family.

If other ends besides that of protection, here explained, are ascribed to
the State, this may easily endanger the true end.

According to my explanation, the right of property arises only through the
expenditure of labour upon things. This truth, which has already often
been expressed, finds a noteworthy confirmation in the fact that it is
asserted, even in a practical regard, in a declaration of the American ex‐
president, Quincey Adams, which is to be found in the _Quarterly Review_
of 1840, No. 130; and also in French, in the “_Bibliothèque universelle de
Genêve_,” July 1840, No. 55. I will give it here in German (English of
_Quarterly Review_): “There are moralists who have questioned the right of
the Europeans to intrude upon the possessions of the aboriginals in any
case, and under any limitations whatsoever; but have they maturely
considered the whole subject? The Indian right of possession itself
stands, with regard to the greatest part of the country, upon a
_questionable_ foundation. Their cultivated fields, their constructed
habitations, a space of ample sufficiency for their subsistence, and
whatever they had annexed of themselves by personal labour, was
undoubtedly by the laws of nature theirs. But what is the right of a
huntsman to the forest of a thousand miles over which he has accidentally
ranged in quest of prey?” &c. In the same way, those who in our own day
have seen occasion to combat communism with reasons (for example, the
Archbishop of Paris, in his pastoral of June 1851) have always brought
forward the argument that property is the result of work, as it were only
embodied work. This is further evidence that the right of property can
only be established by the application of work to things, for only in this
respect does it find free recognition and make itself morally valid.

An entirely different kind of proof of the same truth is afforded by the
moral fact that while the law punishes poaching just as severely as theft,
and in many countries more severely, yet civil honour, which is
irrevocably lost by the latter, is really not affected by the former; but
the poacher, if he has been guilty of nothing else, is certainly tainted
with a fault, but yet is not regarded, like the thief, as dishonourable
and shunned by all. For the principles of civil honour rest upon moral and
not upon mere positive law; but game is not an object upon which labour is
bestowed, and thus also is not an object of a morally valid possession:
the right to it is therefore entirely a positive one, and is not morally
recognised.

According to my view, the principle ought to lie at the basis of criminal
law that it is not really the man but only the deed which is punished, in
order that it may not recur. The criminal is merely the subject in whom
the deed is punished, in order that the law in consequence of which the
punishment is inflicted may retain its deterrent power. This is the
meaning of the expression, “He is forfeited to the law.” According to
Kant’s explanation, which amounts to a _jus talionis_, it is not the deed
but the man that is punished. The penitentiary system also seeks not so
much to punish the deed as the man, in order to reform him. It thereby
sets aside the real aim of punishment, determent from the deed, in order
to attain the very problematic end of reformation. But it is always a
doubtful thing to attempt to attain two different ends by _one_ means: how
much more so if the two are in any sense opposite ends. Education is a
benefit, punishment ought to be an evil; the penitentiary prison is
supposed to accomplish both at once. Moreover, however large a share
untutored ignorance, combined with outward distress, may have in many
crimes, yet we dare not regard these as their principal cause, for
innumerable persons living in the same ignorance and under absolutely
similar circumstances commit no crimes. Thus the substance of the matter
falls back upon the personal, moral character; but this, as I have shown
in my prize essay on the freedom of the will, is absolutely unalterable.
Therefore moral reformation is really not possible, but only determent
from the deed through fear. At the same time, the correction of knowledge
and the awakening of the desire to work can certainly be attained; it will
appear what effect this can produce. Besides this, it appears to me, from
the aim of punishment set forth in the text, that, when possible, the
apparent severity of the punishment should exceed the actual: but solitary
confinement achieves the reverse. Its great severity has no witnesses, and
is by no means anticipated by any one who has not experienced it; thus it
does not deter. It threatens him who is tempted to crime by want and
misery with the opposite pole of human suffering, ennui: but, as Goethe
rightly observes—


    “When real affliction is our lot,
    Then do we long for ennui.”


The contemplation of it will deter him just as little as the sight of the
palatial prisons which are built by honest men for rogues. If, however, it
is desired that these penitentiary prisons should be regarded as
educational institutions, then it is to be regretted that the entrance to
them is only obtained by crimes, instead of which it ought to have
preceded them.

That punishment, as Beccaria has taught, ought to bear a proper proportion
to the crime does not depend upon the fact that it would be an expiation
of it, but rather on the fact that the pledge ought to be proportionate to
the value of that for which it answers. Therefore every one is justified
in demanding the pledge of the life of another as a guarantee for the
security of his own life, but not for the security of his property, for
which the freedom, and so forth, of another is sufficient pledge. For the
security of the life of the citizens capital punishment is therefore
absolutely necessary. Those who wish to abolish it should be answered,
“First remove murder from the world, and then capital punishment ought to
follow.” It ought also to be inflicted for the clear attempt to murder
just as for murder itself; for the law desires to punish the deed, not to
revenge its consequences. In general the injury to be guarded against
affords the right measure for the punishment which is to be threatened,
but it does not give the moral baseness of the forbidden action. Therefore
the law may rightly impose the punishment of imprisonment for allowing a
flower‐pot to fall from a window, or impose hard labour for smoking in the
woods during the summer, and yet permit it in the winter. But to impose
the punishment of death, as in Poland, for shooting an ure‐ox is too much,
for the maintenance of the species of ure‐oxen may not be purchased with
human life. In determining the measure of the punishment, along with the
magnitude of the injury to be guarded against, we have to consider the
strength of the motives which impel to the forbidden action. Quite a
different standard of punishment would be established if expiation,
retribution, _jus talionis_, were its true ground. But the criminal code
ought to be nothing but a register of counter‐motives for possible
criminal actions: therefore each of these motives must decidedly outweigh
the motives which lead to these actions, and indeed so much the more the
greater the evil is which would arise from the action to be guarded
against, the stronger the temptation to it, and the more difficult the
conviction of the criminal;—always under the correct assumption that the
will is not free, but determinable by motives;—apart from this it could
not be got at at all. So much for the philosophy of law.

In my prize essay on the freedom of the will (p. 50 _seq._) I have proved
the originality and unalterableness of the inborn character, from which
the moral content of the course of life proceeds. It is established as a
fact. But in order to understand problems in their full extent it is
sometimes necessary to oppose opposites sharply to each other. In this
case, then, let one recall how incredibly great is the inborn difference
between man and man, in a moral and in an intellectual regard. Here
nobleness and wisdom; there wickedness and stupidity. In one the goodness
of the heart shines out of the eyes, or the stamp of genius is enthroned
in his countenance. The base physiognomy of another is the impression of
moral worthlessness and intellectual dulness, imprinted by the hands of
nature itself, unmistakable and ineradicable; he looks as if he must be
ashamed of existence. But to this outward appearance the inner being
really corresponds. We cannot possibly assume that such differences, which
transform the whole being of the man, and which nothing can abolish,
which, further, in conflict with his circumstances, determine his course
of life, could exist without guilt or merit on the part of those affected
by them, and be merely the work of chance. Even from this it is evident
that the man must be in a certain sense his own work. But now, on the
other hand, we can show the source of these differences empirically in the
nature of the parents; and besides this, the meeting and connection of
these parents has clearly been the work of the most accidental
circumstances. By such considerations, then, we are forcibly directed to
the distinction between the phenomenon and the true being of things, which
alone can contain the solution of that problem. The thing in itself only
reveals itself by means of the forms of the phenomenon; therefore what
proceeds from the thing in itself must yet appear in those forms, thus
also in the bonds of causality. Accordingly it will present itself to us
here as a mysterious and incomprehensible guidance of things, of which the
external empirical connection would be the mere tool. Yet all that happens
appears in this empirical connection introduced by causes, thus
necessarily and determined from without, while its true ground lies in the
inner nature of what thus manifests itself. Certainly we can here see the
solution of the problem only from afar, and when we reflect upon it we
fall into an abyss of thought—as Hamlet very truly says, “thoughts beyond
the reaches of our souls.” In my essay in the first volume of the Parerga
“On the Appearance of Intention in the Fate of Individuals” I have set
forth my thoughts upon this mysterious guidance of things, a guidance
which indeed can only be conceived symbolically.

In § 14 of my prize essay on the foundation of morals there will be found
an exposition of egoism, as regards its nature; and the following attempt
to discover its root may be looked upon as supplementary to that
paragraph. Nature itself contradicts itself directly, according as it
speaks from the individual or the universal, from within or from without,
from the centre or the periphery. It has its centre in every individual;
for each individual is the whole will to live. Therefore, even if this
individual is only an insect or a worm, nature itself speaks out of it
thus: “I alone am all in all: in my maintenance everything is involved;
the rest may perish, it is really nothing.” So speaks nature from the
_particular_ standpoint, thus from the point of view of self‐
consciousness, and upon this depends the egoism of every living thing. On
the other hand, from the _universal_ point of view,—which is that of the
_consciousness of other things_, that of objective knowledge, which for
the moment looks away from the individual with whom the knowledge is
connected,—from without then, from the periphery nature speaks thus: “The
individual is nothing, and less than nothing. I destroy millions of
individuals every day, for sport and pastime: I abandon their fate to the
most capricious and wilful of my children, chance, who harasses them at
pleasure. I produce millions of new individuals every day, without any
diminution of my productive power; just as little as the power of a mirror
is exhausted by the number of reflections of the sun, which it casts on
the wall one after another. The individual is nothing.” Only he who knows
how to really reconcile and eliminate this patent contradiction of nature
has a true answer to the question as to the perishableness and
imperishableness of his own self. I believe I have given, in the first
four chapters of this fourth book of the supplements, an adequate
introduction to such knowledge. What is said above may further be
illustrated in the following manner. Every individual, when he looks
within, recognises in his nature, which is his will, the thing in itself,
therefore that which everywhere alone is real. Accordingly he conceives
himself as the kernel and centre of the world, and regards himself as of
infinite importance. If, on the other hand, he looks without, then he is
in the province of the idea the mere phenomenon, where he sees himself as
an individual among an infinite number of other individuals, accordingly
as something very insignificant, nay, vanishing altogether. Consequently
every individual, even the most insignificant, every I, when regarded from
within, is all in all; regarded from without, on the other hand, he is
nothing, or at least as good as nothing. Hence upon this depends the great
difference between what each one necessarily is in his own eyes and what
he is in the eyes of others, consequently the egoism with which every one
reproaches every one else.

In consequence of this egoism our fundamental error of all is this, that
with reference to each other we are reciprocally not I. On the other hand,
to be just, noble, and benevolent is nothing else than to translate my
metaphysics into actions. To say that time and space are mere forms of our
knowledge, not conditions of things in themselves, is the same as to say
that the doctrine of metempsychosis, “Thou shalt one day be born as him
whom thou now injurest, and in thy turn shalt suffer like injury,” is
identical with the formula of the Brahmans, which has frequently been
mentioned, _Tat twam asi_, “This thou art.” All true virtue proceeds from
the immediate and intuitive knowledge of the metaphysical identity of all
beings, which I have frequently shown, especially in § 22 of my prize
essay on the foundation of morals. But just on this account it is not the
result of a special pre‐eminence of intellect; on the contrary, even the
weakest intellect is sufficient to see through the _principium
individuationis_, which is what is required in this matter. Accordingly we
may find the most excellent character even in the case of a very weak
understanding. And further, the excitement of our sympathy is accompanied
by no exertion of our intellect. It rather appears that the requisite
penetration of the _principium individuationis_ would be present in every
one if it were not that the _will_ opposes this, and by virtue of its
immediate mysterious and despotic influence upon the intellect generally
prevents it from arising; so that ultimately all guilt falls back upon the
_will_, as indeed is in conformity with the fact.

The doctrine of metempsychosis, touched on above, deviates from the truth
merely through the circumstance that it transfers to the future what
already is now. It makes my true inner nature exist in others only after
my death, while, according to the truth, it already lives in them now, and
death merely removes the illusion on account of which I am not aware of
this; just as an innumerable host of stars constantly shine above our
heads, but only become visible to us when the one sun near the earth has
set. From this point of view my individual existence, however much, like
that sun, it may outshine everything, appears ultimately only as a
hindrance which stands between me and the knowledge of the true extent of
my being. And because every individual, in his knowledge, is subject to
this hindrance, it is just individuation that keeps the will to live in
error as to its own nature; it is the Mâyâ of Brahmanism. Death is a
refutation of this error, and abolishes it. I believe that at the moment
of death we become conscious that it is a mere illusion that has limited
our existence to our person. Indeed empirical traces of this may be found
in several states which are related to death by the abolition of the
concentration of consciousness in the brain, among which the magnetic
sleep is the most prominent; for in it, if it reaches a high degree, our
existence shows itself through various symptoms, beyond our persons and in
other beings, most strikingly by direct participation in the thoughts of
another individual, and ultimately even by the power of knowing the
absent, the distant, and even the future, thus by a kind of omnipresence.

Upon this metaphysical identity of the will, as the thing in itself, in
the infinite multiplicity of its phenomena, three principal phenomena
depend, which may be included under the common name of sympathies: (1)
_sympathy proper_, which, as I have shown, is the basis of justice and
benevolence, _caritas_; (2) _sexual love_, with capricious selection,
_amor_, which is the life of the species, that asserts its precedence over
that of the individual; (3) _magic_, to which animal magnetism and
sympathetic cures also belong. Accordingly _sympathy_ may be defined as
the empirical appearance of the metaphysical identity of the will, through
the physical multiplicity of its phenomena, whereby a connection shows
itself which is entirely different from that brought about by means of the
forms of the phenomenon which we comprehend under the principle of
sufficient reason.




Chapter XLVIII.(44) On The Doctrine Of The Denial Of The Will To Live.


Man has his existence and being either _with_ his will, _i.e._, his
consent, or _without_ this; in the latter case an existence so embittered
by manifold and insupportable sufferings would be a flagrant injustice.
The ancients, especially the Stoics, also the Peripatetics and Academics,
strove in vain to prove that virtue sufficed to make life happy.
Experience cried out loudly against it. What really lay at the foundation
of the efforts of these philosophers, although they were not distinctly
conscious of it, was the assumed _justice_ of the thing; whoever was
without guilt ought to be free from suffering, thus happy. But the serious
and profound solution of the problem lies in the Christian doctrine that
works do not justify. Accordingly a man, even if he has practised all
justice and benevolence, consequently the αγαθον, _honestum_, is yet not,
as Cicero imagines, _culpa omni carens_ (_Tusc._, v. i.); but _el delito
mayor del hombre es haber nacido_ (the greatest guilt of man is that he
was born), as Calderon, illuminated by Christianity, has expressed it with
far profounder knowledge than these wise men. Therefore that man comes
into the world already tainted with guilt can appear absurd only to him
who regards him as just then having arisen out of nothing and as the work
of another. In consequence of _this_ guilt, then, which must therefore
have proceeded from his will, man remains rightly exposed to physical and
mental suffering, even if he has practised all those virtues, thus is not
happy. This follows from the _eternal justice_ of which I have spoken in §
63 of the first volume. That, however, as St. Paul (Rom. iii. 21),
Augustine, and Luther teach, works cannot justify, inasmuch as we all are
and remain essentially sinners, ultimately rests upon the fact that,
because _operari sequitur esse_, if we acted as we ought, we would
necessarily be as we ought. But then we would require no _salvation_ from
our present condition, which not only Christianity but also Brahmanism and
Buddhism (under the name which is expressed in English by _final
emancipation_) present as the highest goal, _i.e._, we would not need to
become something quite different from, nay, the very opposite of what we
are. Since, however, we are what we ought not to be, we also necessarily
do what we ought not to do. Therefore we need a complete transformation of
our mind and nature; _i.e._, the new birth, as the result of which
salvation appears. Although the guilt lies in action, _operari_, yet the
root of the guilt lies in our _essentia et existentia_, for out of these
the _operari_ necessarily proceeds, as I have shown in the prize essay on
the freedom of the will. Accordingly our one true sin is really original
sin. Now the Christian myth makes original sin first arise after man came
into existence, and for this purpose ascribes to him, _per impossibile_, a
free will. It does this, however, simply as myth. The inmost kernel and
spirit of Christianity is identical with that of Brahmanism and Buddhism;
they all teach a great guilt of the human race through its existence
itself, only that Christianity does not proceed directly and frankly like
these more ancient religions: thus does not make the guilt simply the
result of existence itself, but makes it arise through the act of the
first human pair. This was only possible under the fiction of a _liberum
arbitrium indifferentiæ_, and only necessary on account of the Jewish
fundamental dogma, in which that doctrine had here to be implanted.
Because, according to the truth, the coming into existence of man himself
is the act of his free will, and accordingly one with the fall, and
therefore the original sin, of which all other sins are the result,
appeared already with the _essentia_ and _existentia_ of man; but the
fundamental dogma of Judaism did not admit of such an explanation. Thus
Augustine taught, in his books _De libero arbitrio_, that only as Adam
before the fall was man guiltless and possessed of a free will, but for
ever after is involved in the necessity of sin. The law, ὁ νομος, in the
Biblical sense, always demands that we shall change our doing, while our
being remains unchanged. But because this is impossible, Paul says that no
man is justified by the law; only the new birth in Jesus Christ, in
consequence of the work of grace, on account of which a new man arises and
the old man is abolished (_i.e._, a fundamental change of mind or
conversion), can transfer us from the state of sinfulness into that of
freedom and salvation. This is the Christian myth with reference to
ethics. But certainly the Jewish theism, upon which it was grafted, must
have received wonderful additions to adapt itself to that myth. In it the
fable of the fall presented the only place for the graft of the old Indian
stem. It is to be attributed just to that forcibly surmounted difficulty
that the Christian mysteries have received such an extraordinary
appearance, conflicting with the ordinary understanding, which makes
proselytising more difficult, and on account of which, from incapacity to
comprehend their profound meaning, Pelagianism, or at the present day
Rationalism, rises against them, and seeks to explain them away, but
thereby reduces Christianity to Judaism.

But to speak without myth: so long as our will is the same, our world can
be no other than it is. It is true all wish to be delivered from the state
of suffering and death; they would like, as it is expressed, to attain to
eternal blessedness, to enter the kingdom of heaven, only not upon their
own feet; they would like to be carried there by the course of nature.
That, however, is impossible. Therefore nature will never let us fall and
become nothing; but yet it can lead us nowhere but always again into
nature. Yet how questionable a thing it is to exist as a part of nature
every one experiences in his own life and death. Accordingly existence is
certainly to be regarded as an erring, to return from which is salvation:
it also bears this character throughout. It is therefore conceived in this
manner by the ancient Samana religions, and also, although indirectly, by
real and original Christianity. Even Judaism itself contains at least in
the fall (this its redeeming feature) the germ of such a view. Only Greek
paganism and Islamism are entirely optimistic: therefore in the former the
opposite tendency had to find expression at least in tragedy; but in
Islamism, which is the worst, as it is the most modern, of all religions,
it appeared as Sufism, that very beautiful phenomenon, which is completely
of Indian spirit and origin, and has now continued for upwards of a
thousand years. Nothing can, in fact, be given as the end of our existence
but the knowledge that we had better not be. This, however, is the most
important of all truths, which must therefore be expressed, however great
the contrast in which it stands with the European manner of thought of the
present day. On the other hand, in the whole of non‐Mohammedan Asia it is
the most universally recognised fundamental truth, to‐day as much as three
thousand years ago.

If now we consider the will to live as a whole and objectively, we have,
in accordance with what has been said, to think of it as involved in an
illusion, to escape from which, thus to deny its whole existing endeavour,
is what all religions denote by self‐renunciation, _abnegatio sui ipsius_;
for the true self is the will to live. The moral virtues, thus justice and
benevolence, since if they are pure they spring, as I have shown, from the
fact that the will to live, seeing through the _principium
individuationis_, recognises itself in all its manifestations, are
accordingly primarily a sign, a symptom, that the self‐manifesting will is
no longer firmly held in that illusion, but the disillusion already begins
to take place; so that one might metaphorically say it already flaps its
wings to fly away from it. Conversely, injustice, wickedness, cruelty are
signs of the opposite, thus of the deep entanglement in that illusion.
Secondly, however, these virtues are a means of advancing self‐
renunciation, and accordingly the denial of the will to live. For true
integrity, inviolable justice, this first and most important of cardinal
virtues, is so hard a task that whoever professes it unconditionally and
from the bottom of his heart has to make sacrifices that soon deprive life
of the sweetness which is demanded to make it enjoyable, and thereby turn
away the will from it, thus lead to resignation. Yet just what makes
integrity honourable is the sacrifices which it costs; in trifles it is
not admired. Its nature really consists in this, that the just man does
not throw upon others, by craft or force, the burdens and sorrows which
life brings with it, as the unjust man does, but bears himself what falls
to his lot; and thus he has to bear the full burden of the evil imposed
upon human life, undiminished. Justice thereby becomes a means of
advancing the denial of the will to live, for want and suffering, those
true conditions of human life, are its consequence, and these lead to
resignation. Still more quickly does the virtue of benevolence, _caritas_,
which goes further, lead to the same result; for on account of it one
takes over even the sufferings which originally fell to the lot of others,
therefore appropriates to oneself a larger share of these than in the
course of things would come to the particular individual. He who is
inspired with this virtue has recognised his own being in all others. And
thereby he identifies his own lot with that of humanity in general; but
this is a hard lot, that of care, suffering, and death. Whoever, then, by
renouncing every accidental advantage, desires for himself no other lot
than that of humanity in general cannot desire even this long. The
clinging to life and its pleasures must now soon yield, and give place to
a universal renunciation; consequently the denial of the will will take
place. Since now, in accordance with this, poverty, privation, and special
sufferings of many kinds are introduced simply by the perfect exercise of
the moral virtues, asceticism in the narrowest sense, thus the surrender
of all possessions, the intentional seeking out of what is disagreeable
and repulsive, self‐mortification, fasts, the hair shirt, and the
scourge—all this is rejected by many, and perhaps rightly, as superfluous.
Justice itself is the hair shirt that constantly harasses its owner and
the charity that gives away what is needed, provides constant fasts.(45)
Just on this account Buddhism is free from all strict and excessive
asceticism, which plays a large part in Brahmanism, thus from intentional
self‐mortification. It rests satisfied with the celibacy, voluntary
poverty, humility, and obedience of the monks, with abstention from animal
food, as also from all worldliness. Since, further, the goal to which the
moral virtues lead is that which is here pointed out, the Vedanta
philosophy(46) rightly says that after the entrance of true knowledge,
with entire resignation in its train, thus the new birth, then the
morality or immorality of the past life is a matter of indifference, and
uses here also the saying so often quoted by the Brahmans: “_Finditur
nodus cordis, dissolvuntur omnes dubitationes, ejusque opera evanescunt,
viso supremo illo_” (_Sancara, sloca 32_).

Now, however objectionable this view may be to many, to whom a reward in
heaven or a punishment in hell is a much more satisfactory explanation of
the ethical significance of human action, just as the good Windischmann
rejects that doctrine, while he expounds it, yet whoever is able to go to
the bottom of the matter will find that in the end it agrees with that
Christian doctrine especially urged by Luther, that it is not works but
only the faith which enters through the work of grace, that saves us, and
that therefore we can never be justified by our deeds, but can only obtain
the forgiveness of our sins through the merits of the Mediator. It is
indeed easy to see that without such assumptions Christianity would have
to teach infinite punishment for all, and Brahmanism endless re‐births for
all, thus no salvation would be reached by either. The sinful works and
their consequences must be annulled and annihilated, whether by extraneous
pardon or by the entrance of a better knowledge; otherwise the world could
hope for no salvation; afterwards, however, they become a matter of
indifference. This is also the μετανοια και αφεσις ἁμαρτιων, the
announcement of which the risen Christ exclusively imposes upon His
Apostles as the sum of their mission (Luke xxiv. 47). The moral virtues
are really not the ultimate end, but only a step towards it. This step is
signified in the Christian myth by the eating of the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, with which moral responsibility enters, together with
original sin. The latter itself is in truth the assertion of the will to
live: the denial of the will to live, in consequence of the appearance of
a better knowledge, is, on the other hand, salvation. Between these two,
then, lies the sphere of morality; it accompanies man as a light upon his
path from the assertion to the denial of the will, or, mythically, from
original sin to salvation through faith in the mediation of the incarnate
God (Avatar); or, according to the teaching of the Vedas, through all re‐
births, which are the consequence of the works in each case, until right
knowledge appears, and with it salvation (final emancipation), Mokscha,
_i.e._, reunion with Brahma. The Buddhists, however, with perfect honesty,
only indicate the matter negatively, by Nirvana, which is the negation of
this world, or of Sansara. If Nirvana is defined as nothing, this only
means that the Sansara contains no single element which could assist the
definition or construction of Nirvana. Just on this account the Jainas,
who differ from the Buddhists only in name, call the Brahmans who believe
in the Vedas Sabdapramans, a nickname which is meant to signify that they
believe upon hearsay what cannot be known or proved (“Asiat. Researches,”
vol. vi. P. 474).

When certain ancient philosophers, such as Orpheus, the Pythagoreans, and
Plato (_e.g._, in the “Phædo,” pp. 151, 183 _seq._, Bip.; and see _Clem.
Alex. strom._, iii. p. 400 _seq._), just like the Apostle Paul, lament the
union of soul and body, and desire to be freed from it, we understand the
real and true meaning of this complaint, since we have recognised, in the
second book, that the body is the will itself, objectively perceived as a
phenomenon in space.

In the hour of death it is decided whether the man returns into the womb
of nature or belongs no more to nature at all, but —— —— ——: for this
opposite we lack image, conception, and word, just because these are all
taken from the objectification of the will, therefore belong to this, and
consequently can in no way express the absolute opposite of it, which
accordingly remains for us a mere negation. However, the death of the
individual is in each case the unweariedly repeated question of nature to
the will to live, “Hast thou enough? Wilt thou escape from me?” In order
that it may occur often enough, the individual life is so short. In this
spirit are conceived the ceremonies, prayers, and exhortations of the
Brahmans at the time of death, as we find them preserved in the Upanischad
in several places; and so also are the Christian provisions for the
suitable employment of the hour of death by means of exhortation,
confession, communion, and extreme unction: hence also the Christian
prayers for deliverance from sudden death. That at the present day it is
just this that many desire only proves that they no longer stand at the
Christian point of view, which is that of the denial of the will to live,
but at that of its assertion, which is the heathen point of view.

But he will fear least to become nothing in death who has recognised that
he is already nothing now, and who consequently no longer takes any share
in his individual phenomenon, because in him knowledge has, as it were,
burnt up and consumed the will, so that no will, thus no desire for
individual existence, remains in him any more.

Individuality inheres indeed primarily in the intellect; and the
intellect, reflecting the phenomenon, belongs to the phenomenon, which has
the _principium individuationis_ as its form. But it inheres also in the
will, inasmuch as the character is individual: yet the character itself is
abolished in the denial of the will. Thus individuality inheres in the
will only in its assertion, not in its denial. Even the holiness which is
connected with every purely moral action depends upon the fact that such
an action ultimately springs from the immediate knowledge of the numerical
identity of the inner nature of all living things.(47) But this identity
only really exists in the condition of the denial of the will (Nirvana),
for the assertion of the will (Sansara) has for its form the phenomenal
appearance of it in multiplicity. Assertion of the will to live, the
phenomenal world, the diversity of all beings, individuality, egoism,
hatred, wickedness, all spring from _one_ root; and so also, on the other
hand, do the world as thing in itself, the identity of all beings,
justice, benevolence, the denial of the will to live. If now, as I have
sufficiently proved, even the moral virtues spring from the consciousness
of that identity of all beings, but this lies, not in the phenomenon, but
only in the thing in itself, in the root of all beings, the moral action
is a momentary passing through the point, the permanent return to which is
the denial of the will to live.

It follows, as a deduction from what has been said, that we have no ground
to assume that there are more perfect intelligences than that of human
beings. For we see that even this degree of intelligence is sufficient to
impart to the will that knowledge in consequence of which it denies and
abolishes itself, upon which the individuality, and consequently the
intelligence, which is merely a tool of individual, and therefore animal
nature, perish. This will appear to us less open to objection if we
consider that we cannot conceive even the most perfect intelligences
possible, which for this end we may experimentally assume, existing
through an endless time, which would be much too poor to afford them
constantly new objects worthy of them. Because the nature of all things is
at bottom one, all knowledge of them is necessarily tautological. If now
this nature once becomes comprehended, as by those most perfect
intelligences it soon would be comprehended, what would then remain but
the wearisomeness of mere repetition through an infinite time? Thus from
this side also we are pointed to the fact that the end of all intelligence
can only be reaction upon the will; since, however, all willing is an
error, it remains the last work of intelligence to abolish the willing,
whose ends it had hitherto served. Accordingly even the most perfect
intelligence possible can only be a transition step to that to which no
knowledge can ever extend: indeed such an intelligence can, in the nature
of things, only assume the position of the moment of the attainment of
perfect insight.

In agreement with all these considerations, and also with what is proved
in the second book as to the origin of knowledge in the will, the
_assertion_ of which it reflects in fulfilling the sole function of
knowledge, that of being serviceable to the ends of the will, while true
salvation lies in its _denial_, we see all religions at their highest
point pass over into mysticism and mysteries, _i.e._, into darkness and
veiled obscurity, which for knowledge signify merely an empty spot, the
point where knowledge necessarily ceases; therefore for thought this can
only be expressed by negations, but for sense perception it is indicated
by symbolical signs; in temples by dim light and silence; in Brahmanism
indeed by the required suspension of all thought and perception for the
sake of sinking oneself profoundly in the grounds of one’s own being,
mentally pronouncing the mysterious Oum.(48) Mysticism in the widest sense
is every guidance to the immediate consciousness of that to which neither
perception nor conception, thus in general no knowledge extends. The
mystic is thus opposed to the philosopher by the fact that he begins from
within, while the philosopher begins from without. The mystic starts from
his inner, positive, individual experience, in which he finds himself to
be the eternal and only being, &c. But nothing of this is communicable
except the assertions which one has to accept upon his word; consequently
he cannot convince. The philosopher, on the other hand, starts from what
is common to all, from the objective phenomenon which lies before all, and
from the facts of consciousness as they are present in all. His method is
therefore reflection upon all this, and combination of the data given in
it: accordingly he can convince. He ought therefore to beware of falling
into the way of the mystics, and, for example, by the assertion of
intellectual intuitions or pretended immediate apprehensions of the
reason, to seek to make a vain show of positive knowledge of that which is
for ever inaccessible to all knowledge, or at the most can be indicated by
means of a negation. The value and worth of philosophy lies in the fact
that it rejects all assumptions which cannot be established, and takes as
its data only what can be certainly proved in the world given in external
perception, in the forms of apprehension of this world, which are
constitutive of our intellect, and in the consciousness of one’s own self
which is common to all. Therefore it must remain cosmology, and cannot
become theology. Its theme must limit itself to the world; to express in
all aspects what this _is_, what it is in its inmost nature, is all that
it can honestly achieve. Now it answers to this that my system when it
reaches its highest point assumes a _negative_ character, thus ends with a
negation. It can here speak only of what is denied, given up: but what is
thereby won, what is laid hold of, it is obliged (at the conclusion of the
fourth book) to denote as nothing, and can only add the consolation that
it is merely a relative, not an absolute nothing. For if something is none
of all the things which we know, it is certainly for us, speaking
generally, nothing. But it does not yet follow from this that it is
absolutely nothing, that from every possible point of view and in every
possible sense it must be nothing, but only that we are limited to a
completely negative knowledge of it, which may very well lie in the
limitation of our point of view. Now it is just here that the mystic
proceeds positively, and therefore it is just from this point that nothing
but mysticism remains. However, any one who wishes this kind of supplement
to the negative knowledge to which alone philosophy can guide him will
find it in its most beautiful and richest form in the Oupnekhat, then also
in the Enneads of Plotinus, in Scotus Erigena, in passages of Jakob Böhm,
but especially in the marvellous work of Madame de Guion, _Les Torrens_,
and in Angelus Silesius; finally also in the poems of the Sufis, of which
Tholuk has given us a collection translated into Latin, and another
translated into German, and in many other works. The Sufis are the
Gnostics of Islam. Hence Sadi denotes them by a word which may be
translated “full of insight.” Theism, calculated with reference to the
capacity of the multitude, places the source of existence without us, as
an object. All mysticism, and so also Sufism, according to the various
degrees of its initiation, draws it gradually back within us, as the
subject, and the adept recognises at last with wonder and delight that he
is it himself. This procedure, common to all mysticism, we find not only
expressed by Meister Eckhard, the father of German mysticism, in the form
of a precept for the perfect ascetic, “that he seek not God outside
himself” (Eckhard’s works, edited by Pfeiffer, vol. i. p. 626), but also
very naïvely exhibited by Eckhard’s spiritual daughter, who sought him
out, when she had experienced that conversion in herself, to cry out
joyfully to him, “Sir, rejoice with me, I have become God” (_loc. cit._,
p. 465). The mysticism of the Sufis also expresses itself throughout
precisely in accordance with this spirit, principally as a revelling in
the consciousness that one is oneself the kernel of the world and the
source of all existence, to which all returns. Certainly there also often
appears the call to surrender all volition as the only way in which
deliverance from individual existence and its suffering is possible, yet
subordinated and required as something easy. In the mysticism of the
Hindus, on the other hand, the latter side comes out much more strongly,
and in Christian mysticism it is quite predominant, so that pantheistic
consciousness, which is essential to all mysticism, here only appears in a
secondary manner, in consequence of the surrender of all volition, as
union with God. Corresponding to this difference of the conception,
Mohammedan mysticism has a very serene character, Christian mysticism a
gloomy and melancholy character, while that of the Hindus, standing above
both, in this respect also holds the mean.

Quietism, _i.e._, surrender of all volition, asceticism, _i.e._,
intentional mortification of one’s own will, and mysticism, _i.e._,
consciousness of the identity of one’s own nature with that of all things
or with the kernel of the world, stand in the closest connection; so that
whoever professes one of them is gradually led to accept the others, even
against his intention. Nothing can be more surprising than the agreement
with each other of the writers who present these doctrines,
notwithstanding the greatest difference of their age, country, and
religion, accompanied by the firm certainty and inward confidence with
which they set forth the permanence of their inner experience. They do not
constitute a _sect_, which adheres to, defends, and propagates a favourite
dogma once laid hold of; indeed the Indian, Christian, and Mohammedan
mystics, quietists, and ascetics are different in every respect, except
the inner significance and spirit of their teaching. A very striking
example of this is afforded by the comparison of the _Torrens_ of Madame
de Guion with the teaching of the Vedas, especially with the passage in
the Oupnekhat, vol. i. p. 63, which contains the content of that French
work in the briefest form, but accurately and even with the same images,
and yet could not possibly have been known to Madame de Guion in 1680. In
the “_Deutschen Theologie_” (the only unmutilated edition, Stuttgart,
1851) it is said in chapters 2 and 3 that both the fall of the devil and
that of Adam consisted in the fact that the one as the other ascribed to
himself the I and me, the mine and to me, and on p. 89 it is said: “In
true love there remains neither I nor me, mine, to me, thou, thine, and
the like.” Now, corresponding to this, it is said in the “Kural,” from the
Tamilian by Graul, p. 8: “The passion of the mine directed outwardly, and
that of the I directed inwardly, cease” (_cf._ ver. 346). And in the
“Manual of Buddhism” by Spence Hardy, p. 258, Buddha says: “My disciples
reject the thoughts I am this, or this is mine.” In general, if we look
away from the forms which are introduced by external circumstances and go
to the bottom of the matter, we will find that Sakya Muni and Meister
Eckhard teach the same; only that the former dared to express his thoughts
directly, while the latter is obliged to clothe them in the garments of
the Christian myth and adapt his expressions to this. He carries this,
however, so far that with him the Christian myth has become little more
than a symbolical language, just as the Hellenic myth became for the Neo‐
Platonists: he takes it throughout allegorically. In the same respect it
is worth noticing that the transition of St. Francis from prosperity to
the mendicant life is similar to the still greater step of Buddha Sakya
Muni from prince to beggar, and that, corresponding to this, the life of
St. Francis, and also the order he founded, was just a kind of
Sannyasiism. Indeed it deserves to be mentioned that his relationship with
the Indian spirit appears also in his great love for the brutes and
frequent intercourse with them, when he always calls them his sisters and
brothers; and his beautiful Cantico also bears witness to his inborn
Indian spirit by the praise of the sun, the moon, the stars, the wind, the
water, the fire, and the earth.(49)

Even the Christian quietists must often have had little or no knowledge of
each other; for example, Molinos and Madame de Guion of Tauler and the
“_Deutsche Theologie_,” or Gichtel of the former. In any case, the great
difference of their culture, in that some of them, like Molinos, were
learned, others, like Gichtel and many more, were the reverse, has no
essential influence upon their teaching. Their great internal agreement,
along with the firmness and certainty of their utterances, proves all the
more that they speak from real inward experience, from an experience which
certainly is not accessible to all, but is possessed only by a few
favoured individuals, and therefore has received the name of the work of
grace, the reality of which, however, for the above reasons, is not to be
doubted. But in order to understand all this one must read the mystics
themselves, and not be contented with second‐hand reports of them; for
every one must himself be comprehended before one judges concerning him.
Thus to become acquainted with quietism I specially recommend Meister
Eckhard, the “_Deutsche Theologie_,” Tauler, Madame de Guion, Antoinette
Bourignon, the English Bunyan, Molinos(50) and Gichtel. In the same way,
as practical proofs and examples of the profound seriousness of
asceticism, the life of Pascal, edited by Reuchlin, together with his
history of the Port‐Royal, and also the _Histoire de Sainte Elisabeth, par
le comte de Montalembert_, and _La vie de Rancé, par Chateaubriand_, are
very well worth reading, but yet by no means exhaust all that is important
in this class. Whoever has read such writings, and compared their spirit
with that of ascetism and quietism as it runs through all works of
Brahmanism and Buddhism, and speaks in every page, will admit that every
philosophy, which must in consistency reject that whole mode of thought,
which it can only do by explaining the representatives of it to be either
impostors or mad‐men, must just on this account necessarily be false. But
all European systems, with the exception of mine, find themselves in this
position. Truly it must be an extraordinary madness which, under the most
widely different circumstances and persons possible, spoke with such
agreement, and, moreover, was raised to the position of a chief doctrine
of their religion, by the most ancient and numerous peoples of the earth,
something like three‐fourths of all the inhabitants of Asia. But no
philosophy can leave the theme of quietism and asceticism undecided if the
question is proposed to it; because this theme is, in its matter,
identical with that of all metaphysics and ethics. Here then is a point
upon which I expect and desire that every philosophy, with its optimism,
should declare itself. And if, in the judgment of contemporaries, the
paradoxical and unexampled agreement of my philosophy with quietism and
asceticism appears as an open stumbling‐block, I, on the contrary, see
just in that agreement a proof of its sole correctness and truth, and also
a ground of explanation of why it is ignored and kept secret by the
_Protestant_ universities.

For not only the religions of the East, but also true Christianity, has
throughout that ascetic fundamental character which my philosophy explains
as the denial of the will to live; although Protestantism, especially in
its present form, seeks to conceal this. Yet even the open enemies of
Christianity who have appeared in the most recent times have ascribed to
it the doctrines of renunciation, self‐denial, perfect chastity, and, in
general, mortification of the will, which they quite correctly denote by
the name of the “_anti‐cosmic tendency_,” and have fully proved that such
doctrines are essentially proper to original and genuine Christianity. In
this they are undeniably right. But that they set up this as an evident
and patent reproach to Christianity, while just here lies its profoundest
truth, its high value, and its sublime character,—this shows an obscuring
of the mind, which can only be explained by the fact that these men’s
minds, unfortunately like thousands more at the present day in Germany,
are completely spoiled and distorted by the miserable Hegelism, that
school of dulness, that centre of misunderstanding and ignorance, that
mind‐destroying, spurious wisdom, which now at last begins to be
recognised as such, and the veneration of which will soon be left to the
Danish Academy, in whose eyes even that gross charlatan is a _summus
philosophus_, for whom it takes the field:—


    “_Car ils suivront la créance et estude,_
    _De l’ignorante et sotte multitude,_
    _Dont le plus lourd sera reça pour juge._”

    —RABELAIS.


In any case, the ascetic tendency is unmistakable in the genuine and
original Christianity as it developed in the writings of the Church
Fathers from its kernel in the New Testament; it is the summit towards
which all strives upwards. As its chief doctrine we find the
recommendation of genuine and pure celibacy (this first and most important
step in the denial of the will to live), which is already expressed in the
New Testament.(51) Strauss also, in his “Life of Jesus” (vol i. p. 618 of
the first edition), says, with reference to the recommendation of celibacy
given in Matt. xix. 11 _seq._, “That the doctrine of Jesus may not run
counter to the ideas of the present day, men have hastened to introduce
surreptitiously the thought that Jesus only praised celibacy with
reference to the circumstances of the time, and in order to leave the
activity of the Apostles unfettered; but there is even less indication of
this in the context than in the kindred passage, 1 Cor. vii. 25 _seq._;
but we have here again one of the places where _ascetic principles_, such
as prevailed among the Essenes, and probably still more widely among the
Jews, appear in the teaching of Jesus also.” This ascetic tendency appears
more decidedly later than at the beginning, when Christianity, still
seeking adherents, dared not pitch its demands too high; and by the
beginning of the third century it is expressly urged. Marriage, in genuine
Christianity, is merely a compromise with the sinful nature of man, as a
concession, something allowed to those who lack strength to aspire to the
highest, an expedient to avoid greater evil: in this sense it receives the
sanction of the Church in order that the bond may be indissoluble. But
celibacy and virginity are set up as the higher consecration of
Christianity through which one enters the ranks of the elect. Through
these alone does one attain the victor’s crown, which even at the present
day is signified by the wreath upon the coffin of the unmarried, and also
by that which the bride lays aside on the day of her marriage.

A piece of evidence upon this point, which certainly comes to us from the
primitive times of Christianity, is the pregnant answer of the Lord,
quoted by Clemens Alexandrinus (_Strom._ iii. 6 _et_ 9) from the Gospel of
the Egyptians: “Τῃ Σαλωμῃ ὁ κυριος πυνθανομενῃ, μεχρι ποτε θανατος
ισχυσει; μεχρις αν ειπεν, ὑμεις, αἱ γυναικες, τικτετε” (_Salomæ
interroganti ____quousque vigebit mors?____ Dominus ____guoadlusque____
inguit ____vos, mulieres, paritis___). “Τουτ᾽ εστι, μεχρις αν αἱ επιθυμιαι
ενεργωσι” (_Hoc est, quamdiu operabuntur cupiditates_), adds Clement, c.
9, with which he at once connects the famous passage, Rom. v. 12. Further
on, c. 13, he quotes the words of Cassianus: “Πυνθανομενης της Σαλωμης,
ποτε γνωσθησεται τα περι ὡν ηρετο, εφη ὁ κυριος, ᾽Οταν της αισχυνς ενδυμα
πατησετε, και ὁταν γενηται τα δυο ἑν, και το αρρεν μετα της θηλειας ουτε
αρρεν, ουτε θηλυ” (_Cum interrogaret Salome, quando cognoscentur ea, de
quibus interrogabat, ait Dominus: ____quando pudoris indumentum
conculcaveritis, et quando duo facto fuerint unum, et masculum cum fæmina
nec masculum, nec fæminium___), _i.e._, when she no longer needs the veil
of modesty, since all distinction of sex will have disappeared.

With regard to this point the heretics have certainly gone furthest: even
in the second century the Tatianites or Encratites, the Gnostics, the
Marcionites, the Montanists, Valentinians, and Cassians; yet only because
with reckless consistency they gave honour to the truth, and therefore, in
accordance with the spirit of Christianity, they taught perfect
continence; while the Church prudently declared to be heresy all that ran
counter to its far‐seeing policy. Augustine says of the Tatianites:
“_Nuptias damnant, atque omnino pares eas fornicationibus aliisque
corruptionibus faciunt: nec recipiunt in suum numerum conjugio utentem,
sive marem, sive fœminam. Non vescunlur carnibus, easque abominantur._”
(_De hœresi ad quod vult Deum. hœr._, 25.) But even the orthodox Fathers
look upon marriage in the light indicated above, and zealously preach
entire continence, the ἁγνεια. Athanasius gives as the cause of marriage:
“Ὁτι υποπιπτοντες εσμεν τῃ του προπατορος καταδικῃ ... επειδη ὁ
προηγουμενος σκοπος του θεου ην, το μη δια γαμου γενεσθαι ἡμας και φθορας;
ἡ δε παραβασις της εντολης του γαμον εισηγαγεν δια το ανομησαι τον Αδαμ.”
(_Quia subjacemus condemnationi propatoris nostri; ... nam finis, a Deo
prœlatus, erat, nos non per nuptias et corruptionem fieri: sed
transgressio mandati nuptias introduxit, propter legis violationem
Adœ._—_Exposit. in psalm._ 50). Tertullian calls marriage _genus mali
inferioris, ex indulgentia ortum_ (_De pudicitia_, c. 16) and says:
“_Matrimonium et stuprum est commixtio carnis; scilicet cujus
concupiscentiam dominus stupro adœquavit. Ergo, inguis, jam et primas, id
est unas nuptias destruis? Nec immerito: quoniam et ipsœ ex eo constant,
quod est stuprum_” (_De exhort. castit._, c. 9). Indeed, Augustine himself
commits himself entirely to this doctrine and all its results, for he
says: “_Novi quosdam, qui murmurent: quid, si, inquiunt, omnes velint ab
omni concubitu abstinere, unde subsistet genus humanum? Utinam omnes hoc
vellent! dumtaxat in caritate, de corde puro et conscientia bona, et fide
non ficta: multo citius Dei civitas compleretur, ut acceleraretur terminus
mundi_” (_De bono conjugali_, c. 10). And again: “_Non vos ab hoc studio,
quo multos ad imitandum vos excitatis, frangat querela vanorum, qui
dicunt: quomodo subsistet genus humanum, si omnes fuerint continentes?
Quasi propter aliud retardetur hoc seculum, nisi ut impleatur
prœdestinatus numerus ille sanctorum, quo citius impleto, profecto nec
terminus seculi differetur_” (_De bono individuitatis_, c. 23). One sees
at once that he identifies salvation with the end of the world. The other
passages in the works of Augustine which bear on this point will be found
collected in the “_Confessio Augustiniana e D. Augustini operibus
compilata a Hieronymo Torrense_,” 1610, under the headings _De
matrimonio_, _De cœlibatu_, &c., and any one may convince himself from
these that in ancient, genuine Christianity marriage was only a
concession, which besides this was supposed to have only the begetting of
children as its end, that, on the other hand, perfect continence was the
true virtue far to be preferred to this. To those, however, who do not
wish to go back to the authorities themselves I recommend two works for
the purpose of removing any kind of doubt as to the tendency of
Christianity we are speaking about: Carové, “_Ueber das Cölibatgesetz_,”
1832, and Lind, “_De cœlibatu Christianorum per tria priora secula_,”
_Havniœ_, 1839. It is, however, by no means the views of these writers
themselves to which I refer, for these are opposed to mine, but solely to
their carefully collected accounts and quotations, which deserve full
acceptance as quite trustworthy, just because both these writers are
opponents of celibacy, the former a rationalistic Catholic, and the other
a Protestant candidate in theology, who speaks exactly like one. In the
first‐named work we find, vol. i. p. 166, in that reference, the following
result expressed: “In accordance with the Church view, as it may be read
in canonical Church Fathers, in the Synodal and Papal instructions, and in
innumerable writings of orthodox Catholics, perpetual chastity is called a
divine, heavenly, angelic virtue, and the obtaining of the assistance of
divine grace for this end is made dependent upon earnest prayer. We have
already shown that this Augustinian doctrine is by Canisius and in the
decrees of the Council of Trent expressed as an unchanging belief of the
Church. That, however, it has been retained as a dogma till the present
day is sufficiently established by the June number, 1831, of the magazine
‘_Der Katholik_.’ It is said there, p. 263: ‘In Catholicism the observance
of a perpetual chastity, for the sake of God, appears as in itself the
highest merit of man. The view that the observance of continual chastity
as an end in itself sanctifies and exalts the man is, as every instructed
Catholic is convinced, deeply rooted in Christianity, both as regards its
spirit and its express precepts. The decrees of the Council of Trent have
abolished all possible doubt on this point....’ It must at any rate be
confessed by every unprejudiced person, not only that the doctrine
expressed by ‘_Der Katholik_’ is really Catholic, but also that the proofs
adduced may be quite irrefutable for a Catholic reason, because they are
drawn so directly from the ecclesiastical view, taken by the Church, of
life and its destiny.” It is further said in the same work, p. 270:
“Although both Paul calls the forbidding to marry a false doctrine, and
the still Judaistic author of the Epistle to the Hebrews enjoins that
marriage shall be held in honour by all, and the bed kept undefiled (Heb.
xiii 4), yet the main tendency of these two sacred writers is not on that
account to be mistaken. Virginity is for both the perfect state, marriage
only a make‐shift for the weak, and only as such to be held inviolable.
The highest effort, on the other hand, was directed to complete, material
putting off of self. The self must turn and refrain from all that tends
only to its own pleasure, and that only temporarily.” Lastly, p. 288: “We
agree with the Abbé Zaccaria, who asserts that celibacy (not the law of
celibacy) is before everything to be deduced from the teaching of Christ
and the Apostle Paul.”

What is opposed to this specially Christian view is everywhere and always
merely the Old Testament, with its παντα καλα λιαν. This appears with
peculiar distinctness from that important third book of the Stromata of
Clement, where, arguing against the encratistic heretics mentioned above,
he constantly opposes to them only Judaism, with its optimistic history of
creation, with which the world‐denying tendency of the New Testament is
certainly in contradiction. But the connection of the New Testament with
the Old is at bottom only external, accidental, and forced; and the one
point at which Christian doctrine can link itself on to the latter is only
to be found, as has been said, in the story of the fall, which, moreover,
stands quite isolated in the Old Testament, and is made no further use of.
But, in accordance with the account in the Gospels, it is just the
orthodox adherents of the Old Testament who bring about the crucifixion of
the founder of Christianity, because they find his teaching in conflict
with their own. In the said third book of the Stromata of Clement the
antagonism between optimism with theism on the one hand, and pessimism
with ascetic morality on the other, comes out with surprising
distinctness. This book is directed against the Gnostics, who just taught
pessimism and asceticism, that is, εγκρατεια (abstinence of every kind,
but especially from all sexual satisfaction); on account of which Clement
censures them vigorously. But, at the same time, it becomes apparent that
even the spirit of the Old Testament stands in this antagonism with that
of the New Testament. For, apart from the fall, which appears in the Old
Testament like a _hors d’œuvre_, the spirit of the Old Testament is
diametrically opposed to that of the New Testament—the former optimistic,
the latter pessimistic. Clement himself brings this contradiction out
prominently at the end of the eleventh chapter (προσαποτεινομενον τον
Παυλον τῳ Κριστῃ κ.τ.λ.), although he will not allow that it is a real
contradiction, but explains it as only apparent,—like a good Jew, as he
is. In general it is interesting to see how with Clement the New and the
Old Testament get mixed up together; and he strives to reconcile them, yet
for the most part drives out the New Testament with the Old. Just at the
beginning of the third chapter he objects to the Marcionites that they
find fault with the creation, after the example of Plato and Pythagoras;
for Marcion teaches that nature is bad, made out of bad materials (φυσις
κακη, εκ τε ὑλης κακης); therefore one ought not to people this world, but
to abstain from marriage (μη βουλομενοι τον κοσμον συμπληρουν, απεχεσθαι
γαμου). Now Clement, to whom in general the Old Testament is much more
congenial and convincing than the New, takes this very much amiss. He sees
in it their flagrant ingratitude to and enmity and rebellion against him
who has made the world, the just demiurgus, whose work they themselves
are, and yet despise the use of his creatures, in impious rebellion
“forsaking the natural opinion” (αντιτασσομενοι τῳ ποιητῃ τῳ σφων, ...
εγκρατεις τῃ προς τον πεποιηκοτα εχθρᾳ, μη βουλομενοι χρησθαι τοις ὑπ᾽
αυτου κτισθεισιν, ... ασεβει θεομαχιᾳ των κατα φυσιν εκσταντες λογισμωι).
At the same time, in his holy zeal, he will not allow the Marcionites even
the honour of originality, but, armed with his well‐known erudition, he
brings it against them, and supports his case with the most beautiful
quotations, that even the ancient philosophers, that Heraclitus and
Empedocles, Pythagoras and Plato, Orpheus and Pindar, Herodotus and
Euripides, and also the Sibyls, lamented deeply the wretched nature of the
world, thus taught pessimism. Now in this learned enthusiasm he does not
observe that in this way he is just giving the Marcionites water for their
mill, for he shows that


    “All the wisest of all the ages”


have taught and sung what they do, but confidently and boldly he quotes
the most decided and energetic utterances of the ancients in this sense.
Certainly they cannot lead him astray. Wise men may mourn the sadness of
existence, poets may pour out the most affecting lamentations about it,
nature and experience may cry out as loudly as they will against
optimism,—all this does not touch our Church Father: he holds his Jewish
revelation in his hand, and remains confident. The demiurgus made the
world. From this it is _a priori_ certain that it is excellent, and it may
look as it likes. The same thing then takes place with regard to the
second point, the εγκρατεια, through which, according to his view, the
Marcionites show their ingratitude towards the demiurgus (αχαρισειν τῳ
δημιουργῳ) and the perversity with which they put from them all his gifts
(δἰ αντιταξιν προς τον δημιουργον, την χρησιν των κοσμικων παραιτουμενοι).
Here now the tragic poets have preceded the Encratites (to the prejudice
of their originality) and have said the same things. For since they also
lament the infinite misery of existence, they have added that it is better
to bring no children into such a world; which he now again supports with
the most beautiful passages, and, at the same time, accuses the
Pythagoreans of having renounced sexual pleasure on this ground. But all
this touches him not; he sticks to his principle that all these sin
against the demiurgus, in that they teach that one ought not to marry,
ought not to beget children, ought not to bring new miserable beings into
the world, ought not to provide new food for death (δἰ εγκρατειας ασεβουσι
εις τε την κτισιν και τον ἁγιον δημιουργον, τον παντοκρατορα μονον θεον,
και διδασκουσι, μη δειν παραδεχεσθαι γαμον και παιδοποιϊαν, μηδε
αντεισαγειν τῳ κοσμῳ δυστυχησοντας ἑτερους, μηδε επιχορηγειν θανατῳ
τροφην—c. 6). Since the learned Church Father thus denounces εγκρατεια, he
seems to have had no presentiment that just after his time the celibacy of
the Christian priesthood would be more and more introduced, and finally,
in the eleventh century, raised to the position of a law, because it is in
keeping with the spirit of the New Testament. It is just this spirit which
the Gnostics have grasped more profoundly and understood better than our
Church Father, who is more Jew than Christian. The conception of the
Gnostics comes out very clearly at the beginning of the ninth chapter,
where the following passage is quoted from the Gospel of the Egyptians:
Αυτος ειπεν ὁ Σωτηρ, “ηλθον καταλυσαι τα εργα της θηλειας;” θηλειας μεν,
της επιθυμιας; εργα δε, γενεσιν και φθοραν (_Ajunt enim dixisse
Servatorem: ____veni ad dissolvendum opera feminæ;____ feminæ quidem,
cupiditatis; opera autem, generationem et interitum_); but quite specially
at the end of the thirteenth and the beginning of the fourteenth chapter.
The Church certainly was obliged to consider how to set a religion upon
its legs that could also walk and stand in the world as it is, and among
men; therefore it declared these persons to be heretics. At the conclusion
of the seventh chapter our Church Father opposes Indian asceticism, as
bad, to Christian Judaism; whereby the fundamental difference of the
spirit of the two religions is clearly brought out. In Judaism and
Christianity everything runs back to obedience or disobedience to the
command of God: ὑπακοη και παρακοη; as befits us creatures, ἡμιν, τοις
πεπλασμενοις ὑπο της του Παντοκρατορος βουλησεως (_nobis, qui Omnipotentis
voluntate efficti sumus_), chap. 14. Then comes, as a second duty,
λατρευειν θεῳ ζωντι, to serve God, extol His works, and overflow with
thankfulness. Certainly the matter has a very different aspect in
Brahmanism and Buddhism, for in the latter all improvement and conversion,
and the only deliverance we can hope for from this world of suffering,
this Sansara, proceeds from the knowledge of the four fundamental truths:
(1) _dolor_; (2) _doloris ortus_; (3) _doloris interitus_; (4)
_octopartita via ad doloris sedationem_ (_Dammapadam_, ed. Fausböll, p. 35
_et_ 347). The explanation of these four truths will be found in Bournouf,
“_Introduct. à l’hist. du Buddhisme_,” p. 629, and in all expositions of
Buddhism.

In truth, Judaism, with its παντα καλα λιαν, is not related to
Christianity as regards its spirit and ethical tendency, but Brahmanism
and Buddhism are. But the spirit and ethical tendency are what is
essential in a religion, not the myths in which these are clothed. I
therefore cannot give up the belief that the doctrines of Christianity can
in some way be derived from these primitive religions. I have pointed out
some traces of this in the second volume of the Parerga, § 179 (second
edition, § 180). I have to add to these that Epiphanias (_Hæretic_.
xviii.) relates that the first Jewish Christians of Jerusalem, who called
themselves Nazarenes, refrained from all animal food. On account of this
origin (or, at least, this agreement) Christianity belongs to the ancient,
true and sublime faith of mankind, which is opposed to the false, shallow,
and injurious optimism which exhibits itself in Greek paganism, Judaism,
and Islamism. The Zend religion holds to a certain extent the mean,
because it has opposed to Ormuzd a pessimistic counterpoise in Ahriman.
From this Zend religion the Jewish religion proceeded, as J.G. Rhode has
thoroughly proved in his book, “_Die heilige Sage des Zendvolks_;” from
Ormuzd has come Jehovah, and from Ahriman, Satan, who, however, plays only
a very subordinate rôle in Judaism, indeed almost entirely disappears,
whereby then optimism gains the upper hand, and there only remains the
myth of the fall as a pessimistic element, which certainly (as the fable
of Meschia and Meschiane) is derived from the Zend‐Avesta. Yet even this
falls into oblivion, till it is again taken up by Christianity along with
Satan. Ormuzd himself, however, is derived from Brahmanism, although from
a lower region of it; he is no other than Indra, that subordinate god of
the firmament and the atmosphere, who is represented as frequently in
rivalry with men. This has been very clearly shown by J.J. Schmidt in his
work on the relation of the Gnostic‐theosophic doctrines to the religions
of the East. This Indra‐Ormuzd‐Jehovah had afterwards to pass over into
Christianity, because this religion arose in Judæa. But on account of the
cosmopolitan character of Christianity he laid aside his own name to be
denoted in the language of each converted nation by the appellation of the
superhuman beings he supplanted, as, Δεος, _Deus_, which comes from the
Sanscrit _Deva_ (from which also devil comes), or among the Gothico‐
Germanic peoples by the word God, _Gott_, which comes from _Odin_,
_Wodan_, _Guodan_, _Godan_. In the same way he assumed in Islamism, which
also sprang from Judaism, the name of Allah, which also existed earlier in
Arabia. Analogous to this, the gods of the Greek Olympus, when in
prehistoric times they were transplanted to Italy, also assumed the names
of the previously reigning gods: hence among the Romans Zeus is called
Jupiter, Hera Juno, Hermes Mercury, &c. In China the first difficulty of
the missionaries arose from the fact that the Chinese language has no
appellation of the kind and also no word for creating; for the three
religions of China know no gods either in the plural or in the
singular.(52)

However the rest may be, that παντα καλα λιαν of the Old Testament is
really foreign to true Christianity; for in the New Testament the world is
always spoken of as something to which one does not belong, which one does
not love, nay, whose lord is the devil.(53) This agrees with the ascetic
spirit of the denial of one’s self and the overcoming of the world which,
just like the boundless love of one’s neighbour, even of one’s enemy, is
the fundamental characteristic which Christianity has in common with
Brahmanism and Buddhism, and which proves their relationship. There is
nothing in which one has to distinguish the kernel so carefully from the
shell as in Christianity. Just because I prize this kernel highly I
sometimes treat the shell with little ceremony; it is, however, thicker
than is generally supposed. Protestantism, since it has eliminated
asceticism and its central point, the meritoriousness of celibacy, has
already given up the inmost kernel of Christianity, and so far is to be
regarded as a falling away from it. This has become apparent in our own
day by the gradual transition of Protestantism into shallow rationalism,
this modern Pelagianism, which ultimately degenerates into the doctrine of
a loving father, who has made the world, in order that things may go on
very pleasantly in it (in which case, then, he must certainly have
failed), and who, if one only conforms to his will in certain respects,
will also afterwards provide a still more beautiful world (with regard to
which it is only a pity that it has such a fatal entrance). That may be a
good religion for comfortable, married, and enlightened Protestant
pastors; but it is no Christianity. Christianity is the doctrine of the
deep guilt of the human race through its existence alone, and the longing
of the heart for deliverance from it, which, however, can only be attained
by the greatest sacrifices and by the denial of one’s own self, thus by an
entire reversal of human nature. Luther may have been perfectly right from
the practical point of view, _i.e._, with reference to the Church scandal
of his time, which he wished to remove, but not so from the theoretical
point of view. The more sublime a doctrine is, the more it is exposed to
abuse at the hands of human nature, which, on the whole, is of a low and
evil disposition: hence the abuses of Catholicism are so much more
numerous and so much greater than those of Protestantism. Thus, for
example, monasticism, that methodical denial of the will practised in
common for the sake of mutual encouragement, is an institution of a
sublime description, which, however, for this very reason is for the most
part untrue to its spirit. The shocking abuses of the Church excited in
the honest mind of Luther a lofty indignation. But in consequence of this
he was led to desire to limit as much as possible the claims of
Christianity itself, and for this end he first confined it to the words of
the Bible; but then, in his well‐meant zeal, he went too far, for he
attacked the very heart of Christianity in the ascetic principle. For
after the withdrawal of the ascetic principle, the optimistic principle
soon necessarily took its place. But in religions, as in philosophy,
optimism is a fundamental error which obstructs the path of all truth.
From all this it seems to me that Catholicism is a shamefully abused, but
Protestantism a degenerate Christianity; thus, that Christianity in
general has met the fate which befalls all that is noble, sublime, and
great whenever it has to dwell among men.

However, even in the very lap of Protestantism, the essentially ascetic
and encratistic spirit of Christianity has made way for itself; and in
this case it has appeared in a phenomenon which perhaps has never before
been equalled in magnitude and definiteness, the highly remarkable sect of
the Shakers, in North America, founded by an Englishwoman, Anne Lee, in
1774. The adherents of this sect have already increased to 6000, who are
divided into fifteen communities, and inhabit a number of villages in the
states of New York and Kentucky, especially in the district of New
Lebanon, near Nassau village. The fundamental characteristic of their
religious rule of life is celibacy and entire abstention from all sexual
satisfaction. It is unanimously admitted, even by the English and
Americans who visit them, and who laugh and jeer at them in every other
respect, that this rule is strictly and with perfect honesty observed;
although brothers and sisters sometimes even occupy the same house, eat at
the same table, nay, _dance_ together in the religious services in church.
For whoever has made that hardest of all sacrifices may _dance_ before the
Lord; he is a victor, he has overcome. Their singing in church consists in
general of cheerful, and partly even of merry, songs. The church‐dance,
also, which follows the sermon is accompanied by the singing of the rest.
It is a lively dance, performed in measured time, and concludes with a
galop, which is carried on till the dancers are exhausted. Between each
dance one of their teachers cries aloud, “Think, that ye rejoice before
the Lord for having slain your flesh; for this is here the only use we
make of our refractory limbs.” To celibacy most of the other conditions
link themselves on of themselves. There are no families, and therefore
there is no private property, but community of goods. All are clothed
alike, in Quaker fashion, and with great neatness. They are industrious
and diligent: idleness is not endured. They have also the enviable rule
that they are to avoid all unnecessary noise, such as shouting, door‐
slamming, whip‐cracking, loud knocking, &c. Their rule of life has been
thus expressed by one of them: “Lead a life of innocence and purity, love
your neighbours as yourself, live at peace with all men, and refrain from
war, blood‐shed, and all violence against others, as well as from all
striving after worldly honour and distinction. Give to each his own, and
follow after holiness, without which no man can see the Lord. Do good to
all so far as your opportunity and your power extends.” They persuade no
one to join them, but test those who present themselves by a novitiate of
several years. Moreover, every one is free to leave them; very rarely is
any one expelled for misconduct. Adopted children are carefully educated,
and only when they are grown up do they voluntarily join the sect. It is
said that in the controversies of their ministers with Anglican clergy the
latter generally come off the worse, for the arguments consist of passages
from the New Testament. Fuller accounts of them will be found particularly
in Maxwell’s “Run through the United States,” 1841; also in Benedict’s
“History of all Religions,” 1830; also in the _Times_, November 4, 1837,
and in the German magazine _Columbus_, May number, 1831. A German sect in
America, very similar to them, who also live in strict celibacy and
continence, are the Rappists. An account of them is given in F. Loher’s
“_Geschichte und Zustande der Deutschen in Amerika_,” 1853. In Russia also
the Raskolniks are a similar sect. The Gichtelians live also in strict
chastity. But among the ancient Jews we already find a prototype of all
these sects, the Essenes, of whom even Pliny gives an account (_Hist.
Nat._, v. 15), and who resembled the Shakers very much, not only in
celibacy, but also in other respects; for example, in dancing during
divine service, which leads to the opinion that the founder of the Shakers
took the Essenes as a pattern. In the presence of such facts as these how
does Luther’s assertion look: “_Ubi natura, quemadmodum a Deo nobis insita
est, fertur ac rapitur_, FIERI NULLO MODO POTEST, _ut extra matrimonium
caste vivatur_”? (_Catech. maj._)

Although Christianity, in essential respects, taught only what all Asia
knew long before, and even better, yet for Europe it was a new and great
revelation, in consequence of which the spiritual tendency of the European
nations was therefore entirely transformed. For it disclosed to them the
metaphysical significance of existence, and therefore taught them to look
away from the narrow, paltry, ephemeral life of earth, and to regard it no
longer as an end in itself, but as a condition of suffering, guilt, trial,
conflict, and purification, out of which, by means of moral achievements,
difficult renunciation, and denial of oneself, one may rise to a better
existence, which is inconceivable by us. It taught the great truth of the
assertion and denial of the will to live in the clothing of allegory by
saying that through Adam’s fall the curse has come upon all, sin has come
into the world, and guilt is inherited by all; but that, on the other
hand, through the sacrificial death of Jesus all are reconciled, the world
saved, guilt abolished, and justice satisfied. In order, however, to
understand the truth itself that is contained in this myth one must not
regard men simply in time, as beings independent of each other, but must
comprehend the (Platonic) Idea of man, which is related to the series of
men, as eternity in itself is related to eternity drawn out as time; hence
the eternal Idea _man_ extended in time to the series of men through the
connecting bond of generation appears again in time as a whole. If now we
keep the Idea of man in view, we see that Adam’s fall represents the
finite, animal, sinful nature of man, in respect of which he is a finite
being, exposed to sin, suffering, and death. On the other hand, the life,
teaching, and death of Jesus Christ represent the eternal, supernatural
side, the freedom, the salvation of man. Now every man, as such and
_potentiâ_, is both Adam and Jesus, according as he comprehends himself,
and his will thereupon determines him; in consequence of which he is then
condemned and given over to death, or saved and attains to eternal life.
Now these truths, both in their allegorical and in their real acceptation,
were completely new as far as Greeks and Romans were concerned, who were
still entirely absorbed in life, and did not seriously look beyond it. Let
whoever doubts this see how Cicero (_Pro Cluentio_, c. 61) and Sallust
(_Catil._, c. 47) speak of the state after death. The ancients, although
far advanced in almost everything else, remained children with regard to
the chief concern, and were surpassed in this even by the Druids, who at
least taught metempsychosis. That one or two philosophers, like Pythagoras
and Plato, thought otherwise alters nothing as regards the whole.

That great fundamental truth, then, which is contained in Christianity, as
in Brahmanism and Buddhism, the need of deliverance from an existence
which is given up to suffering and death, and the attainableness of this
by the denial of the will, thus by a decided opposition to nature, is
beyond all comparison the most important truth there can be; but, at the
same time, it is entirely opposed to the natural tendency of the human
race, and in its true grounds it is difficult to comprehend; as indeed all
that can only be thought generally and in the abstract is inaccessible to
the great majority of men. Therefore for these men there was everywhere
required, in order to bring that great truth within the sphere of its
practical application, _a mythical vehicle_ for it, as it were a
receptacle, without which it would be lost and dissipated. The truth had
therefore everywhere to borrow the garb of the fable, and also constantly
to endeavour to connect itself with what in each case was historically
given, already familiar, and already revered. What _sensu proprio_
remained inaccessible to the great mass of mankind of all ages and lands,
with their low tone of mind, their intellectual stupidity and general
brutality, had, for practical purposes, to be brought home to them _sensu
allegorico_, in order to become their guiding star. So, then, the
religions mentioned above are to be regarded as the sacred vessels in
which the great truth, known and expressed for several thousand years,
indeed perhaps since the beginning of the human race, which yet in itself,
for the great mass of mankind always remains a mystery, is, according to
the measure of their powers, made accessible to them, preserved and
transmitted through the centuries. Yet, because all that does not through
and through consist of the imperishable material of pure truth is subject
to destruction, whenever this fate befalls such a vessel, through contact
with a heterogeneous age, its sacred content must in some way be saved and
preserved for mankind by another. But it is the task of philosophy, since
it is one with pure truth, to present that content pure and unmixed, thus
merely in abstract conceptions, and consequently without that vehicle, for
those who are capable of thinking, who are always an exceedingly small
number. It is therefore related to religions as a straight line to several
curves running near it: for it expresses _sensu proprio_, thus reaches
directly, what they show in veiled forms and reach by circuitous routes.

If now, in order to illustrate what has just been said by an example, and
also to follow a philosophical fashion of my time, I should wish perhaps
to attempt to solve the profoundest mystery of Christianity, that of the
Trinity, in the fundamental conception of my philosophy, this could be
done, with the licence permitted in such interpretations, in the following
manner. The Holy Ghost is the distinct denial of the will to live: the man
in whom this exhibits itself _in concreto_ is the Son; He is identical
with the will which asserts life, and thereby produces the phenomenon of
this perceptible world, _i.e._, with the Father, because the assertion and
denial are opposite acts of the same will whose capability for both is the
only true freedom. However, this is to be regarded as a mere _lusus
ingenii_.

Before I close this chapter I wish to adduce a few proofs in support of
what in § 68 of the first volume I denoted by the expression Δευτυρος
πλους, the bringing about of the denial of the will by one’s own deeply
felt suffering, thus not merely by the appropriation of the suffering of
others, and the knowledge of the vanity and wretchedness of our existence
introduced by this. We can arrive at a comprehension of what goes on in
the heart of a man, in the case of an elevation of this kind and the
accompanying purifying process, by considering what every emotional man
experiences on beholding a tragedy, which is of kindred nature to this. In
the third and fourth acts perhaps such a man is distressed and disturbed
by the ever more clouded and threatened happiness of the hero; but when,
in the fifth act, this happiness is entirely wrecked and shattered, he
experiences a certain elevation of the soul, which affords him an
infinitely higher kind of pleasure than the sight of the happiness of the
hero, however great it might be, could ever have given. Now this is the
same thing, in the weak water‐colours of sympathy which is able to raise a
well‐known illusion, as that which takes place with the energy of reality
in the feeling of our own fate when it is heavy misfortune that drives the
man at last into the haven of entire resignation. Upon this occurrence
depend all those conversions which completely transform men such as are
described in the text. I may give here in a few words the story of the
conversion of the Abbé Rancé, as it is strikingly similar to that of
Raymond Lully, which is told in the text, and besides this is memorable on
account of its result. His youth was devoted to enjoyment and pleasure;
finally, he lived in a relation of passion with a Madame de Montbazon. One
evening, when he visited her, he found her room empty, in disorder and
darkness. He struck something with his foot; it was her head, which had
been severed from the trunk, because after her sudden death her corpse
could not otherwise be got into the lead coffin that stood beside it.
After overcoming an immense sorrow, Rancé now became, in 1663, the
reformer of the order of the Trappists, which at that time had entirely
relaxed the strictness of its rules. He joined this order, and through him
it was led back to that terrible degree of renunciation which is still
maintained at the present day at La Trappe, and, as the methodically
carried out denial of the will, aided by the severest renunciation and an
incredibly hard and painful manner of life, fills the visitor with sacred
awe, after he has been touched at his reception by the humility of these
genuine monks, who, emaciated by fasting, by cold, by night watches,
prayers and penances, kneel before him, the worldling and the sinner, to
implore his blessing. Of all orders of monks, this one alone has
maintained itself in perfection in France, through all changes; which is
to be attributed to the profound earnestness which in it is unmistakable,
and excludes all secondary ends. It has remained untouched even by the
decline of religion, because its root lies deeper in human nature than any
positive system of belief.

I have mentioned in the text that this great and rapid change of the
inmost being of man which we are here considering, and which has hitherto
been entirely neglected by philosophers, appears most frequently when,
with full consciousness, he stands in the presence of a violent and
certain death, thus in the case of executions. But, in order to bring this
process much more distinctly before our eyes, I regard it as by no means
unbecoming to the dignity of philosophy to quote what has been said by
some criminals before their execution, even at the risk of incurring the
sneer that I encourage gallows’ sermons. I certainly rather believe that
the gallows is a place of quite peculiar revelations, and a watch‐tower
from which the man who even then retains his presence of mind obtains a
wider, clearer outlook into eternity than most philosophers over the
paragraphs of their rational psychology and theology. The following speech
on the gallows was made on the 15th April, 1837, at Gloucester, by a man
called Bartlett, who had murdered his mother‐in‐law: “Englishmen and
fellow countrymen,—I have a few words to say to you, and they shall be but
very few. Yet let me entreat you, one and all, that these few words that I
shall utter may strike deep into your hearts. Bear them in your mind, not
only now while you are witnessing this sad scene, but take them to your
homes, take them, and repeat them to your children and friends. I implore
you as a dying man—one for whom the instrument of death is even now
prepared—and these words are that you may loose yourselves from the love
of this dying world and its vain pleasures. Think less of it and more of
your God. Do this: repent, repent, for be assured that without deep and
true repentance, without turning to your heavenly Father, you will never
attain, nor can hold the slightest hope of ever reaching those bowers of
bliss to which I trust I am now fast advancing” (_Times_, 18th April
1837).

Still more remarkable are the last words of the well‐known murderer,
Greenacre, who was executed in London on the 1st of May 1837. The English
newspaper the _Post_ gives the following account, which is also reprinted
in _Galignani’s Messenger_ of the 6th of May 1837: “On the morning of his
execution a gentleman advised him to put his trust in God, and pray for
forgiveness through the mediation of Jesus Christ. Greenacre replied that
forgiveness through the mediation of Christ was a matter of opinion; for
his part, he believed that in the sight of the highest Being, a Mohammedan
was as good as a Christian and had just as much claim to salvation. Since
his imprisonment he had had his attention directed to theological
subjects, and he had become convinced that the gallows is a passport to
heaven.” The indifference displayed here towards positive religions is
just what gives this utterance greater weight, for it shows that it is no
fanatical delusion, but individual immediate knowledge that lies at its
foundation. The following incident may also be mentioned which is given by
_Galignani’s Messenger_ of the 15th August 1837, from the _Limerick
Chronicle_: “Last Monday Maria Cooney was executed for the revolting
murder of Mrs. Anderson. So deeply was this wretched woman impressed with
the greatness of her crime that she kissed the rope which was put round
her neck, while she humbly implored the mercy of God.” Lastly this: the
_Times_, of the 29th April 1845 gives several letters which Hocker, who
was condemned for the murder of Delarue, wrote the day before his
execution. In one of these he says: “I am persuaded that unless the
natural heart be broken, and renewed by divine mercy, however noble and
amiable it may be deemed by the world, it can never think of eternity
without inwardly shuddering.” These are the outlooks into eternity
referred to above which are obtained from that watch‐tower; and I have had
the less hesitation in giving them here since Shakspeare also says—


        “Out of these convertites
    There is much matter to be heard and learned.”

    —_As You Like it_, last scene.


Strauss, in his “Life of Jesus,” has proved that Christianity also
ascribes to suffering as such the purifying and sanctifying power here set
forth (_Leben Jesu_, vol. i. ch. 6, §§ 72 and 74). He says that the
beatitudes in the Sermon on the Mount have a different sense in Luke (vi.
21) from that which they have in Matt. (v. 3), for only the latter adds τῳ
πνευματι to μακαριοι οἱ πτωχοι, and την δικαιοσυνην to πεινωντες. Thus by
him alone are the simple‐minded, the humble, &c., meant, while by Luke are
meant the literally poor; so that here the contrast is that between
present suffering and future happiness. With the Ebionites it is a capital
principle that whoever takes his portion in this age gets nothing in the
future, and conversely. Accordingly in Luke the blessings are followed by
as many ουαι, woes, which are addressed to the rich, οἱ πλουσιοι, the
full, οἱ εμπεπλησμενοι, and to them that laugh, οἱ γελωντες, in the
Ebionite spirit. In the same spirit, he says, p. 604, is the parable (Luke
xvi. 19) of the rich man and Lazarus given, which nowhere mentions any
fault of the former or any merit of the latter, and takes as the standard
of the future recompense, not the good done or the wickedness practised,
but the evil suffered here and the good things enjoyed, in the Ebionite
spirit. “A like estimation of outward poverty,” Strauss goes on, “is also
attributed to Jesus by the other synoptists (Matt. xix. 16; Mark x. 17;
Luke xviii. 18), in the story of the rich young man and the saying about
the camel and the eye of a needle.”

If we go to the bottom of the matter we will recognise that even in the
most famous passages of the Sermon on the Mount there is contained an
indirect injunction to voluntary poverty, and thereby to the denial of the
will to live. For the precept (Matt. v. 40 _seq._) to consent
unconditionally to all demands made upon us, to give our cloak also to him
who will take away our coat, &c., similarly (Matt. vi. 25‐34) the precept
to cast aside all care for the future, even for the morrow, and so to live
simply in the present, are rules of life the observance of which
inevitably leads to absolute poverty, and which therefore just say in an
indirect manner what Buddha directly commands his disciples and has
confirmed by his own example: throw everything away and become bhikkhu,
_i.e._, beggars. This appears still more decidedly in the passage Matt. x.
9‐15, where all possessions, even shoes and a staff, are forbidden to the
Apostles, and they are directed to beg. These commands afterwards became
the foundation of the mendicant order of St. Francis (_Bonaventuræ vita S.
Francisci_, c. 3). Hence, then, I say that the spirit of Christian ethics
is identical with that of Brahmanism and Buddhism. In conformity with the
whole view expounded here Meister Eckhard also says (Works, vol. i. p.
492): “The swiftest animal that bears thee to perfection is suffering.”




Chapter XLIX. The Way Of Salvation.


There is only one inborn error, and that is, that we exist in order to be
happy. It is inborn in us because it is one with our existence itself, and
our whole being is only a paraphrase of it, nay, our body is its monogram.
We are nothing more than will to live and the successive satisfaction of
all our volitions is what we think in the conception of happiness.

As long as we persist in this inborn error, indeed even become rigidly
fixed in it through optimistic dogmas, the world appears to us full of
contradictions. For at every step, in great things as in small, we must
experience that the world and life are by no means arranged with a view to
containing a happy existence. While now by this the thoughtless man only
finds himself tormented in reality, in the case of him who thinks there is
added to his real pain the theoretical perplexity why a world and a life
which exist in order that one may be happy in them answer their end so
badly. First of all it finds expression in pious ejaculations, such as,
“Ah! why are the tears on earth so many?” &c. &c. But in their train come
disquieting doubts about the assumptions of those preconceived optimistic
dogmas. One may try if one will to throw the blame of one’s individual
unhappiness now upon the circumstances, now upon other men, now upon one’s
own bad luck, or even upon one’s own awkwardness, and may know well how
all these have worked together to produce it; but this in no way alters
the result that one has missed the real end of life, which consists indeed
in being happy. The consideration of this is, then, often very depressing,
especially if life is already on the wane; hence the countenances of
almost all elderly persons wear the expression of that which in English is
called disappointment. Besides this, however, hitherto every day of our
life has taught us that joys and pleasures, even if attained, are in
themselves delusive, do not perform what they promise, do not satisfy the
heart, and finally their possession is at least embittered by the
disagreeables that accompany them or spring from them; while, on the
contrary, the pains and sorrows prove themselves very real, and often
exceed all expectation. Thus certainly everything in life is calculated to
recall us from that original error, and to convince us that the end of our
existence is not to be happy. Indeed, if we regard it more closely and
without prejudice, life rather presents itself as specially intended to be
such that we shall _not_ feel ourselves happy in it, for through its whole
nature it bears the character of something for which we have no taste,
which must be endured by us, and from which we have to return as from an
error that our heart may be cured of the passionate desire of enjoyment,
nay, of life, and turned away from the world. In this sense, it would be
more correct to place the end of life in our woe than in our welfare. For
the considerations at the conclusion of the preceding chapter have shown
that the more one suffers the sooner one attains to the true end of life,
and that the more happily one lives the longer this is delayed. The
conclusion of the last letter of Seneca corresponds with this: _bonum tunc
habebis tuum, quum intelliges infelicissimos esse felices_; which
certainly seems to show the influence of Christianity. The peculiar effect
of the tragic drama also ultimately depends upon the fact that it shakes
that inborn error by vividly presenting in a great and striking example
the vanity of human effort and the nothingness of this whole existence,
and thus discloses the profound significance of life; hence it is
recognised as the sublimest form of poetry. Whoever now has returned by
one or other path from that error which dwells in us _a priori_, that
πρωτου ψευδος of our existence, will soon see all in another light, and
will now find the world in harmony with his insight, although not with his
wishes. Misfortunes of every kind and magnitude, although they pain him,
will no longer surprise him, for he has come to see that it is just pain
and trouble that tend towards the true end of life, the turning away of
the will from it. This will give him indeed a wonderful composedness in
all that may happen, similar to that with which a sick person who
undergoes a long and painful cure bears the pain of it as a sign of its
efficacy. In the whole of human existence suffering expresses itself
clearly enough as its true destiny. Life is deeply sunk in suffering, and
cannot escape from it; our entrance into it takes place amid tears, its
course is at bottom always tragic, and its end still more so. There is an
unmistakable appearance of intention in this. As a rule man’s destiny
passes through his mind in a striking manner, at the very summit of his
desires and efforts, and thus his life receives a tragic tendency by
virtue of which it is fitted to free him from the passionate desire of
which every individual existence is an example, and bring him into such a
condition that he parts with life without retaining a single desire for it
and its pleasures. Suffering is, in fact, the purifying process through
which alone, in most cases, the man is sanctified, _i.e._, is led back
from the path of error of the will to live. In accordance with this, the
salutary nature of the cross and of suffering is so often explained in
Christian books of edification, and in general the cross, an instrument of
suffering, not of doing, is very suitably the symbol of the Christian
religion. Nay, even the Preacher, who is still Jewish, but so very
philosophical, rightly says: “Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the
sadness of the countenance the heart is made better” (Eccles. vii. 3).
Under the name of the δεντρος πλους I have presented suffering as to a
certain extent a substitute for virtue and holiness; but here I must make
the bold assertion that, taking everything into consideration, we have
more to hope for our salvation and deliverance from what we suffer than
from what we do. Precisely in this spirit Lamartine very beautifully says
in his “_Hymne à la douleur_,” apostrophising pain:—


    “_Tu me traites sans doute en favori des cieux,_
    _Car tu n’épargnes pas les larmes à mes yeux._
    _Eh bien! je les reçois comme tu les envoies,_
    _Tes maux seront mes biens, et tes soupirs mes joies._
    _Je sens qu’il est en toi, sans avoir combattu,_
    _Une vertu divine au lieu de ma vertu,_
    _Que tu n’es pas la mort l’âme, mais sa vie,_
    _Que ton bras, en frappant, guérit et vivifie._”


If, then, suffering itself has such a sanctifying power, this will belong
in an even higher degree to death, which is more feared than any
suffering. Answering to this, a certain awe, kindred to that which great
suffering occasions us, is felt in the presence of every dead person,
indeed every case of death presents itself to a certain extent as a kind
of apotheosis or canonisation; therefore we cannot look upon the dead body
of even the most insignificant man without awe, and indeed, extraordinary
as the remark may sound in this place, in the presence of every corpse the
watch goes under arms. Dying is certainly to be regarded as the real aim
of life: in the moment of death all that is decided for which the whole
course of life was only the preparation and introduction. Death is the
result, the _Résumé_ of life, or the added up sum which expresses at once
the instruction which life gave in detail, and bit by bit; this, that the
whole striving whose manifestation is life was a vain, idle, and self‐
contradictory effort, to have returned from which is a deliverance. As the
whole, slow vegetation of the plant is related to the fruit, which now at
a stroke achieves a hundredfold what the plant achieved gradually and bit
by bit, so life, with its obstacles, deluded hopes, frustrated plans, and
constant suffering, is related to death, which at one stroke destroys all,
all that the man has willed, and so crowns the instruction which life gave
him. The completed course of life upon which the dying man looks back has
an effect upon the whole will that objectifies itself in this perishing
individuality, analogous to that which a motive exercises upon the conduct
of the man. It gives it a new direction, which accordingly is the moral
and essential result of the life. Just because a sudden death makes this
retrospect impossible, the Church regards such a death as a misfortune,
and prays that it should be averted. Since this retrospect, like the
distinct foreknowledge of death, as conditioned by the reason, is possible
only in man, not in the brute, and accordingly man alone really drinks the
cup of death, humanity is the only material in which the will can deny
itself and entirely turn away from life. To the will that does not deny
itself every birth imparts a new and different intellect,—till it has
learned the true nature of life, and in consequence of this wills it no
more.

In the natural course, in age the decay of the body coincides with that of
the will. The desire for pleasures soon vanishes with the capacity to
enjoy them. The occasion of the most vehement willing, the focus of the
will, the sexual impulse, is first extinguished, whereby the man is placed
in a position which resembles the state of innocence which existed before
the development of the genital system. The illusions, which set up
chimeras as exceedingly desirable benefits, vanish, and the knowledge of
the vanity of all earthly blessings takes their place. Selfishness is
repressed by the love of one’s children, by means of which the man already
begins to live more in the ego of others than in his own, which now will
soon be no more. This course of life is at least the desirable one; it is
the euthanasia of the will. In hope of this the Brahman is ordered, after
he has passed the best years of his life, to forsake possessions and
family, and lead the life of a hermit (_Menu_, B. 6), But if, conversely,
the desire outlives the capacity for enjoyment, and we now regret
particular pleasures in life which we miss, instead of seeing the
emptiness and vanity of all; and if then gold, the abstract representative
of the objects of desire for which the sense is dead, takes the place of
all these objects themselves, and now excites the same vehement passions
which were formerly more pardonably awakened by the objects of actual
pleasure, and thus now with deadened senses a lifeless but indestructible
object is desired with equally indestructible eagerness; or, also, if, in
the same way, existence in the opinion of others takes the place of
existence and action in the real world, and now kindles the same
passions;—then the will has become sublimated and etherealised into
avarice or ambition; but has thereby thrown itself into the last fortress,
in which it can only now be besieged by death. The end of existence has
been missed.

All these considerations afford us a fuller explanation of that
purification, conversion of the will and deliverance, denoted in the
preceding chapter by the expression δευτερος πλους which is brought about
by the suffering of life, and without doubt is the most frequent. For it
is the way of sinners such as we all are. The other way, which leads to
the same goal, by means of mere knowledge and the consequent appropriation
of the suffering of a whole world, is the narrow path of the elect, the
saints, and therefore to be regarded as a rare exception. Therefore
without that first way for most of us there would be no salvation to hope
for. However, we struggle against entering upon it, and strive rather to
procure for ourselves a safe and agreeable existence, whereby we chain our
will ever more firmly to life. The conduct of the ascetics is the opposite
of this. They make their life intentionally as poor, hard, and empty of
pleasure as possible, because they have their true and ultimate welfare in
view. But fate and the course of things care for us better than we
ourselves, for they frustrate on all sides our arrangements for an utopian
life, the folly of which is evident enough from its brevity, uncertainty,
and emptiness, and its conclusion by bitter death; they strew thorns upon
thorns in our path, and meet us everywhere with healing sorrow, the
panacea of our misery. What really gives its wonderful and ambiguous
character to our life is this, that two diametrically opposite aims
constantly cross each other in it; that of the individual will directed to
chimerical happiness in an ephemeral, dream‐like, and delusive existence,
in which, with reference to the past, happiness and unhappiness are a
matter of indifference, and the present is every moment becoming the past;
and that of fate visibly enough directed to the destruction of our
happiness, and thereby to the mortification of our will and the abolition
of the illusion that holds us chained in the bonds of this world.

The prevalent and peculiarly Protestant view that the end of life lies
solely and immediately in the moral virtues, thus in the practice of
justice and benevolence, betrays its insufficiency even in the fact that
so miserably little real and pure morality is found among men. I am not
speaking at all of lofty virtue, nobleness, magnanimity, and self‐
sacrifice, which one hardly finds anywhere but in plays and novels, but
only of those virtues which are the duty of every one. Let whoever is old
think of all those with whom he has had to do; how many persons will he
have met who were merely really and truly _honest_? Were not by far the
greater number, in spite of their shameless indignation at the slightest
suspicion of dishonesty or even untruthfulness, in plain words, the
precise opposite? Were not abject selfishness, boundless avarice, well‐
concealed knavery, and also poisonous envy and fiendish delight in the
misfortunes of others so universally prevalent that the slightest
exception was met with surprise? And benevolence, how very rarely it
extends beyond a gift of what is so superfluous that one never misses it.
And is the whole end of existence to lie in such exceedingly rare and weak
traces of morality? If we place it, on the contrary, in the entire
reversal of this nature of ours (which bears the evil fruits just
mentioned) brought about by suffering, the matter gains an appearance of
probability and is brought into agreement with what actually lies before
us. Life presents itself then as a purifying process, of which the
purifying lye is pain. If the process is carried out, it leaves behind it
the previous immorality and wickedness as refuse, and there appears what
the Veda says: “_Finditur nodus cordis, dissolvuntur omnes dubitationes,
ejusque opera evanescunt._” As agreeing with this view the fifteenth
sermon of Meister Eckhard will be found very well worth reading.




Chapter L. Epiphilosophy.


At the conclusion of my exposition a few reflections concerning my
philosophy itself may find their place. My philosophy does not pretend to
explain the existence of the world in its ultimate grounds: it rather
sticks to the facts of external and internal experience as they are
accessible to every one, and shows the true and deepest connection of them
without really going beyond them to any extra‐mundane things and their
relations to the world. It therefore arrives at no conclusions as to what
lies beyond all possible experience, but affords merely an exposition of
what is given in the external world and in self‐consciousness, thus
contents itself with comprehending the nature of the world in its inner
connection with itself. It is consequently _immanent_, in the Kantian
sense of the word. But just on this account it leaves many questions
untouched; for example, why what is proved as a fact is as it is and not
otherwise, &c. All such questions, however, or rather the answers to them,
are really transcendent, _i.e._, they cannot be thought by the forms and
functions of our intellect, do not enter into these; it is therefore
related to them as our sensibility is related to the possible properties
of bodies for which we have no senses. After all my explanations one may
still ask, for example, whence has sprung this will that is free to assert
itself, the manifestation of which is the world, or to deny itself, the
manifestation of which we do not know. What is the fatality lying beyond
all experience which has placed it in the very doubtful dilemma of either
appearing as a world in which suffering and death reign, or else denying
its very being?—or again, what can have prevailed upon it to forsake the
infinitely preferable peace of blessed nothingness? An individual will,
one may add, can only turn to its own destruction through error in the
choice, thus through the fault of knowledge; but the will in itself,
before all manifestation, consequently still without knowledge, how could
it go astray and fall into the ruin of its present condition? Whence in
general is the great discord that permeates this world? It may, further,
be asked how deep into the true being of the world the roots of
individuality go; to which it may certainly be answered: they go as deep
as the assertion of the will to live; where the denial of the will appears
they cease, for they have arisen with the assertion. But one might indeed
even put the question, “What would I be if I were not will to live?” and
more of the same kind. To all such questions we would first have to reply
that the expression of the most universal and general form of our
intellect is the _principle of sufficient reason_; but that just on this
account that principle finds application only to the phenomenon, not to
the being in itself of things. Yet all whence and why depend upon that
principle alone. As a result of the Kantian philosophy it is no longer an
_æterna veritas_, but merely the form, _i.e._, the function, of our
intellect, which is essentially cerebral, and originally a mere tool in
the service of the will, which it therefore presupposes together with all
its objectifications. But our whole knowing and conceiving is bound to its
forms; accordingly we must conceive everything in time, consequently as a
before and after, then as cause and effect, and also as above and below,
whole and part, &c., and cannot by any means escape from this sphere in
which all possibility of our knowledge lies. Now these forms are utterly
unsuited to the problems raised here, nor are they fit or able to
comprehend their solution even if it were given. Therefore with our
intellect, this mere tool of the will, we are everywhere striking upon
insoluble problems, as against the walls of our prison. But, besides this,
it may at least be assumed as probable that not only _for us_ is knowledge
of all that has been asked about impossible, but no such knowledge is
possible in general, thus never and in no way; that these relations are
not only relatively but absolutely insusceptible of investigation; that
not only does no one know them, but that they are in themselves
unknowable, because they do not enter into the form of knowledge in
general. (This corresponds to what Scotus Erigena says, _de mirabili
divina ignorantia, qua Deus non intelligit quid ipse sit_. Lib. ii.) For
knowableness in general, with its most essential, and therefore constantly
necessary form of subject and object, belongs merely to the phenomenal
appearance, not to the being in itself of things. Where knowledge, and
consequently idea, is, there is also only phenomenon, and we stand there
already in the province of the phenomenal; nay, knowledge in general is
known to us only as a phenomenon of brain, and we are not only unjustified
in conceiving it otherwise, but also incapable of doing so. What the world
is as world may be understood: it is phenomenal manifestation; and we can
know that which manifests itself in it, directly from ourselves, by means
of a thorough analysis of self‐consciousness. Then, however, by means of
this key to the nature of the world, the whole phenomenal manifestation
can be deciphered, as I believe I have succeeded in doing. But if we leave
the world in order to answer the questions indicated above, we have also
left the whole sphere in which, not only connection according to reason
and consequent, but even knowledge itself is possible; then all is
_instabilis tellus, innabilis unda_. The nature of things before or beyond
the world, and consequently beyond the will, is open to no investigation;
because knowledge in general is itself only a phenomenon, and therefore
exists only in the world as the world exists only in it. The inner being
in itself of things is nothing that knows, no intellect, but an
unconscious; knowledge is only added as an accident, a means of assistance
to the phenomenon of that inner being, and can therefore apprehend that
being itself only in proportion to its own nature, which is designed with
reference to quite different ends (those of the individual will),
consequently very imperfectly. Here lies the reason why a perfect
understanding of the existence, nature, and origin of the world, extending
to its ultimate ground and satisfying all demands, is impossible. So much
as to the limits of my philosophy, and indeed of all philosophy.

The ἑν και παν, _i.e._, that the inner nature in all things is absolutely
one and the same, my age had already grasped and understood, after the
Eleatics, Scotus Erigena, Giordano Bruno, and Spinoza had thoroughly
taught, and Schelling had revived this doctrine. But _what_ this one is,
and how it is able to exhibit itself as the many, is a problem the
solution of which is first found in my philosophy. Certainly from the most
ancient times man had been called the microcosm. I have reversed the
proposition, and shown the world as the macranthropos: because will and
idea exhaust its nature as they do that of man. But it is clearly more
correct to learn to understand the world from man than man from the world;
for one has to explain what is indirectly given, thus external perception
from what is directly given, thus self‐consciousness—not conversely.

With the Pantheists, then, I have certainly that ἑν και παν in common, but
not the παν θεος; because I do not go beyond experience (taken in its
widest sense), and still less do I put myself in contradiction with the
data which lie before me. Scotus Erigena, quite consistently with the
spirit of Pantheism, explains every phenomenon as a theophany; but then
this conception must also be applied to the most terrible and abominable
phenomena. Fine theophanies! What further distinguishes me from Pantheism
is principally the following. (1). That their θεος is an _x_, an unknown
quantity; the will, on the other hand, is of all possible things the one
that is known to us most exactly, the only thing given immediately, and
therefore exclusively fitted for the explanation of the rest. For what is
unknown must always be explained by what is better known; not conversely.
(2). That their θεος manifests himself _animi causa_, to unfold his glory,
or, indeed, to let himself be admired. Apart from the vanity here
attributed to him, they are placed in the position of being obliged to
sophisticate away the colossal evil of the world; but the world remains in
glaring and terrible contradiction with that imagined excellence. With me,
on the contrary, the _will_ arrives through its objectification however
this may occur, at self‐knowledge, whereby its abolition, conversion,
salvation becomes possible. And accordingly, with me alone ethics has a
sure foundation and is completely worked out in agreement with the sublime
and profound religions, Brahmanism, Buddhism, and Christianity, not merely
with Judaism and Mohammedanism. The metaphysic of the beautiful also is
first fully cleared up as a result of my fundamental truth, and no longer
requires to take refuge behind empty words. With me alone is the evil of
the world honestly confessed in its whole magnitude: this is rendered
possible by the fact that the answer to the question as to its origin
coincides with the answer to the question as to the origin of the world.
On the other hand, in all other systems, since they are all optimistic,
the question as to the origin of evil is the incurable disease, ever
breaking out anew, with which they are affected, and in consequence of
which they struggle along with palliatives and quack remedies. (3.) That I
start from experience and the natural self‐consciousness given to every
one, and lead to the will as that which alone is metaphysical; thus I
adopt the ascending, analytical method. The Pantheists, again, adopt the
opposite method, the descending or synthetical. They start from their
θεος, which they beg or take by force, although sometimes under the name
_substantia_, or absolute, and this unknown is then supposed to explain
everything that is better known. (4.) That with me the world does not fill
the whole possibility of all being, but in this there still remains much
room for that which we denote only negatively as the denial of the will to
live. Pantheism, on the other hand, is essentially optimism: but if the
world is what is best, then the matter may rest there. (5.) That to the
Pantheists the perceptible world, thus the world of idea, is just the
intentional manifestation of the God indwelling in it, which contains no
real explanation of its appearance, but rather requires to be explained
itself. With me, on the other hand, the world as idea appears merely _per
accidens_, because the intellect, with its external perception, is
primarily only the medium of motives for the more perfect phenomena of
will, which gradually rises to that objectivity of perceptibility, in
which the world exists. In this sense its origin, as an object of
perception, is really accounted for, and not, as with the Pantheists, by
means of untenable fictions.

Since, in consequence of the Kantian criticism of all speculative
theology, the philosophisers of Germany almost all threw themselves back
upon Spinoza, so that the whole series of futile attempts known by the
name of the post‐Kantian philosophy are simply Spinozism tastelessly
dressed up, veiled in all kinds of unintelligible language, and otherwise
distorted, I wish, now that I have explained the relation of my philosophy
to Pantheism in general, to point out its relation to Spinozism in
particular. It stands, then, to Spinozism as the New Testament stands to
the Old. What the Old Testament has in common with the New is the same
God‐Creator. Analogous to this, the world exists, with me as with Spinoza,
by its inner power and through itself. But with Spinoza his _substantia
æterna_, the inner nature of the world, which he himself calls God, is
also, as regards its moral character and worth, Jehovah, the God‐Creator,
who applauds His own creation, and finds that all is very good, παντα καλα
λιαν. Spinoza has deprived Him of nothing but personality. Thus, according
to him also, the world and all in it is wholly excellent and as it ought
to be: therefore man has nothing more to do than _vivere, agere, suum Esse
conservare ex fundamento proprium utile quærendi_ (_Eth._, iv. pr. 67); he
is even to rejoice in his life as long as it lasts; entirely in accordance
with Ecclesiastes ix. 7‐10. In short, it is optimism: therefore its
ethical side is weak, as in the Old Testament; nay, it is even false, and
in part revolting.(54) With me, on the other hand, the will, or the inner
nature of the world, is by no means Jehovah, it is rather, as it were, the
crucified Saviour, or the crucified thief, according as it resolves.
Therefore my ethical teaching agrees with that of Christianity, completely
and in its highest tendencies, and not less with that of Brahmanism and
Buddhism. Spinoza could not get rid of the Jews; _quo semel est imbuta
recens servabit odorem_. His contempt for the brutes, which, as mere
things for our use, he also declares to be without rights, is thoroughly
Jewish, and, in union with Pantheism, is at the same time absurd and
detestable (_Eth._, iv., appendix, c. 27). With all this Spinoza remains a
very great man. But in order to estimate his work correctly we must keep
in view his relation to Descartes. The latter had sharply divided nature
into mind and matter, _i.e._, thinking and extended substance, and had
also placed God and the world in complete opposition to each other;
Spinoza also, so long as he was a Cartesian, taught all that in his
“_Cogitatis Metaphysicis_,” c. 12, i. I., 1665. Only in his later years
did he see the fundamental falseness of that double dualism; and
accordingly his own philosophy principally consists of the indirect
abolition of these two antitheses. Yet partly to avoid injuring his
teacher, partly in order to be less offensive, he gave it a positive
appearance by means of a strictly dogmatic form, although its content is
chiefly negative. His identification of the world with God has also this
negative significance alone. For to call the world God is not to explain
it: it remains a riddle under the one name as under the other. But these
two negative truths had value for their age, as for every age in which
there still are conscious or unconscious Cartesians. He makes the mistake,
common to all philosophers before Locke, of starting from conceptions,
without having previously investigated their origin, such, for example, as
substance, cause, &c., and in such a method of procedure these conceptions
then receive a much too extensive validity. Those who in the most recent
times refused to acknowledge the Neo‐Spinozism which had appeared, for
example, Jacobi, were principally deterred from doing so by the bugbear of
fatalism. By this is to be understood every doctrine which refers the
existence of the world, together with the critical position of mankind in
it, to any absolute necessity, _i.e._, to a necessity that cannot be
further explained. Those who feared fatalism, again, believed that all
that was of importance was to deduce the world from the free act of will
of a being existing outside it; as if it were antecedently certain which
of the two was more correct, or even better merely in relation to us. What
is, however, especially assumed here is the _non datur tertium_, and
accordingly hitherto every philosophy has represented one or the other. I
am the first to depart from this; for I have actually established the
_Tertium_: the act of will from which the world arises is our own. It is
free; for the principle of sufficient reason, from which alone all
necessity derives its significance, is merely the form of its phenomenon.
Just on this account this phenomenon, if it once exists, is absolutely
necessary in its course; in consequence of this alone we can recognise in
it the nature of the act of will, and accordingly _eventualiter_ will
otherwise.





APPENDIX.




Abstract.


SCHOPENHAUER’S ESSAY ON THE FOURFOLD ROOT OF THE PRINCIPLE OF SUFFICIENT
REASON (Fourth Edition, Edited by FRAUENSTÄDT. The First Edition appeared
in 1813).

This essay is divided into eight chapters. The first is introductory. The
second contains an historical review of previous philosophical doctrines
on the subject. The third deals with the insufficiency of the previous
treatment of the principle, and prescribes the lines of the new departure.
The fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh treat of the four classes of objects
for the subject, and the forms of the principle of sufficient reason which
respectively characterise these classes. The eighth contains general
remarks and results. It will be convenient to summarise these chapters
severally.




Chapter I.


Schopenhauer points out that Plato and Kant agree in recommending, as the
method of all knowledge, obedience to two laws:—that of Homogeneity, and
that of Specification. The former bids us, by attention to the points of
resemblance and agreement in things, get at their kinds, and combine them
into species, and these species again into genera, until we have arrived
at the highest concept of all, that which embraces everything. This law
being transcendental, or an essential in our faculty of reason, assumes
that nature is in harmony with it, an assumption which is expressed in the
old rule: _Entia præter necessitatem non esse multiplicanda._ The law of
Specification, on the other hand, is stated by Kant in these words:
_Entium varietates non temere esse minuendas._ That is to say, we must
carefully distinguish the species which are united under a genus, and the
lower kinds which in their turn are united under these species; taking
care not to make a leap, and subsume the lower kinds and individuals under
the concept of the genus, since this is always capable of division, but
never descends to the object of pure perception. Plato and Kant agree that
these laws are transcendental, and that they presuppose that things are in
harmony with them.

The previous treatment of the principle of sufficient reason, even by
Kant, has been a failure, owing to the neglect of the second of these
laws. It may well be that we shall find that this principle is the common
expression of more than one fundamental principle of knowledge, and that
the necessity, to which it refers, is therefore of different kinds. It may
be stated in these words: _Nihil est sine ratione cur potius sit, quam non
sit._ This is the general expression for the different forms of the
assumption which everywhere justifies that question “Why?” which is the
mother of all science.




Chapter II.


Schopenhauer in this chapter traces historically the forms in which the
principle had been stated by his predecessors, and their influence. He
points out that in Greek philosophy it appeared in two aspects—that of the
necessity of a ground for a logical judgment, and that of a cause for
every physical change—and that these two aspects were systematically
confounded. The Aristotelian division, not of the forms of the principle
itself, but of one of its aspects, the causal, exemplified a confusion
which continued throughout the Scholastic period. Descartes succeeds no
better. His proof of the existence of God that the immensity of His nature
is a _cause or reason_ beyond which no cause is needed for His existence,
simply illustrates the gross confusion between cause and ground of
knowledge which underlies every form of this ontological proof. “That a
miserable fellow like Hegel, whose entire philosophy is nothing but a
monstrous amplification of the ontological proof, should dare to defend
this proof against Kant’s criticism of it is an alliance of which the
ontological proof itself, little as it knows of shame, might well feel
ashamed. It is not to be expected I should speak respectfully of people
who have brought philosophy into disrespect.” Spinoza made the same
confusion when he laid it down that the cause of existence was either
contained in the nature and definition of the thing as it existed, or was
to be found outside that thing. It was through this confusion of the
ground of knowledge with the efficient cause that he succeeded in
identifying God with the world. The true picture of Spinoza’s “_Causa
sui_” is Baron Munchhausen encircling his horse with his legs, and raising
himself and the horse upwards by means of his pigtail, with the
inscription “_Causa sui_” written below. Leibnitz was the first to place
the principle of sufficient reason in the position of a first principle,
and to indicate the difference between its two meanings. But it was Wolff
who first completely distinguished them, and divided the doctrine into
three kinds: _principium fiendi_ (cause), _principium essendi_
(possibility), and _principium cognoscendi_. Baumgarten, Reimarus,
Lambert, and Platner added nothing to the work of Wolff, and the next
great step was Hume’s question as to the validity of the principle. Kant’s
distinction of the logical or formal principle of knowledge—Every
_proposition_ must have its ground; from the transcendental or material
principle, Every _thing_ must have its ground—was followed out by his
immediate successors. But when we come to Schelling we find the
proposition that gravitation is the _reason_ and light the _cause_ of
things, a proposition which is quoted simply as a curiosity, for such a
piece of nonsense deserves no place among the opinions of earnest and
honest inquirers. The chapter concludes by pointing out the futility of
the attempts to prove the principle. Every proof is the exhibition of the
ground of a judgment which has been expressed, and of which, just because
that ground is exhibited, we predicate truth. The principle of sufficient
reason is just this expression of the demand for such a ground, and he who
seeks a proof, _i.e._, the exhibition of a ground for this principle
itself, presupposes it as true, and so falls into the circle of seeking a
proof of the justification of the demand for proof.




Chapter III.


In the third chapter Schopenhauer points out that the two applications of
the principle of sufficient reason distinguished by his predecessors, to
judgments, which must have a ground, and to the changes of real objects,
which must have a cause, are not exhaustive. The reason why the three
sides of a certain triangle are equal is that the angles are equal, and
this is neither a logical deduction nor a case of causation. With a view
to stating exhaustively the various kinds into which the application of
the principle falls it is necessary to determine the nature of the
principle itself. All our ideas are objects of the subject, and all
objects of the subject are our ideas. But our ideas stand to one another
as a matter of fact in an orderly connection, which is always determinable
_a priori_ in point of form, and on account of which nothing that is in
itself separate and wholly independent of other things can be the object
of our consciousness. It is this connection which the principle of
sufficient reason in its generality expresses. The relations which
constitute it are what Schopenhauer calls its root, and they fall into
four classes, which are discussed in the four following chapters.




Chapter IV.


In the fourth chapter Schopenhauer deals with the first class of objects
for the subject and the form of the principle of sufficient reason which
obtains in it. This first class is that of those complete ideas of
perception which form part of our experience, and which are referable to
some sensation of our bodies. These ideas are capable of being perceived
only under the forms of Space and Time. If time were the only form there
would be no coexistence, and therefore no persistence. If space were their
only form there would be no succession, and therefore no change. Time may
therefore be defined as the possibility of mutually exclusive conditions
of the same thing. But the union of these two forms of existence is the
essential condition of reality, and this union is the work of the
understanding (see “World as Will and Idea,” vol. i. § 4, and the table of
predicables annexed to vol. ii., chap. 4). In this class of objects for
the subject the principle of sufficient reason appears as the law of
causality or the principle of sufficient reason of becoming, and it is
through it that all objects which present themselves in perception are
bound together through the changes of their states. When a new state of
one or more objects makes its appearance it must have been preceded by
another on which it regularly follows. This is causal sequence, and the
first state is the cause, the second the effect. The law has thus to do
exclusively with the _changes_ of objects of external experience, and not
with things themselves, a circumstance which is fatal to the validity of
the cosmological proof of the existence of God. It follows also from the
essential connection of causality with succession that the notion of
reciprocity, with its contemporaneous existence of cause and effect, is a
delusion. The chain of causes and effects does not affect either matter,
which is that in which all changes take place, or the original forces of
nature, through which causation becomes possible, and which exist apart
from all change, and in this sense out of time, but which yet are
everywhere present (_e.g._, chemical forces, see _supra_, vol. i., § 26).
In nature causation assumes three different forms; that of cause in the
narrow sense, of stimulus, and of motive, on which differences depend the
true distinctions between inorganic bodies, plants, and animals. It is
only of cause properly so called that Newton’s third law of the equality
of action and reaction is true, and only here do we find the degree of the
effect proportionate to that of the cause. The absence of this feature
characterises stimulation. Motive demands knowledge as its condition, and
intelligence is therefore the true characteristic of the animal. The three
forms are in principle identical, the difference being due to the degrees
of receptivity in existence. What is called freedom of the will is
therefore an absurdity, as is also Kant’s “Practical Reason.” These
results are followed by an examination of the nature of vision, which
Schopenhauer sums up in these words: “I have examined all these visual
processes in detail in order to show that the understanding is active in
all of them, the understanding which, by apprehending every change as an
effect and referring it to its cause, creates on the basis of the _a
priori_ and fundamental intuitions or perceptions of space and time, the
objective world, that phenomenon of the brain, for which the sensations of
the senses afford only certain data. And this task the understanding
accomplishes only through its proper form, the law of causality, and
accomplishes it directly without the aid of reflection, that is, of
abstract knowledge through concepts and words, which are the material of
secondary knowledge, of thought, thus of the Reason.” “What understanding
knows aright is reality; what reason knows aright is truth, _i.e._, a
judgment which has a ground; the opposite of the former being illusion
(what is falsely perceived), of the latter error (what is falsely
thought).” All understanding is an immediate apprehension of the causal
relation, and this is the sole function of understanding, and not the
complicated working of the twelve Kantian Categories, the theory of which
is a mistaken one. A consequence of this conclusion is, that arithmetical
processes do not belong to the understanding, concerned as they are with
abstract conceptions. But it must not be forgotten that between volition
and the apparently consequential action of the body there is no causal
relation, for they are the same thing perceived in two different ways.
Section 23 contains a detailed refutation of Kant’s proof of the _a
priori_ nature of the causal relation in the “Second Analogy of
Experience” of the Critique of Pure Reason, the gist of the objection
being that the so‐called subjective succession is as much objective in
reality as what is called objective by Kant: “Phenomena may well follow
one another, without following _from_ one another.”




Chapter V.


The fifth chapter commences with an examination of the distinction between
man and the brutes. Man possesses _reason_, that is to say, he has a class
of ideas of which the brutes are not capable, _abstract_ ideas as
distinguished from those ideas of perception from which the former kind
are yet derived. The consequence is, that the brute neither speaks nor
laughs, and lacks all those qualities which make human life great. The
nature of _motives_, too, is different where abstract ideas are possible.
No doubt the actions of men follow of necessity from their causes, not
less than is the case with the brutes, but the kind of sequence through
thought which renders choice, _i.e._, the conscious conflict of motives,
possible is different. Our abstract ideas, being incapable of being
objects of perception, would be outside consciousness, and the operations
of thought would be impossible, were it not that they are fixed for sense
by arbitrary signs called words, which therefore always indicate _general_
conceptions. It is just because the brutes are incapable of general
conceptions that they have no faculty of speech. But thought does not
consist in the mere presence of abstract ideas in consciousness, but in
the union and separation of two or more of them, subject to the manifold
restrictions and modifications which logic deals with. Such a clearly
expressed conceptual relation is a judgment. In relation to judgments the
principle of sufficient reason is valid in a new form: that of the ground
of knowing. In this form it asserts that if a judgment is to express
knowledge it must have a ground; and it is just because it has a ground
that it has ascribed to it the predicate true. The grounds on which a
judgment may depend are divisible into four kinds. A judgment may have
another judgment as its ground, in which case its truth is formal or
_logical_. There is no truth except in the relation of a judgment to
something outside it, and intrinsic truth, which is sometimes
distinguished from extrinsic logical truth, is therefore an absurdity. A
judgment may also have its ground in sense‐perception, and its truth is
then material truth. Again, those forms of knowledge which lie in the
understanding and in pure sensibility, as the conditions of the
possibility of experience, may be the ground of a judgment which is then
synthetical _a priori_. Finally, those formal conditions of all thinking
which lie in the reason may be the ground of a judgment, which may in that
case be called metalogically true. Of these metalogical judgments there
are four, and they were long ago discovered and called laws of thought.
(1.) A subject is equal to the sum of its predicates. (2.) A subject
cannot at once have a given predicate affirmed and denied of it. (3.) Of
two contradictorily opposed predicates one must belong to every subject.
(4.) Truth is the relation of a judgment to something outside it as its
sufficient reason. Reason, it may be remarked, has no material but only
formal truth.




Chapter VI.


The third class of objects for the subject is constituted by the formal
element in perception, the forms of outer and inner sense, space and time.
This class of ideas, in which time and space appear as pure intuitions, is
distinguished from that other class in which they are objects of
perception by the presence of matter which has been shown to be the
perceptibility of time and space in one aspect, and causality which has
become objective, in another. Space and time have this property, that all
their parts stand to one another in a relation in which each is determined
and conditioned by another. This relation is peculiar, and is intelligible
to us neither through understanding nor through reason, but solely through
pure intuition or perception _a priori_. And the law according to which
the parts of space and time thus determine one another is called the law
of sufficient reason of _being_. In space every position is determined
with reference to every other position, so that the first stands to the
second in the relation of a consequence to its ground. In time every
moment is conditioned by that which precedes it. The ground of being, in
the form of the law of sequence, is here very simple owing to the
circumstance that time has only one dimension. On the nexus of the
position of the parts of space depends the entire science of geometry.
Ground of _knowledge_ produces _conviction_ only, as distinguished from
_insight_ into the ground of being. Thus it is that the attempt, which
even Euclid at times makes, to produce _conviction_, as distinguished from
insight into the ground of being, in geometry, is a mistake, and induces
aversions to mathematics in many an admirable mind.




Chapter VII.


The remaining class of objects for the subject is a very peculiar and
important one. It comprehends only one object, the immediate object of
inner sense, the subject in volition which becomes an object of knowledge,
but only in inner sense, and therefore always in time and never in space;
and in time only under limitations. There can be no knowledge of
knowledge, for that would imply that the subject had separated itself from
knowledge, and yet knew knowledge, which is impossible. The subject is the
condition of the existence of ideas, and can never itself become idea or
object. It knows itself therefore never as _knowing_, but only as
_willing_. Thus what we know in ourselves is never what knows, but what
wills, the will. The identity of the subject of volition with the subject
of knowledge, through which the word “I” includes both, is the insoluble
problem. The identity of the knowing with the known is inexplicable, and
yet is immediately present. The operation of a motive is not, like that of
all other causes, known only from without, and therefore indirectly, but
also from within. Motivation is, in fact, causality viewed from within.




Chapter VIII.


In this, the concluding chapter, Schopenhauer sums up his results.
Necessity has no meaning other than that of the irresistible sequence of
the effect where the cause is given. All necessity is thus conditioned,
and absolute or unconditioned necessity is a contradiction in terms. And
there is a fourfold necessity corresponding to the four forms of the
principle of sufficient reason:—(1.) The logical form, according to the
principle of the ground of knowledge; on account of which, if the
premisses are given, the conclusion follows. (2.) The physical form,
according to the law of causality; on account of which, if the cause is
given, the effect must follow. (3.) The mathematical form, according to
the law of being; on account of which every relation expressed by a true
geometrical proposition is what it is affirmed to be, and every correct
calculation is irrefutable. (4.) The moral form, on account of which every
human being and every brute must, when the motive appears, perform the
only act which accords with the inborn and unalterable character. A
consequence of this is, that every department of science has one or other
of the forms of the principle of sufficient reason as its basis. In
conclusion, Schopenhauer points out that just because the principle of
sufficient reason belongs to the _a priori_ element in intelligence, it
cannot be applied to the entirety of things, to the universe as inclusive
of intelligence. Such a universe is mere phenomenon, and what is only true
because it belongs to the form of intelligence can have no application to
intelligence itself. Thus it is that it cannot be said that the universe
and all things in it exist because of something else. In other words, the
cosmological proof of the existence of God is inadmissible.





INDEX.(55)


Aboriginals, interference with, iii. 411.

Absolute, conception of, has reality only in matter, ii. 94;
  how not to be conceived, ii. 94;
  misuse of, ii. 94, 215, 216, 393.

Abstract, idea, knowledge, dependent on idea of perception, i. 45, 52, 53,
            ii. 258;
  insufficiency of, i. 72, ii. 248‐251;
  opposite of idea of perception, i. 7;
  philosophy must not start from, ii. 261 _seq._;
  relation to intuitive knowledge, ii. 54, 55, 91;
  use of, ii. 235, 238.

Absurd, sphere of, ii. 242;
  supremacy of, i. 418.

Academies, relation of, to great men, ii. 496.

Accident. See _Substance_.

Actors, why madness common among, iii. 168.

Adultery, iii. 351, 364, 365.

Æschylus, iii. 213, 378.

Æsthetic mode of contemplation, i. 253 _seq._, iii. 127 _seq._

Agamemnon, i. 199, iii. 213.

Alemann, Matteo, iii. 363.

Alfieri, i. 247.

Allegory, nature of, use and abuse in art, i. 305‐313.

America, compared with Old World in physical regard, iii. 57, 58.

Ampere, iii. 44.

Anacreon, iii. 377.

Analytical method, ii. 309.

Anatomy, what it teaches, iii. 38;
  value of comparative anatomy, i. 187, iii. 84.

Anaxagoras, iii. 2, 34, 73, 390.

Ancients, the, their architecture, iii. 185, 188, 190;
  defects in religion, iii. 452;
  freedom of thought, ii. 394;
  inferiority of tragedy, iii. 213, 214;
  historians, i. 317, 318;
  philosophy, ii. 400;
  sculpture, i. 269, 291.

Angelus Silesius, i. 167, 492, iii. 432.

Anger, evidence of primacy of will, ii. 442;
  psychological effect of, ii. 429.

Animals, lower, distinctive characteristics of animal life, i. 25, ii.
            228, 232;
  essential identity with man, i. 192;
  difference from man, i. 45, 47, 112, see _Man_;
  do not laugh, ii. 280;
  nor weep, i. 486;
  naïveté of, i. 204;
  no passions proper, iii. 16;
  no knowledge of death, iii. 249;
  yet fear death, iii. 251;
  right of man over, i. 481 n.

Animal magnetism, iii. 76, 418, 419.

Anselm of Canterbury, ii. 125, 126.

Anticipation in art, i. 287, 288;
  in nature, iii. 103, 104.

Antinomies, criticism of Kantian, i, 39, ii. 107 _seq._;
  the two of natural science, i. 37 _seq._

Antisthenes, i. 115, ii. 357.

Anwari Soheili, ii. 283.

Απαγωγη and επαγωγη, ii. 290.

Apollo Belvedere, i. 230.

Apperception, transcendental unity of, ii. 333.

_A priori_ knowledge, meaning and explanation of, ii. 33;
  directness, necessity, and universality of, i. 88;
  table of _prædicabilia a priori_, ii. 221;
  the basis of ontology, ii. 220.

Apuleius, ii. 352.

Architecture, its problem as a fine art, i. 276;
  solution of problem, i. 277 _seq._, iii. 182 _seq._;
  beauty and grace in, i. 277, iii. 188, 189;
  combines beauty with usefulness, i. 280;
  its relation to light, i. 279, 280;
  to music, iii. 239 _seq._;
  to plastic arts and poetry, i. 280;
  its effects dynamical as well as mathematical, i. 279;
  comparison of antique and Gothic, iii. 189‐192.

Aristippus, ii. 319, 363.

Aristo of Chios, ii. 319.

Aristocracy of intellect, ii. 342.

Aristotle, his logic, i. 62;
  on scientific knowledge, i. 95;
  his _forma substantialis_, i. 186;
  on essential conflict in nature, i. 192;
  his method, i. 239;
  on Platonic Ideas, i. 273, iii. 124;
  on derivation of ηθη, i. 378;
  his style, ii. 21;
  denies reciprocity, ii. 66;
  on the necessary and contingent, ii. 70;
  contented with abstract conceptions, ii. 71;
  on quality and quantity, ii. 76;
  his categories, ii. 85;
  on existence as subject, ii. 101;
  on infinity of world in space, ii. 110;
  atomism not necessary, ii. 111;
  infinity _potentia_ not _actu_, ii. 115;
  refutation of ontological proof, ii. 129;
  νους πρακτικος of, ii. 133;
  the seat of the virtues, ii. 137;
  treatment of art, ii. 153;
  an infinitely large body immovable, ii. 203;
  relation of number and time, ii. 205;
  Topi of, ii. 212;
  division of causes, ii. 217;
  on pure matter, ii. 219;
  on origin of things, ii. 220;
  real things and conceptions, ii. 244;
  meaning of his _nihil est in intellectu nisi quod ante fuerit in sensu_,
              ii. 258;
  eight spheres of, ii. 265;
  rhetorics of, ii. 285;
  his επαγωγη and απαγωγη, ii. 290;
  his syllogistic figures, ii. 297;
  analysis of syllogisms, ii. 303;
  on the prudent man, ii. 347;
  his ethics eudæmonistic, ii. 349;
  wonder the origin of philosophy, ii. 360;
  view of the Sophists, ii. 362;
  necessity of metaphysics, ii. 379;
  on invertebrate animals, ii. 481;
  on plants, iii. 34;
  difference between efficient and final cause, iii. 82;
  his freedom from physico‐theology, iii. 94;
  merits of his teaching as to organised and unorganised nature, iii. 95;
  nature a demon, iii. 106;
  music a cathartic of the feelings, iii. 174;
  poetry better than history, iii. 220.

Arithmetic, depends on _a priori_ intuition of time, i. 99, ii. 204.

Arrian, ii. 355 _seq._

Art, source and aim of, i. 238, 239, 286 _seq._, iii. 126, 179;
  object of, see _Idea_;
  subject of, see _Genius_;
  relation to and difference from philosophy, iii. 176, 177, 178;
  contrasted with history, i. 298, 315, iii. 224;
  inborn and acquired, i. 252;
  the two extremes in series of, i. 274 _seq._, 280;
  value and importance of, i. 345, 346, iii. 132;
  opposition between useful and fine, iii. 181.

Art, works of, tendency of, iii. 177;
  relation of conception to execution of, iii. 180;
  the abstract concept barren in, i. 303, 304, iii. 179, 180;
  why Idea more easily comprehended in than in nature, i. 252, iii. 132;
  co‐operation of the beholder required for enjoyment of, iii. 177;
  why they do not give all to the senses, iii. 178 _seq._;
  superiority of those dashed off in moment of conception, iii. 178, 180.

Asceticism, its source, i, 490 _seq._;
  its way of manifesting itself, i. 492, 493, 506, iii. 425;
  identity of its spirit in different countries and religions, i. 502,
              503, iii. 433;
  difference of spirit of cynicism, ii. 352, 353.

Assertion, definition of, ii. 308.

Association of ideas, its root, ii. 324;
  kinds of, ii. 324;
  apparent exceptions to law of, ii. 327;
  the will secretly controls the law of, ii. 328.

Astronomy, what it teaches, iii. 37;
  source of its certainty and comprehensibility, i. 86;
  its method, i. 87;
  Ptolemaic, i. 64.

Athanasius, iii. 439.

Atheism, what strengthens the reproach of, ii. 379;
  not necessarily materialism, ii. 131, 132.

Atom, assumption of, not necessary, iii. 44 _seq._;
  has no reality, ii. 223;
  defence of, from porosity refuted, iii. 47.

Attraction and repulsion, forces of, constitute space‐occupation, ii. 224.

Augustine, recognises identity of all things with will, i. 165;
  cause of beauty of vegetable world, i. 260 n.;
  on original sin, i. 524;
  the will not free, i. 525;
  dogmatics of, i. 525 n.;
  beginner of Scholasticism, ii. 12;
  on moral systems of ancients, ii. 349;
  spirit of his anti‐Pelagianism, ii. 368, iii. 421;
  on affections of will, ii. 412 n.;
  his _de civit. Dei_, iii. 117 n.

Autobiography. See _Biography_.

Avarice, the vice of old age, iii. 465

Avatar, iii. 426.

Axiom, definition, ii. 308.

Bacon, his conception of philosophy, i. 109;
  all movement preceded by perception, i. 137 n.;
  on atheism, ii. 131;
  his philosophical method, ii. 212;
  on the intellect, ii. 433;
  his moral character, ii. 447;
  influence of climate upon intellect, iii. 18;
  rejected teleology, iii. 91;
  on final causes, iii. 93;
  on Democritus, iii. 95;
  on rarity of genius, iii. 158.

Basilidians, iii. 305.

Bass. See _Music_.

Baumgarten, his æsthetics, ii. 153.

Beard, its efficient and final cause in man, iii. 88.

Beauty, the beautiful, two elements of, i. 270;
  source of pleasure in, i. 253 _seq._;
  everything beautiful, i. 271;
  why one thing more beautiful than another, i. 272;
  distinguished from grace, i. 289;
  distinguished from the sublime, i. 270;
  effect of natural beauty, i. 255, iii. 173, 174;
  beauty in art. See _Painting_, _Sculpture_, &c.

Beccaria, iii. 413.

Being, as the most general conception, ii. 236;
  in the professorial philosophy, ii. 288;
  relation of thought to. See _Thing in itself_;
  limitation of individual being the cause of philosophy, i. 135;
  contrast of seeing and being, iii. 392.

Bell, Sir Ch., i. 133, iii. 6.

Benedict, iii. 450.

Berkeley, on rareness of thought, i. 50;
  his idealism, ii. 15, 29, 41, 163, 165, 175, iii. 59, 261.

Bhagavad‐gita, i. 366, iii. 75, 262.

Bible, one metaphysical truth in Old Testament, iii. 423;
  ascetic spirit of New Testament, iii. 437, 458 _seq._;
  opposition of Old and New Testaments, i. 420, iii. 281, 441, 445;
  its historical material unsuited for paintings, i. 300.

Bichat, “_Sur la vie et la mort_,” ii. 470, 488;
  on circulation of blood, ii. 478;
  on organic and animal life, ii. 489;
  only animal life can be educated, ii. 491;
  Flourens’ attack on, ii. 494 _seq._;
  nervous and muscular systems in children, iii. 161;
  effect of emotions on organism, iii. 296.

Bio, on relation of science and philosophy, ii. 319.

Biography, superiority to history, i. 319 _seq._;
  difficulty of dissimulating in autobiographies, i. 320.

Biot, on colour rings, ii. 338.

Blood, the primitive fluid of organism, ii. 478‐481.

Body, the, an object among objects, i. 5, 14, 23, 25, 129, ii. 167;
  its identity with will, i. 129 _seq._; 137‐142, ii. 428, 468, 471‐493;
  relation of physiological and metaphysical explanations of, i. 139
              _seq._, ii. 492, 493;
  its design, i. 140 _seq._;
  knowledge of, key to nature of things, i. 136, 141 _seq._;
  criticism of antithesis of body and soul as two substances, ii. 101‐104,
              378, iii. 11.

Böhm, Jakob, everything half dead, i. 191;
  “_De signatura rerum_,” i. 284 n., iii. 432.

Bolingbroke, iii. 397.

Books, not so instructive as reality, ii. 244, 245;
  why they cannot take the place of experience, ii. 248, 249.

Boswell, his Life of Johnson, ii. 446.

Boureguon, Antoinette, iii. 435.

Brahmanism, recognises no beginning of world, ii. 94, 95, 108, 109;
  teaches metempsychosis, iii. 303.

Brain, metaphysically considered, ii. 468, 485, 486;
  physiologically considered, its origin and function, ii. 411, 462, 463,
              470, iii. 9;
  its share in perception, ii. 185;
  its relation to the ganglia, ii. 483;
  the seat of motives, ii. 473;
  develops with organism, ii. 416, iii. 13, 14;
  as necessary for thought as stomach for digestion, ii. 237;
  the regulator of the will, ii. 470;
  the condition of self‐consciousness, iii. 12 _seq._;
  influence of its development upon intellect at different periods of
              life, ii. 425, 454 _seq._;
  necessity of sleep for, ii. 464;
  effect of over‐work on, ii. 255, 256;
  its variation in man the cause of individual character, i. 171;
  its activity in dreams, ii. 464;
  the brain of genius, iii. 159, 160;
  influence on agility of limbs, iii. 21;
  influence of noise on, ii. 196, 197.

Brandis, Ch. A., ii. 264.

Brandis, J. D., ii. 488.

Bridgewater Treatise Men, iii. 91.

Brougham, Lord, iii. 91.

Brown, Thomas, “On Cause and Effect,” ii. 207, iii. 92.

Bruno, Giordano, started from real in his philosophy, i. 33;
  his view of life, i. 366;
  lonely position in his age, ii. 13 n.;
  on finiteness of world, ii. 110;
  infinitely large body immovable, ii. 203;
  matter incorporeal, ii. 208, iii. 51, 54;
  no space beyond the world, ii. 265;
  his death, iii. 106;
  his motto, iii. 144.

Buddhism, its pre‐eminence over all religions, ii. 371;
  superiority to Brahmanism, i. 460, iii. 430;
  compared with Christianity, iii. 445 _seq._;
  its pessimism, i. 372, iii. 397;
  its mysticism, iii. 435;
  teaches that nature expects salvation from man, i. 492;
  its doctrine of metempsychosis, iii. 302;
  doctrine of Nirvana, iii. 308, 427.

Buffon, on intelligence of animals, i. 29;
  on style, ii. 247.

Bunyan, John, iii. 435.

Bundahish, iii. 391.

Burdach, sleep the original state, ii. 463;
  formation of muscles from blood, ii. 478;
  heart independent of nervous system and sensibility, ii. 479;
  reciprocal support of vegetable and insect world, iii. 90;
  on bees, iii. 100;
  on the burrying beetle, iii. 102;
  on _cercaria ephemera_, iii. 269;
  on maternal affection of animals, iii. 317.

Bürger, his place in German poetry, iii. 327;
  his parents, iii. 327;
  on love, iii. 336.

Burke, on the beautiful, ii. 153;
  on the apprehension of words, ii. 239.

Byron, an instance of connection of genius and madness, i. 247;
  brain weighed 6 lbs., iii. 160;
  quoted, i. 234, 324, 258, 342, 432, 458, iii. 379, 398, 400.

Cabanis, on arterial and venous systems, ii. 257;
  his materialism, ii. 378;
  on passions of children, ii. 424;
  “_Des rapports du physique au moral_,” iii. 6.

Cæsar, Jul., on Druids, iii. 304.

Calderon, life a dream, i. 22;
  steadfast prince, i. 327;
  a crime to be born, i. 328, 458, iii. 420;
  his Semiramis, iii. 343;
  “Zenobia the Great,” iii. 364.

Camerarius, J., collection of emblems, i. 309.

Cannibalism, most palpable example of wrong, i. 431;
  hereditary, iii. 322.

Canisius, iii. 440.

Canova, iii. 195.

Caravaggio, iii. 197.

Caricature, character of species annulled by that of individual, i. 291.

Carové, iii. 440.

Carracci, Hannibal, his allegorical paintings, i. 306, 308.

Casper, on length of human life, iii. 301.

Castration, its significance, iii. 310;
  its use as a punishment, iii. 331.

Categories, criticism of the Kantian, ii. 48‐51.

Catholicism, compared with Protestantism in an ethical regard, iii. 448,
            449.

Catullus, iii. 318.

Caucasian, an original race, iii. 58.

Cause, Causality, law of, ii. 214;
  _a priori_ nature of law of, i. 154 _seq._, ii. 206 _seq._;
  corollary from it the permanence of substance, ii. 79;
  difference of cause and force, i. 144, 145;
  mysteriousness of connection between cause and effect, i. 174;
  temporal relation between cause and effect, ii. 209, 210;
  three kinds of causes, i. 149, 150;
  truth of doctrine of occasional causes, i. 178 _seq._;
  falseness of proposition “the effect cannot contain more than the
              cause,” ii. 213;
  a “first cause” inconceivable, ii. 214;
  to determine the cause of an effect, ii. 154.

Celibacy, from Christian and ethical point of view, iii. 425, 437, 438,
            449, 450, 451.

Cellini, Benvenuto, his conversion, i. 510.

Celsus, on generation, iii. 310.

Certainty, distinguished from scientific completeness of knowledge, i. 83;
  superiority of immediate to indirect, i. 89, 90.

Cervantes, i. 311; ii. 246.

Chamfort, iii., 157, 158, 365.

Champollion, i. 313.

Change, nature of, i. 11;
  always conditioned by a cause, i. 170, ii. 211 _seq._

Character, as a force of nature, i. 370;
  difference between that of man and brutes, i. 170, 386, 387;
  that of man individual, i. 290;
  empirical, ii. 407;
  constant, i. 378, ii. 441, 491;
  inherited from father, iii. 320 _seq._;
  relation of intelligible to empirical, i. 203, 207, 373 _seq._;
  a false inference from unalterableness of, i. 389;
  the acquired, i. 391‐397;
  explanation of inharmonious nature of, iii. 330;
  abolition of, i. 520 _seq._

Chatham, Lord, iii. 324.

Chateaubriand, iii. 435.

Chemistry, what it teaches, iii. 38;
  antinomy of, i. 37 _seq._

Chevreul, experiments on light, iii. 62.

Childhood, character of, iii. 161 _seq._

Chiliasts, ii. 243.

Chinese, philosophy, i. 187, 188, 343;
  garden, iii. 157.

Chladni, i. 344.

Choice, man larger sphere of, than brutes, i. 388;
  not freedom of individual volition, _loc. cit._

Christianity, different constituent parts of, i. 500, 501, iii. 422;
  its connection with Brahmanism and Buddhism, iii. 391, 421, 459;
  pessimistic spirit of, ii. 372, iii. 397, 436;
  kernel of, i. 424, 523‐524, ii. 149, iii. 421, 452;
  symbol of, iii. 462.

Chrysippus, i. 116, 118, 389, ii. 72, 349.

Cicero, i. 116 n., 117, 247, 389, ii. 72, 137, 138, 140, 141, 270, 272,
            348, 356, 358, 444, iii. 147, 253 n., 452.

Circle, the symbol of nature, iii. 267.

Classics, advantage of studying, ii. 239.

Classical poetry, distinguished from romantic, iii. 209.

Cleanthes, i. 118, ii. 128.

Clemens Alexandrinus, “Stromata” referred to, i. 425, ii. 98, iii. 427,
            438, 442, 443.

Clouds, illustration of opposition between Idea and phenomenon, i. 235.

Colebrooke, i. 491, 494 n., 281, 304, 307, 308 n.

Comedy, distinguished from tragedy, iii. 218.

Composer, musical, i. 336.

Concept, conception, see _Abstract_;
  their construction the function of reason, i. 7, 50, ii. 235 _seq._;
  content and extent of, ii. 236;
  spheres, i. 55, 64;
  representatives of, i. 51;
  relation to word, i. 51; ii. 234, 238;
  relation to Idea, i. 301, 302;
  simple, ii. 236;
  distinct, ii. 237;
  abstract and concrete, i. 53;
  pure, ii. 385;
  advantages and disadvantages of, i. 45, 47 _seq._, 68‐75, ii. 234‐243,
              345 _seq._

Concrete, union of form and matter, ii. 215.

Condillac, his materialism, ii. 175, 187. iii. 45.

Condorcet, ii. 187.

Connections among men, foundation of, ii. 450.

Conscience, presupposes intelligible character, i. 474;
  is only affected by deeds, i. 387;
  anguish of, i. 471 _seq._;
  the good, i. 482.

Consciousness, only a property of animal beings, ii. 336, 337, 414;
  origin, aim, and seat of, ii. 475;
  what common to all, and what distinguishes one from another, ii. 414,
              iii. 17 _seq._;
  self‐consciousness and that of other things, ii. 259, 412, 468, iii.
              126;
  limited to phenomena, i. 358 n., iii. 74, 285 _seq._;
  as opposed to unconsciousness, ii. 328;
  fragmentary nature of, ii. 330 _seq._;
  what gives it unity and connection, iii. 333;
  extinguished in death, iii. 255 _seq._

Considering things, ways of, i. 239; 121 _seq._

Contingent, contingency, conception of, ii. 67;
  misuse of word by pre‐Kantian dogmatists, ii. 70.

Conversation, ii. 343.

Copula, ii. 287, 288.

Coriolanus, ii. 136.

Corneille, iii. 203.

Correct, distinguished from true, real, &c., ii. 208.

Correggio, i. 300, 306, 307, 531.

Cosmogony, of Laplace, iii. 71, 72.

Cosmological proof, Kant’s refutation of, ii. 130.

Cousin, M., iii. 45.

Cramp, ii. 484.

Crime, chief cause of, iii. 412.
  See _Punishment_.

Criticism, the Kantian, ii. 6‐11.

Crystal, its one manifestation of life, i. 202;
  its individuality, i. 171;
  becomes rigid in the moment of movement, iii. 37.

Culture, cannot make up for want of understanding, ii. 253 _seq._, 343

Cuvier, ii. 204, 318, 479, iii. 98, 160, 165.

Cynicism, spirit and fundamental thought of, ii. 350 _seq._, iii. 388.

_Da Capo_, i. 342.

Daemon, i. 349, iii. 99.

Dante, i. 258, 419, ii. 315.

Davis, iii. 207.

Death, i. 356 _seq._, 506‐509, iii. 249‐308, 312, 389, 463;
  sudden death, why prayed against, iii, 428.

Decameron, iii. 365.

Deductive method, ii. 310.

Delamark, ii. 318, 378.

Delirium, distinguished from madness, i. 248.

Democritus, i. 33, 159, 160, ii. 131 140, 177, 378, iii. 61, 62, 64, 95.

Denial. See _Will_.

Descartes, vortex of, i. 159;
  identifies will with judgment, 377, 385;
  his thought not free, ii. 13;
  on repetition, ii. 21, 25;
  ontological proof, ii. 126;
  made philosophy start from self‐consciousness, ii. 164, 165, 201, 400,
              iii. 59;
  the quantity of a motion, ii. 226;
  opinion of mathematics, ii. 323;
  slept a great deal, ii. 465;
  criticism of his doctrines, ii. 494‐496;
  relation to Spinoza, iii. 475.

Desire, the universal nature of things, i. 165, iii. 34;
  in a psychological regard, ii. 429.

Determinism, iii. 67‐69.

Δευτερος πλους, the second way of the denial of the will, i. 506, iii.
            454, 465.

Dialectic, definition of, ii. 285.

Diderot, ii. 341, iii. 233, 272.

Diodorus the Megaric, ii. 72.

Diogenes the Cynic, i. 151, ii. 351, 352, iii. 388.

Diogenes, Laertius, i. 118, 151, 169, ii. 319, 351, 355, 363, iii. 255.

Dionysius the Areopagite, ii. 264.

Discovery, the work of understanding, i. 26, 27.

Disease, its nature, ii. 487.

Disgusting, the, i. 269.

Dissimulation, i. 47, iii. 231.

Divisibility, infinite, of time, i. 13, ii. 221;
  of matter, iii. 46.

Dog, intelligence of, ii. 230‐232;
  wags its tail, ii. 280.

Dogmas, their relation to virtue and morality, i. 475 _seq._

Dogmatism, philosophical, opposed to criticism, ii. 10, 11;
  its fundamental error, iii. 27.

Domenichino, iii. 193.

Donatello, iii. 193.

Don Quixote, i. 311.

Drama, the, i. 321‐330, iii. 211‐219.

Drapery in sculpture, i. 296.

Dreams, distinguished from real life, i. 20 _seq._

Duns Scotus, i. 111, ii. 237.

Dutch paintings, i. 269.

Ebionites, iii. 458.

Eckermann, “Conversations of Goethe,” i. 362, iii. 240.

Eckhard, Meister, i. 492, 500, iii. 432, 435, 467.

Edda, the, iii. 304.

Ego, conception of, i. 132, 324, ii. 413, 487, iii. 3, 13, 284, 285;
  the logical ego, ii. 333.

Egoism, origin, nature, and scope of, i. 427, iii. 416, 417;
  theoretical egoism, i. 135.

Egyptians, gospel of, iii. 436, 444.

Eleatics, i. 33, 61, 93, ii. 85, 113, iii. 271.

Election, doctrine of, i. 378, ii. 149.

Elephant, intelligence of, i. 29, ii. 232, 233.

Eloquence, ii. 305, 306.

Emblems, i. 312, 313.

Emotion, its origin and effect, ii. 346, iii. 407, 408.

Empedocles, i. 192, 288, 530, iii. 8, 34, 95, 271.

Encratites, iii. 438.

English, the, their faults, ii. 131, iii. 92.

ἑν και παν, iii. 65, 471.

Ennui, i. 402, 404, iii. 413.

_Ens realissimum_, ii. 125‐127.

Envy, iii, 389.

επαγωγη and απαγωγη, ii. 290.

Epic poetry, i. 324, 413, iii. 211.

Epicurus, Epicureans, i. 33, 37, ii. 181, 145, 177, 378, iii. 255, 261.

Epictetus, i. 115, 116 n., 386, ii. 354, 356.

Epiphanias, iii. 446.

Equivocation, i. 79.

Erigena, Scotus, ii. 319, iii. 432, 470, 471.

Error, definition of, i. 30, 103‐105;
  difference between man and brutes with regard to, ii. 243, _seq._;
  pernicious nature of, i. 45, ii. 241 _seq._;
  tragic and comic side of, ii. 243;
  how perpetuated, ii. 243, 341.

Esquirol, iii. 117, 328.

Essenes, iii. 437, 451.

_Essentia_ and _existentia_, their relation, ii. 129, 130;
  their union in pure matter, ii. 218.

Eternity, conception of, i. 228, 360 _seq._, iii. 276.

Ethics, i. 441‐443, 474 _seq._, iii. 402‐409;
  criticism of Kantian, ii. 133 _seq._;
  of ancients, ii. 348, iii. 213, 214, 452.

Ethiopian, an original race, iii. 58.

Etiology, subject and scope of, i. 124 _seq._;
  its relation to the philosophy of nature, i. 182 _seq._

Euchel, Isaak, his “Prayers of the Jews,” ii. 98.

Euclid, criticism of his method, i. 90‐100, ii. 33, 164, 321‐323.

Eudæmonism, ii. 348 _seq._

ευκολος and δυσκολος, i. 407.

Euler, i. 55, 165, ii. 172 n., 187‐189, 192, 341.

Euripides, i. 328, 453, iii. 214, 218, 400, 406, 443.

Evidence, distinction between empirical and _a priori_, i. 85;
  the predicate “evident” defined, ii. 308.

Evil, meaning of word, i. 426;
  the _punctum pruriens_ of metaphysics, ii. 375.
  See _Pessimism_.

Existence, vanity of, iii. 382 _seq._;
  the end of, ii. 695.

Experience, ii. 234 _seq._, 388 _seq._

Experiment, ii. 268.

Explanation, i. 105 _seq._, 125.

Extension. See _Matter_.

Eye, i. 301, ii. 194, iii. 162.

Fame, i. 305, iii. 151.

Fanaticism, i. 466 n.

Fate, Fatalism, i. 389, 390, iii. 475.

Fear, effect of, ii. 429 _seq._;
  origin of belief in God, ii. 130.

Feeling, as sense of touch, ii. 195;
  as opposite of knowing, i. 66‐68.

Fénélon, i. 499.

Fernow, i. 293.

Fichte, i. 16, 33, 40‐43, ii. 22, 31, 176, iii. 13.

Fit Arari, ii. 444.

Flagellants, ii. 243.

Flourens, ii. 133, 416, 417, 479, 494‐496, iii. 165, 326.

Folly, a species of the ludicrous, i. 77 _seq._, ii. 277;
  a characteristic of genius, iii. 153.

Force, distinguished from cause, i. 144, 145, 174‐178, ii. 217;
  inseparable from matter, iii. 54 _seq._

Form and matter. i. 162, 168, ii. 215, iii. 26, 53‐57.

Forms of thought, 86 _seq._;
  their relation to parts of speech, ii. 85, 86.

Francis, St., i. 496, iii. 434, 459.

Frauenstädt, ii. 225.

Frederick the Great, ii. 133.

Freedom, as a metaphysical quality, i. 369 _seq._;
  intellectual, iii. 407;
  of the will, i. 376 _seq._, 388, 389, 520 _seq._;
  criticism of Kant’s doctrine, ii. 117 _seq._

French, national character of, i. 510;
  philosophy of, ii. 18, iii. 44, 45;
  poetry, iii. 209;
  music, iii. 244.

Friendship, i. 485.

Fright, effect of, ii. 429.

Froriep, ii. 209.

Future. See _Present_.

Gall, ii. 469, 494, 495.

Galenus, ii. 297.

Gallows, iii. 456, 457.

Ganglia, their function in organism, ii. 484 _seq._

Gardening, landscape, i. 282;
  difference between English and old French, iii. 175.

Garrick, ii. 279, iii. 21.

_Gemüth_, distinguished from mind, ii. 458, 459.

_Generatio æquivoca_, i. 184 _seq._; iii. 54‐56.

Generation, and death essential moments in life of species, i. 365, iii.
            270‐273;
  instinctive nature of act, iii. 309;
  act viewed subjectively and objectively, iii. 292, 293;
  inner significance of act, i. 423 _seq._, iii. 379;
  reason of shame connected with, i. 423, 378;
  existence a paraphrase of, iii. 377.

Genius, i. 238‐247, 251‐253, ii. 245‐249, iii. 138‐166.

Genital organs, the opposite pole of the brain, i. 425, iii. 87, 310;
  independence of knowledge, i. 150, 426;
  difference of plants, animals, and man in respect of, i. 204, iii. 35;
  shame connected with, iii. 379;
  symbolical language of, iii. 380.

Genus, distinguished from species, iii. 123 _seq._;
  construction of logical genus, ii. 103, 104.

Geometry, content of, i. 9;
  method of, i. 90 _seq._; ii. 321 _seq._

Genre painting, i. 298.

Gichtel, iii. 434, 435.

Gilbert, ii. 196.

Giordano, Luca, iii. 198.

Given, the, ii. 23, 84.

Gnostics, iii. 305, 432, 438, 442,

γνωθι σαυτον, ii. 423.

God, origin of the word, iii. 446;
  egotistical origin of belief in, ii. 130;
  an asserted “consciousness of God,” ii. 129, 141, 142;
  criticism of proofs for existence of, ii. 128‐133.

Goethe, his theory of colours, i. 26, 160, 245, ii. 433;
  on genius, i. 247, iii. 19, 147, 151, 153, 156;
  on effect of human beauty, i. 285;
  on Laocoon, i. 293;
  on painting of music, i. 295;
  on fable of Proserpine and pomegranate, i. 311, 424;
  his songs, i. 323, 210;
  on indestructibility of human spirit, i. 362 n.;
  “Confessions of beautiful soul,” i. 497;
  power of sight of suffering, i. 512;
  on persistency of error, ii. 4, 8;
  unknown to Kant, ii. 152;
  sensitive to noise, ii. 198;
  metamorphosis of plants, ii. 225, iii. 85;
  on skeletons of rodents, ii. 318;
  on Kant, ii. 340;
  never over‐worked, ii, 427;
  example of folly of childhood, ii. 456;
  on sleep, ii. 466;
  “_Wahlverwandtschaften_,” iii. 37, 151, 164;
  his love of natural sciences, iii. 39;
  his height, iii. 160;
  his childishness, iii. 163;
  his mother, iii. 327;
  quoted, i. 314, 366, ii. 14, 22, 294, iii. 132, 136, 369.

Good, the conception, i. 464 _seq._;
  nature of the good man, 465, 480, iii. 306, 307.

Gorgias, ii. 281, 286.

Gothic architecture compared with antique, iii. 189‐192.

Gozzi, Carlo, i. 237, ii. 276, iii. 169.

Grace, distinguished from beauty, i. 289;
  Christian doctrine of, i. 522 _seq._, 528, ii. 149.

Gracian, Balthasar, i. 311, ii. 250, iii. 401.

Grammar, relation to Logic, ii. 85‐87, 89.

_Gravitas_, iii. 152.

Gravitation, i. 13, 26, 195, 212, 213, 398, ii. 225, 226, iii. 52, 394.

Greatness in spiritual sense, iii. 150.

Guicciardini, ii. 447.

Guido Reni, iii. 191.

Guilt, i. 204, 454, iii. 390, 415, 418, 420 _seq._, 448.

Guion, Mme. de, i. 497, 505, iii. 432, 434, 435.

Hall, Marshall, i. 151, ii. 133, 433, 484, iii. 6.

Haller, ii. 479, 488, iii. 328.

Hamilton, Sir W., ii. 323.

Happiness, is negative, i. 411‐413;
  from standpoint of higher knowledge, i. 456;
  impossible in an existence like ours, iii. 382, 383;
  and virtue, i. 466, iii. 420 _seq._

Hardy, Spence, i. 497, iii. 301, 303, 308 n., 434.

Hauz, iii. 45.

Haydn, i. 304.

Head, relation of, to trunk in brutes and man, i. 230;
  opposite pole of genitals, i. 425, iii. 87, 310;
  and heart, ii. 450 _seq._

Health, i. 190 _seq._, iii. 385.

Hearing, sense of, ii. 195‐199.

Heart, the centre and _primum mobile_ of life, ii. 428, 479‐481;
  opposition between head and heart, ii. 450 _seq._;
  why love affairs are called affairs of the heart, iii. 373.

Heathen, ii. 97.

Heavens, sublime effect of, i. 266, 267.

Hegel, ii. 8, 22, 31, 171, 243, 261, 266, iii. 45, 224, 225, 394, 404,
            436.

Heine, Heinrich, ii. 283.

Hell, i. 419, iii. 387, 388, 392.

Helvetius, i. 288 n., ii. 256, 444 446, iii. 8.

Heraclitus, i. 8, ii. 256, iii. 399.

Herder, i. 52, ii. 153, iii. 163.

Heredity, iii. 318‐335.

Hermaphrodism, iii. 356.

Herodotus, ii. 347, iii. 303, 398.

Hesiod, i. 425.

History and science, i. 82, iii. 220, 221;
  and philosophy, iii. 223;
  and poetry, i. 315 _seq._, iii. 224;
  and biography, i. 319;
  the philosophy of, i. 236, 237, iii. 224‐226;
  true value of, iii. 227 _seq._
  untrustworthiness of, i. 238, 316, 317, iii. 223;
  history of world and history of the saints, i. 497, 498.

Hobbes, i. 21, 361 n., 441, 446, 451 ii. 263, 453.

Holberg, ii. 379.

Holiness, inner nature of, i. 494, 495;
  its independence of dogmas, i. 495, 509.

Hollbach, ii. 176.

Home, ii. 153, 270.

Homer, i. 236, 295, 311, 314, 324, iii. 400.

Hooke, i. 26, ii. 225, 226.

Hope, ii. 431.

Horace, ii. 139, 140, 274, iii. 181.

Horizon, mental, ii. 338.

Huber, iii. 101.

Human race. See _Man_.

Humboldt, Alex. von, ii. 64, iii. 112.

Hume, David, i. 15, 52, 89, ii. 8, 129, 130, 156, 157, 173, 207, 209 iii.
            92, 92 n., 305, 327, 393, 394, 395.

Humour, ii. 282‐284.

Hutcheson, ii. 270.

Hydraulics, science, of iii. 38;
  as a fine art, i. 281, 282.

Hypothesis, correct, ii. 309;
  effect of, on mind, ii. 432.

I. See _Ego_.

Idea (_Vorstellung_), what it is, ii. 400;
  common form of all classes of, i. 3;
  form of combination of all classes of, i. 5;
  chief distinction among, i. 7;
  idea of perception, i. 7‐45, ii. 163‐227;
  abstract, i. 45‐120, ii. 228‐395;
  subjective correlative of, i. 13 (Cf. _Object_ and _World_);
  the Platonic Idea (_Idee_) defined, i. 168, iii. 122;
  distinguished from thing in itself, i. 209, 226 _seq._, 232, iii. 122
              _seq._;
  empirical correlative of, iii. 123.;
  relation to individual things, i. 227, 233, iii. 275;
  knowledge of, i. 220‐228, 271, ii. 335‐336, iii. 122, 126 _seq._;
  grades of, in nature, i. 195‐199, 202;
  the object of art, see _Art_;
  misuse of word, i. 168, ii. 99, 100;
  association of, see _Association_;
  Kant’s Ideas of reason, ii. 23 _seq._

Ideal, in art, i. 287, 288;
  opposition between ideal and real, ii. 400 _seq._

Idealism, as opposed to realism, i. 3 _seq._, ii. 28 _seq._, 163, 167;
  difference between empirical and transcendental, ii. 170, 184;
  absolute, i. 134, 135.

Identity, law of, ii. 86‐88;
  philosophy of, i. 32, ii. 8, 400.

Idyll, the, why it must be short, i. 413.

Iffland, ii. 426.

Illusion distinguished from error, i. 28, 103, 104.

Imagination, an instrument of thought, ii. 240, 245;
  an essential element of genius, i. 241 _seq._, iii. 141, 142.

Imitation, in art, i. 304;
  of idiosyncrasies of others, i. 395.

Immanent knowledge, opposed to transcendent and transcendental, i. 224,
            ii. 387, iii. 430 n., 468.

Immortality, iii. 75.
  See _Indestructibility_.

Impenetrability of matter, i, 13, ii. 103, 223 _seq._, iii. 52.

Inclination, definition, iii. 406.

Indestructibility, of our true nature by death, Ch. 41 _passim_, iii.
            249‐308.

Indian, mysticism, 432;
  sculpture, i. 309;
  philosophy, iii. 281, 282;
  caste i. 459, 460
  (Cf. _Buddhism_ and _Brahmanism_).

Individuality, as phenomenon rooted in the thing in itself, i. 147, 219,
            354, 357, 358, iii. 74, 428, 469;
  at the different grades of nature, i. 170‐172;
  language of nature with reference to, i. 355, 356, iii. 108 _seq._, 416,
              417;
  destruction of, by death, iii. 286, 298 _seq._

Induction, ii. 310.

Infinite, true conception of, ii. 115.

Inquisition, i. 466 n.

Innocence, of plants, i. 204.

Insects, fertilisation of plants by, iii. 90;
  life of severed parts of, ii. 483;
  ephemeral nature of, iii. 267.
  See _Instinct_.

Instinct, an act directed to an unknown end, i. 148, 150, 197, iii. 96,
            346 _seq._;
  relation of, to guidance by motives, iii. 96 _seq._;
  relation to somnambulism, iii. 98;
  throws light on organising work of nature, iii. 96‐100, 103;
  in man, iii. 346 _seq._

Intellect, pure, ii. 179, 180;
  empirical, secondary nature of, ii. 411‐467, iii. 3 _seq._, 291;
  end of, i. 199, 228, ii. 336, 485, iii. 21 _seq._;
  degrees of, in series of animals and in man, iii. 29, 30;
  parsimony of nature in imparting, iii. 20;
  limitation of, to phenomena, iii. 21‐29;
  imperfections of, ii. 330‐344.

Interesting, distinguished from beautiful, i. 229.

Ionic school, i. 33.

Irritability as objectification of will, ii. 472 _seq._;
  its connection with blood, ii. 478.

Isaiah ii. 437.

Islamism, iii. 423, 446.

Jacobi, i. 225 n., ii. 169.

Jealousy, iii. 364.

Johnson, Dr. Samuel, i. 328.

Jones, Sir W., i. 8, 501 n.

Joy, i. 410, ii. 429 _seq._

Judaism, i. 300, iii. 305, 446.

Judgment, faculty of, i. 30, 84 _seq._, ii. 152 _seq._, 266 _seq._

Julian, Emperor, ii. 350.

Jung Stilling, ii. 243.

Justinius, 305.

Justice, as a virtue, i. 478, 479, iii. 424;
  retributive, i. 452;
  eternal, i. 427, 452‐458, 461, iii. 405, 421;
  poetical, i. 328.

Kant, abstract and perceptible knowledge, ii. 25, 32, 80, 213;
  æsthetic, ii. 32, 33, 189;
  amphiboly, ii. 38;
  analytic, ii. 33‐89;
  antinomy, i. 39, ii. 104‐125, iii. 45;
  _a priori_ nature of space and time, i. 6, 8, 154, 155, ii. 169, 201,
              202, iii. 276 _seq._;
  on the beautiful, iii. 189;
  categories, i. 57, ii. 43‐47, 403;
  causality, i. 16, ii. 58 _seq._, 173, 208, 209, 217, 385, 386, iii. 469;
  character, empirical and intelligible, i. 138, 203, 349, 373;
  chief result of Kantian philosophy, ii. 405;
  childish in old age, ii. 427;
  conceptions, philosophy a science of, ii. 259, 384;
  cosmological proof, ii. 130;
  cosmology, i. 194, ii. 225, 72;
  critical philosophy, ii. 6‐11;
  criticism of functions of the brain, ii. 174, 185;
  critique of judgment, ii. 152‐159;
  critique of practical reason, ii. 133‐150;
  critique of pure reason, ii. 3‐133 (fundamental thought of, ii. 18‐20),
              237, 377;
  dialectic, 89‐133;
  “_Die Falsche Spitzfindigkeit_,” ii. 300;
  dreams distinguished from reality, i. 20, 21;
  editions of Critique, ii. 29;
  error, source of, i. 103;
  ethics, i. 79, 110, 140, ii. 12, 133‐150;
  freedom and necessity, ii. 377;
  God, ii. 129, 130;
  laws of homogeneity and specification, i. 83;
  idealism of, ii. 29, 163, 164, 400 _seq._;
  infinity, ii. 115;
  judgment, reflective and subsuming, i. 85;
  judgments, table of, ii. 56‐78;
  philosophy of law, i. 433, ii. 150‐152;
  logic, transcendental, ii. 33‐133;
  on love, 338;
  theory of ludicrous, ii. 270;
  influence of Kantian doctrine on mathematics, i. 94, 385;
  explanation of matter, i. 12 n., iii. 54;
  “Metaphysical First Principles of Natural Science,” i. 88, ii. 111, 219,
              224, 225;
  metaphysics, impossibility of, ii. 386 _seq._;
  method of, ii. 53‐55, iii. 5;
  Kant’s mother, iii. 327;
  negative result of philosophy, ii. 17;
  _nihil privativum_, i. 528;
  sensitive to noise, ii. 198;
  ontological proof, ii. 129, 130;
  object of perception, ii. 33‐43;
  permanence of substance, ii. 78‐81;
  phenomenon and thing in itself, i. 9, 41, 155, 220, 6‐12, 28, 181, 379,
              389, 399, 486;
  physico‐theological proof, ii. 130;
  relation to Plato, i. 223 _seq._;
  psychology, refutation of rational, ii. 100‐104;
  reason, conception of, i. 49;
  ideas of, i. 169, ii. 96‐100;
  ideal of, ii. 125‐133;
  principle of, ii. 90‐96;
  reciprocity, category of, ii. 61 _seq._;
  schematism of categories, 48‐51;
  Scholastic dogmatism overthrown by, ii. 12‐16, iii. 27;
  Schopenhauer gone further than, iii. 28, 59;
  his sleep, ii. 465;
  speculative theology, refutation of, ii. 128‐133, 473;
  spiritualism, refutation of, ii. 177;
  style of, ii. 20, 21, 340;
  subject, system starts from, i. 42;
  theory of, sublime, i. 265;
  love of symmetry, ii. 22, 47, 69, 76, 78, 106, 133;
  synthetic unity of apperception, ii. 51, 52, 333, 476, iii. 12;
  thing in itself, ii. 3, 31, 169, 381, 407;
  transcendent, transcendental and immanent, i. 124, ii. 3, 87, iii. 24;
  _das Vernünfteln_ ii. 263;
  weight an _a priori_ quality of matter, i. 13.

Kemble, i. 295.

Kepler, i. 87, 94, 137 n., iii. 41.

Kerner, Justinus, ii. 481.

Kielmayer, 318.

Kicser, ii. 326, iii. 99.

Kirby, iii. 91, 101, 103.

Kleist, i. 311.

Klettenberg, Fr. von, i. 497.

Knowledge, whence the need of, iii. 7, 8;
  physiological and metaphysical view of, ii. 486, iii. 290, 291, 470;
  aim of, ii. 475;
  kinds of, i. 199, 230;
  degrees of, iii. 29, 30;
  why no knowledge of knowing, ii. 487;
  influence of will upon, iii. 134;
  influence of, on degree of sensibility and suffering, i. 400, iii. 16.

Köppen, iii. 301.

Koran, ii. 361.

Körösi, Csoma, ii. 371.

Kosack, i. 96.

Krishna, iii. 262.

Lactantius, ii. 98.

Lalita‐Vistara, iii. 168.

Lamarck, i. 185.

Lambert, i. 55, ii. 303.

Landscape painting, i. 282.

Language, the first production and tool of reason, i. 47, 48, 51;
  connection of conception with word, ii. 238;
  capacity for, depends on association of ideas, ii. 325;
  the acquisition of several an important mental culture, ii. 238, 239;
  against the modern habit of curtailing words, ii. 310 _seq._

Laocoon, i. 292, iii. 198.

Laplace, i. 194, ii. 225, iii. 72, 73.

Latin, as universal language of scientific literature, ii. 310 _seq._

La Trappe, i. 510, iii. 455.

Laughter, as a psychical act, i. 76 _seq._, ii. 270;
  peculiar to man, ii. 280;
  why pleasant, ii. 279;
  insulting and bitter, ii. 281;
  a test of moral worth, ii. 281.

Lavater, i. 312.

Law, philosophy of, i. 442, 452, ii. 150‐152, iii. 409‐414.

Learning, on the subordinate value of, ii. 253 _seq._

Lee, Anne, iii. 449.

Legislation, i. 446, 447.

Leibnitz, i. 49, 111, 342, ii. 11, 81 _seq._, 141, 237, 391, iii. 91, 394
            _seq._

Leibnitz‐Wolfian philosophy, i. 64, ii. 8, 127, 129, 141, iii. 394.

Leopardi, iii. 401.

Lessing, i. 292, ii. 16, 153, 169, iii. 305.

Leszczynski, iii. 203 n.

Leucippus, ii. 177, 378, iii. 61, 64.

Lichtenberg, ii. 113, 172 n., 198, 445. iii. 21, 203 n., 305, 332 n.

Lie, the, origin and end of, i. 434 _seq._

Liebig, iii. 42.

Life, nature of, iii. 36;
  conflict with mechanical and chemical forces, i. 190;
  opposition between organic and animal, ii. 489‐492;
  blind striving, iii. 105‐118;
  relation to dreams, i. 20, 415;
  tragic and comic side of, i. 415, 416;
  misery of, i. 401‐407, 417, iii. 114, 382‐401;
  aim of, iii. 376, 384‐391.

Light, mechanical explanations of, iii. 44 _seq._;
  relation to heat, i. 262, 263;
  explanation of pleasure given by, i. 258, iii. 137;
  connection with architecture, i. 279, 280.

Locke, i. 49, ii. 6, 7, 45, 81 _seq._, 141, 173 _seq._, 185 _seq._, 212,
            213, 258, 259, 402, iii. 5, 23, 59, 394.

Logic, definition of, i. 58, ii. 285;
  value of, i. 57‐59, ii. 286;
  on what its certainty depends, ii. 268.

Love, nature of all true and pure, i. 484 _seq._;
  root and significance of sexual love, iii, 419, 339‐343, 360;
  degrees of it, iii. 344‐361;
  the _rôle_ of instinct in it, iii. 345‐349, 350‐360;
  independence of friendship, iii. 345;
  sublime and comic sides of, iii. 366 _seq._

Lucretius, i. 403, 411, 412, iii. 91, 93, 313.

Lully, Raymond, i. 510, iii. 455.

Lupus, Rutilius, ii. 286.

Luther, i. 500, 525, ii. 145, 368, iii. 392, 421, 448‐451.

Lyric, subjectivity of, i. 321;
  nature of the song, i. 322‐324.

Machiavelli, ii. 135, iii. 158.

Macrocosm, i. 212, iii. 404.

Madness, nature of, i. 30, 248 _seq._, iii. 167;
  criterion of, iii. 167 _seq._;
  relation of knowledge of madman to that of the brutes, i. 249, ii. 243;
  relation of, to genius, i. 246, 247;
  prevalence among actors, iii. 168;
  origin of, i. 249 _seq._, iii. 169, 170;
  _mania sine delirio_, iii. 171, 172.

Magnetism, animal, ii. 466, 467, iii. 76, 419.

Maine de Biran, ii. 206, 507, 217.

Malebranche, i. 178, 179, 522, ii. 15.

Man, the human race, connection with rest of nature, i. 200 _seq._, 403,
            ii. 377;
  identity of essence of man and the brutes, i. 192;
  difference between man and brutes, i. 46‐48, 110‐112, 170, 171, 230,
              384, 385, ii. 228‐233, 358, iii. 14‐17, 380, 381;
  transcendent unity of human race, iii. 75, 76;
  turning‐point of will to live, i. 491 _seq._, iii. 381, 426;
  origin of, iii. 358;
  gradual degradation of, ii. 362.

Manichæans, iii. 305.

Mannerists, i. 304, 305.

Manzoni, ii. 352.

Marcionists, iii. 305, 438, 442, 443.

Marcus Aurelius, ii. 356, iii. 323.

Marriage, iii. 333, 334, 336‐375.

Materialism, i. 34 _seq._, ii. 175 _seq._, iii. 60‐64, 261, 262.

Mathematics, scientific nature of, i. 81, 82;
  ground of certainty of, i. 157, ii. 268;
  and genius, i. 246, 247;
  method of, i. 95 _seq._;
  and logic, ii. 202;
  value of, ii. 323.

Matter, i. 10‐13, 175, 275, 276, ii. 79, 103, 104, 218‐224, iii. 48‐54.

Maupertius, ii. 225.

Maximus of Tyre, ii. 264.

Maxwell, iii. 450.

Mâyâ, i. 9, 21, 425, 454, 455, 471, 478, 481, 482, 489, 490, 514, 515, ii.
            8, 10, 108 n., iii. 69, 418.

Mechanics, iii. 37, 39, 43 _seq._

Medwin, iii. 160 n.

Meister, J. C. F., ii. 152.

Melancholy, i. 512.

Melissus, ii. 264.

Memnon, ii. 198.

Memory, as a function of intellect, ii. 335, iii. 300;
  difference between that of men and brutes, ii. 229, 230;
  the influences acting upon, i. 30, 248‐251, ii. 200, 334, 438 _seq._

Menenius Agrippa, i. 311.

_Mens_ as opposed to _animus_, ii. 458.

Menu, laws of, i. 433, 501 n., iii. 465.

Merck, ii. 446, iii. 200.

Metaphysics, i. 107, ii. 20, 359‐395 iii. 40.

Metempsychosis, doctrine of, i. 458‐460, iii. 300‐306, 417, 418.

Method, i. 100, 108, ii. 53, 210, 259, 309, 310, 393.

Metre, i. 314, ii. 205‐207.

Mind, presence of, ii. 430.

Minor key, i. 337, iii. 243, 244.

Missionaries, i. 460.

Mnemonics, ii. 325.

Modality, categories of, ii. 66‐75.

Modesty, i. 303, iii. 202, 203.

Mohammedanism, ii. 361, 362, iii. 423, 433, 472.

Molinos, iii. 434, 435, 435 n.

Molock, ii. 243.

Monarchy, i. 443, iii. 410.

Monasticism, i. 499, iii. 448.

Mongolian race, iii. 58.

Montaigne, i. 463 n., ii. 315, 465, iii. 378.

Montalembert, iii. 435.

Montanists, iii. 438.

Monuments, value of historical, iii. 229.

Moon, æsthetic effect of, iii. 136.

Morality, i. 343, 477, iii. 405, 415, 423‐428 (Cf. _Ethics_).

Morphology, i. 124, 125, 183.

Mortality, iii. 301‐302.

Motives, Motivation, what they determine, i. 138, 212, 213, iii. 115;
  what imparts power to, iii. 97;
  intellectual condition of action of, i. 380, 381;
  influence of nearness upon strength of, ii. 346;
  influence upon intellect, ii. 436;
  distinguished from instinct, iii. 97;
  intellect as medium of, i. 199, ii. 336, 485, iii. 21 _seq._

Movement, i. 194, ii. 226, 227, 483, 484, iii. 39.

Mozart, iii. 163.

Müller, ii. 479.

Multiplicity, i. 145, 146, 166, 167, iii. 69 _seq._, 274, 275.

Münchhausen, Baron, i. 34, ii. 278.

Murder, i. 432, iii. 413, 414.

Music, metaphysics of, i. 330‐346, iii. 231‐248.

Mysteries essential to religion, ii. 367, 368, iii. 430.

Mysticism, Mystics, i. 499, 500, iii. 430 n., 430‐434.

Nakedness, i. 296.

Nature, what it means, iii. 1;
  works of nature and works of art, iii. 1, 69, 70, 79;
  inner nature of, i. 140 _seq._, 148, 152 _seq._, iii. 32, 33, 39;
  perfection of works of, iii. 69, 70;
  the circle of, iii. 267;
  grades of, i. 195 _seq._, 202‐206;
  continuity of, ii. 232, iii. 36, 85;
  the conflict in, i. 191, 210, 211;
  design of, i. 201‐211, 77 _seq._, 95;
  relation to species and individual, i. 356, 425, 426, iii. 194, 277,
              278, 396;
  æsthetic effect of, i. 255, iii. 173, 174;
  naïveté of, i. 203, 204, 356, 362, 423, 491, iii. 380;
  moral quality of, i. 518, iii. 106;
  laws of, i. 126, 172, 175 _seq._., 183;
  forces of, i. 126, 162, 169‐182, 202, ii. 217, 218, iii. 73, 259;
  investigator of, ii. 318, 319, 383.

Necessity, origin and meaning of conception, i. 97;
  relation to the actual and possible, ii. 72 _seq._;
  relation to contingent, ii. 67, 68;
  as opposed to freedom, iii. 67, 69;
  absolute necessity, 70.

Nerves, i. 131, ii. 173, 185, 481‐485.

Newton, Isaac, i. 26, 64, 160, 165, 245, ii. 226, 268, 338.

Nirvana, i. 460, iii. 308 n., 374, 427, 428.

Nitzsch, iii. 269.

Noise, ii. 198, 199, iii. 450.

Nominalism, ii. 85, iii. 125.

νοουμενον and Φαινομενον, i. 93, ii. 85.

Nothing, relativity of conception, i. 528, iii. 272.

Nourishment, i. 357.

Numenius, ii. 98.

νους, ii. 459, iii. 390.

_Nunc stans_, the, i. 227, 361 n., iii. 381.

Object, conditioned by subject, i. 3, 6, 16, _seq._, 123, 124, ii.
            166‐169, 170, 173, 179, 381.

Objectification, i. 130, 166‐163, ii. 468.

Objectivity, of genius and in art, i. 240, 321, 324, ii. 417, iii. 144,
            210.

Obscurantism, iii. 328, 329.

Obry, iii. 303, 308 n.

Ocelius Lucanus, 113.

Opera, iii. 92, 233, 234.

Optimism, i. 420, ii. 391, iii. 390‐397, 436, 443, 449, 471 _seq._

Organism, ii. 468, iii. 77 _seq._

Original sin, iii. 306, 421 _seq._, 426.

Orpheus, iii. 303, 427, 433, 443.

Osiander, i. 151.

Ossian, i. 324.

Ought, the absolute, i. 350, ii. 144.

Oum, iii. 430, 430 n.

Oupnekhat, i. 459, 501, iii. 425 n. 432, 433.

Ovid, 1. 396, 410.

Owen, R., ii. 131, 203 n., iii. 82, 86, 91.

Pæstum, iii. 185.

Pain, i. 386, 410, 412, 413, iii. 384, 385.

Paine, T., i. 231.

Painting, i. 282‐292, 297‐301, 306‐310, iii. 193, 196‐198.

Palingenesis, iii. 300, 301.

Pander, ii. 318.

Pantheism, iii. 106, 114, 403, 404, 471‐475.

Paracelsus, Theophrastus, iii. 280, 362.

Parmenides, i. 141, 425.

Parody, ii. 275, 276.

Particles, logical, ii. 288, 315.

Pascal, i. 476, iii. 435.

Passions, ii. 216, iii. 406, 407.

Past, the, i. 359, 360.

Pedantry, i. 78, ii. 250 _seq._

Pelagianism, i. 525, ii. 368, 369, iii. 422, 448.

Penitentiary system, i. 404, iii. 412.

Perception, intellectuality of, i. 14‐16, ii. 40, 174, 185, 192;
  share of senses and brain in, ii. 185;
  object of, i. 7, ii. 40;
  relation to thing in itself, ii. 174, 401;
  significance for knowledge, science, art, philosophy, and virtue, ii.
              244‐269, iii. 131, 141 _seq._

Perfection, ii. 15.

Peripatetics, ii. 137, 145.

Permanence of substance, ii. 78.

Perpetual motion, ii. 65, iii. 395.

Pessimism, can be demonstrated, iii. 395;
  the ground of distinction among religions, ii. 372 _seq._;
  of the most significant religions, i. 420, iii. 423;
  of great men of all ages, iii. 398 _seq._

_Petitio principii_, definition of, ii. 308.

Petit‐Thouars, Admiral, iii. 55.

Petrarch, i. 487, 512, ii. 313, iii. 210, 363, 369, 370, 386.

Petronius, ii. 130.

Pettigrew, i. 178 n.

Phidias, iii. 195.

Philosopher, the, nature of, i. 21, 109, ii. 319, 359, 360, iii. 146, 147;
  distinguished from poet, iii. 146, 147;
  distinguished from sophist, ii. 362, 363.

Philosophy, source of, 1. 135, ii. 359‐361, 374;
  task of, i. 107, 168, 350, 352, 495;
  distinguished from science, i. 107, ii. 317;
  as opposed to theology, ii. 367, 395, iii. 431, 453;
  relation to art, iii. 176, 177;
  relation to history, iii. 223;
  method of, ii. 53, 210, 259, 393;
  division of, i. 349;
  cause of small progress of, ii. 395;
  limits of, ii. 362, 363, 27, 405;
  professors of, ii. 362, 363.

Phlegmatic temperament, iii. 18, 161.

Physics, subject of, ii. 375;
  relation to metaphysics, ii. 376‐384, iii. 40.

Physiognomy, i. 74, 74 n.

Physiology, i. 125, ii. 317, iii. 38.

Pico de Mirandula, ii. 240.

Pictet, iii. 304.

Picturesque, iii. 130.

Pindar, i. 21.

Pitt, iii. 324.

Plagiarism, ii. 225, 226.

Plants, chief characteristics of, i. 357, ii. 29;
  inner nature of, i. 152, iii. 34‐36;
  distinguished from animals, i. 25, 150, iii. 13;
  form and physiognomy of, i. 203, 204;
  metamorphosis of, iii. 85;
  æsthetic effect of, i. 260, 288, 289.

Platner, ii. 270.

Plato, on _a priori_ knowledge, ii. 201;
  on being and becoming, i. 9;
  relation to Giordano Bruno, ii. 114 n.;
  figure of the cave, i. 311, ii. 8;
  improper use of conceptions, ii. 211, 261, 264;
  his Dæmon, i. 349;
  his dialectic, ii. 309;
  source of error, i. 103;
  errors in syllogistic reasoning, i. 93;
  his ethics, i. 114, ii. 145, 149, 348;
  ευκολος and δυσκολος, i. 407;
  hope the dream of waking, ii. 431;
  his Ideas, i. 168, 220, 273, ii. 85, 99, 322, iii. 123, 274, 275;
  on love, iii. 338;
  on materialism, ii. 176;
  on mathematics, 323;
  on metempsychosis, 303;
  his method, i. 239;
  on music, i. 336;
  on nature of nothing, i. 529;
  on the nature of the philosopher, i. 21, 41, 109, 143; ii. 369, 374;
  on plants, iii. 34;
  on punishment, i. 451;
  on reason, ii. 141;
  on science, i. 83;
  on sensual pleasure, iii. 349, 369;
  his world of shadows, ii. 10;
  on existence of soul, ii. 102;
  his theism, ii. 98.

Pliny, iii. 378, 400, 451.

Plotinus, ii. 218, iii. 51, 54, 432.

Plouquet, i. 55.

Plutarch, ii. 98, 319, iii. 124, 271 399.

Poaching, a positive, not a moral fault, iii. 411, 412.

Poet, the, grade; of, iii. 202;
  marks of genuine, iii. 207;
  bad influence of mediocre, i. 317 n.;
  distinguished from philosopher, iii. 146, 147.

Poetical justice, i. 328

Poetry, i. 313‐330, iii. 38, 200‐219.

Point, extensionless, ii. 223;
  immovable, ii. 219.

Polarity, i. 187.

Polier, Mme. de, i. 492, 501 n., ii 109.

Position, i. 9.

Possibility, ii. 69, 72.

Pouchet, iii. 56.

Poussin, i. 306.

Praxiteles, iii. 195.

Predestination, i. 378, ii. 149.

Pre‐existence, iii. 253, 254.

Prejudice, ii. 268.

Preller, ii. 357.

Present, the, i. 358‐360, iii. 271, 271 n.

Priestley, i. 373, ii. 111, 224, 225, iii. 46.

Priests, i. 466 n., ii. 362.

_Principium individuationis_, i. 145, 146, 166, 454 _seq._, 481, iii. 274,
            417, 418.

Principle of sufficient reason, is _a priori_, i. preface xi., 6, iii.
            469;
  sphere of validity of, i. 7, 16, 17, 41, 106, iii. 405, 469;
  importance of, i. 96, 107, ii. 316;
  indemonstrable nature of, i. 96, 106;
  fourfold root of, i. 7 (Cf. _Appendix_ to vol. iii.)

Property, right of, i. 432, 433 n., iii. 411.

Prose, as distinguished from poetry, i, 313, iii. 204‐206.

Protestantism. See _Catholicism_.

Prudence, i. 27, 245, 456.

Psychology, ii. 412‐467.

Punishment, distinguished from revenge, i. 449;
  end of, i. 448‐450, iii. 412, 413;
  measure of, iii. 413, 414.

Pyramids, i. 267, iii. 229.

Pythagoras, iii. 303.

Pythagoreans, i. 33, 86, 92, 95, 188, 343, ii. 319, iii. 95, 124, 427,
            442, 452.

Quality, of judgments ii. 57, 87;
  as determination of matter, iii. 54;
  natural forces as _qualitates occultæ_, i. 126, 162, 170, 182, ii. 376.

_Quid pro quo_, i. 79.

Quieter of will, i. 301, 326, 327, 367, 396, 489, 490.

Quietism, iii. 433‐435,

Rabelais, iii. 437.

Radius, Justus, ii. 191.

Rameau, i. 58.

Rancé, Abbé, i. 510, iii. 455.

Raphael, i. 295, 300, 531, iii. 162.

Rationalism in theology, ii. 369.

Reading, disadvantage of much, ii. 253‐255.

Realism, ii. 85, iii. 125.

Reality, definition, i. 30;
  the present is the form of, i. 359, 360, iii. 271 n.;
  of external world, i. 22, 23, ii. 169, 184.

Reason, the word, i. 48, ii. 141, 241;
  function of, i. 50, ii. 137;
  theoretical and practical, i. 30, 113, ii. 138, 139, 345; iii. 408;
  prerogative of man, i. 46‐48, 110‐112, 384, 385, ii. 228‐233, iii. 380,
              381;
  relation of language to, i. 47‐51, ii. 238;
  advantages and disadvantages, i. 45, 47, 68‐75, ii. 234‐243, 345 _seq._;
  compatible with want of understanding and with moral badness, ii. 136;
  opposed to revelation, ii. 142;
  Kant’s Ideas of, i. 169, ii. 96‐100;
  ideal of, ii. 125‐133;
  principle of, ii. 90‐96.

Reflection, definition, i. 46;
  relation to perceptive knowledge, ii. 54 _seq._

Reflex movements, ii. 483‐484.

Reid, Dr. Thomas, ii. 189, 191, 207, 240.

Reil, i. 140, 159.

Religion, significance of, ii. 367 _seq._;
  value of, ii. 370;
  fundamental distinction between, ii. 372 _seq._;
  mysteries essential to, ii. 367;
  demoralising influence of, i. 466 n.;
  conflict with culture and science, ii. 370;
  philosophy of, ii. 370
  (Cf. _Buddhism_, _Brahmanism_, _Christianity_, _Judaism_, and
              _Mohammedanism_).

Repentance, i. 382, iii. 406, 407.

Reproduction. See _Generation_.

Republics tend to anarchy, i. 443.

Resignation. See _Will, denial of_.

Resolve, i. 387.

Revenge, distinguished from punishment, i. 449;
  relation to wickedness, i. 470;
  a characteristic of human nature which is not to be confounded with
              revenge, i. 462.

Rhetoric, i. 63, ii. 285, 286, 305, 306.

Rhyme. See _Poetry_.

Rhythm, in music, i. 339 _seq._
  See _Poetry_.

Richter, Jean Paul, ii. 22, 198, 270, 283, iii. 141, 143, 145.

Right, negative nature of conception, i. 437, 444;
  independent of State, i. 439, iii. 409;
  positive i. 444, 446;
  of property, i. 432 433 n., iii. 411.

Ritter, ii. 357.

Romantic, distinguished from classical, iii. 209.

Rösch, ii. 478, 480.

Rosenkranz, i. 203 n., ii. 29, 36, 117, 120, 121, 146‐148, 204 n., 212,
            217, 225, 377.

Rosini, ii. 447.

Rousseau, i. 247, 343, ii. 136, 353, iii. 106, 325, 338, 397.

Ruins, sublime effect of, i. 267;
  analogous to _cadenza_ in music, iii. 241.

Ruisdael, i. 255.

St. Hilaire, August, iii. 55.

St. Hilaire, Geoffroi, ii. 318, iii. 82.

Sakya Muni, iii. 168, 434.

Salvation, the way of, iii. 460‐467.

Sangermano, iii. 301, 308 n.

Sannyasis, i. 496, ii. 352.

Saphir, ii. 274.

Sceptics, i. 123, 124.

Schelling, i. 187, ii. 22, 31, 116, 169, 176, 236, 261, iii. 62, 471.

Schiller, i. 79, 318, ii. 148, 276, 321, iii. 215, 217.

Schleiermacher, i. 67, 262, iii. 394.

Schlegel, iii. 75.

Schmidt, J. J., ii. 371, iii. 308 n.

Schnürrer, iii. 301.

Scholastics, Scholasticism, i. 82, 146, 162, 198 n., ii. 12, 13, 35, 100,
            125, 126, iii. 125.

Scholiast, ii. 319.

Schultz, ii. 480.

Schulze, ii. 312.

Science, nature of, i. 36, 58, 80‐90, 105, 106, 229, 238, ii. 53, 252,
            267.

Scott, Sir Walter, ii. 427, 457, iii. 328, 386, 399.

Scopas, iii. 195.

Sculpture, as opposed to painting, i. 292, iii. 193;
  æsthetic effect of, iii. 200, 201;
  significance of drapery in, i. 296;
  antique, i. 309, iii. 194, 195;
  modern, iii. 195.

Secundus, Johannes, iii. 195.

Selfishness. See _Egoism_.

Self‐knowledge, ii. 423.

Self‐renunciation, meaning of, iii. 423;
  the appearance of freedom in the phenomenon, i. 388, 389.

Seneca, i. 75, 246, 379, ii. 149, 234, 347, 350, 355‐358, 458.

Sensation, ii. 186‐191.

Senses, ii. 193‐200.

Sensibility, i. 13.

Sentimentality, i. 512, 513.

Serenity, i. 422, iii. 376.

Seriousness, as the opposite of laughter, ii. 280;
  as determining the tendency of life, iii. 149.

Sex, degree of, iii. 356.

Sextus Empiricus, i. 62, 93, 343, ii. 127.

Sexual impulse, difference between man and brute with reference to, i.
            171, iii. 309;
  significance and power of, i. 423, 425, 310, 312‐314, 376;
  physiological correlative of, iii. 314;
  its relation to happiness of life, iii. 376;
  voluntary renunciation of satisfaction of, i. 430, iii. 376.

Shaftesbury, iii. 397.

Shakers, iii. 449.

Shakspeare, i. 21, 268, 511, ii. 239, 254, 306, 315, iii. 210, 214, 216,
            321, 363, 369, 400, 457.

Shame, i. 424, iii. 379.

Shenstone, ii. 275.

Siècle, iii. 112 n.

Sight, sense of, ii. 193 _seq._

Simonists, iii. 305.

Simplicius, ii. 157.

Sirach, Jesus, iii. 352.

Sketches, value of, iii. 178.

Skull, explained from vertebræ iii. 85.

Slavery, as a wrong, i. 432.

Sleep, necessity of, ii. 337, 428, 462, 463, 466;
  action of vital force in, ii. 463, 466;
  positive character of, ii. 464;
  relation to brain life, ii. 465;
  relation to death, i. 358, iii. 267 _seq._

Socialists, iii. 250.

Socrates, i. 288, 343, ii. 107, 281, 363, iii. 299, 249, 252, 405.

Somnambulism, ii. 467, iii. 98 _seq._

Sömmering, iii. 21.

Sophist, distinguished from philosopher, ii. 362, 363.

Sophistry, i. 63, ii. 263, 264.

Sophocles, i. 21, 295, 328, iii. 214.

Soul, historical, iii. 2, 3, 13;
  opposition between soul and body, ii. 102‐104, 378;
  in what sense the word should be used, iii. 105;
  a motive which has led to the assumption of, ii. 409;
  theoretical and practical results of assumption, ii. 77, 409, 494.

Southey, ii. 427.

Space, ideality of, ii. 201‐204, 221;
  opposition between space and time with reference to abstract knowledge,
              i. 69, 70;
  union of space and time the condition of duration and matter, i. 10‐13,
              ii. 78;
  the framework of the phenomenal world, i. 187, 188;
  whether the world is limited in space, ii. 109
  (Cf. _Principium individuationis_).

Spallanzani, ii. 469.

Species, iii. 123.

_Spectator_, ii. 233.

Spinal cord, ii. 483‐484.

Spinoza, on benevolence, i. 486;
  biography of, i. 497;
  explanation and use of concepts, i. 111, ii. 241, 266;
  ethical teaching of, i. 114, 367, iii. 403;
  God of, iii. 106;
  on knowledge of Ideas, i. 231, 232 n.;
  on immortality, iii. 280, 291;
  on love, iii. 338;
  method of, i. 100 n., 108, ii. 212;
  his place in western philosophy, ii. 13 n.;
  rejection of spiritualism, ii. 177;
  conception of substance, i. 33, ii. 373, 391;
  rejection of teleology, iii. 91, 93, 94;
  on will, i. 164, 377, 385, ii. 120.

Spiritualism, ii, 177.

Stahl, i. 64.

State, the, i. 442‐448, 451, iii. 409‐411.

Statics, ii. 226.

Stewart, Dugald, ii. 226, 240.

Stobæus, i. 114, 117, 118, 378, 506 n., ii. 137, 319, 350.

Stoics, Stoicism, i. 113‐120, ii. 453.

Strauss, D. F., iii. 437, 457.

Stupidity, i. 30.

Style, ii. 44, 246, 247.

Suarez, i. 146, 162, 198 n., ii. 13, 89, 100.

Subject, the, has two parts, i. 132;
  of will, iii. 126;
  of knowing, i. 3, 6, 16, 123, 124, ii. 166‐169, 170 _seq._;
  pure, will‐less subject of knowing, i. 253 _seq._, iii. 128 _seq._

Sublime, the, i. 259‐268.

Substance, origin and content of concept, ii. 103, 104;
  principle of permanence of, ii. 78 _seq._;
  and accident, i. 12 _seq._, ii. 79, 80.

Succession, i. 9.

Suetonius, iii. 321.

Suffering, universality of, i. 399 _seq._;
  sanctifying power of, i. 511;
  of life, i. 401‐407, 417, iii. 114.

Sufism, iii. 423, 432.

Suicide, i. 408, 514‐520, iii. 117.

Suidas, ii. 98.

Sulzer, ii. 141.

Supernaturalism, ii. 369

Swift, iii. 399.

Swoon, the twin‐brother of death, iii. 256.

Sybarites, ii. 199.

Syllogism, ii. 292‐304.

Symbolism, i. 308 _seq._

Symmetry, analogy with rhythm iii. 240, 241.

Sympathy, definition and division, iii. 419.

Systems, philosophical, ground of interest in, ii. 360, 361;
  contrast between Schopenhauer’s and others, i. 32, ii. 180, 393;
  division of those starting from object, i. 33;
  error of those which proceed historically, i. 352;
  criteria of truth of, ii. 391.

Tatianites, iii. 439.

Tauler, iii. 434, 435.

Teleology, i. 201‐210, iii. 77‐95.

Tennemann, i. 67, ii. 12.

_Termini technici_, iii. 312.

Tersteegen, i. 496.

Tertullian, ii. 368, iii. 305, 439.

Thales, i. 33.

Theodicy, iii. 394, 404.

Theon of Smyrna, iii. 313.

Thilo, iii. 158.

Thing in itself, as opposed to phenomenon, i. 40, 44, 128, 142 145, 157,
            166, ii. 31, 168, 169, 402, 403, iii. 292;
  how knowledge of it can be attained, i. 41, 128, ii. 31, 174, 175, 404,
              405;
  in what sense it is the _will_, i. 142, ii. 407;
  why our knowledge of it is not exhaustive, i. 157, ii. 406, iii. 9, 24,
              25, 27, 286 _seq._;
  in history of philosophy, i. 220, ii. 30, 117, 174, 185, 380, 390, iii.
              45.

Tholuk, iii. 432.

Thorwaldsen, iii. 195.

Thracians, iii. 398.

Tiedemann, ii. 470.

Tien, ii. 97.

Time, nature of, i. 9, 44, ii. 205, iii. 12;
  ideality of, ii. 201, 204;
  _prædicabilia a priori_ of, 121 _seq._ (Cf. _Space_).

_Times_, the, i. 178 n., ii. 459, iii. 304, 450.

Tourtual, ii. 187.

Tragedy, i., 326‐330, iii. 212‐216. 454.

Transcendent, ii. 387.

Transcendental knowledge, i. 224;
  philosophy, ii. 11.

Travelling, æsthetic effect of, iii. 131.

Trent, decrees of Council of, iii. 441.

Treviranus, ii. 470, iii. 35.

Truth, definition, i. 30, ii. 308;
  foundation of, i. 100‐103;
  difference between conceivability and truth, ii. 278;
  relation to proof, i. 83, 84;
  power of, i. 45, 179.

Understanding, function of, i. 13, 14;
  identity of nature at different grades, i. 26, 28, 29;
  why sensibility is everywhere accompanied by, i. 30, 31, 228;
  misuse of word, ii. 241;
  defects and advantages of knowledge of, ii. 253;
  keenness of, i. 27, 245.

Ungewitter, iii. 304.

Universal, two kinds of, i. 301‐303, iii. 124, 125;
  knowledge of, ii. 335, 336;
  universal truths, ii. 308.

Upham, iii. 282.

Utopias, i. 451, iii. 331.

Valentinians, iii. 305, 438.

Vaninus, Jul. Cæsar, iii. 32, 106.

Vauvenarque, ii. 251.

Vedas, 9, 21, 114, 234, 266, 364 n., 458, 501, ii. 108 n., 362, iii. 303,
            307, 426, 427, 433, 467.

Velocity, ii. 226, 227.

Virgil, i. 293, 295.

Virtue, source of genuine, i. 475, 477, ii. 149, 252;
  cannot be taught, i. 475, ii. 149;
  relation to happiness, i. 466, iii. 420;
  distinguished from reasonableness, ii. 134;
  transition to asceticism, iii. 424, 425.

Voltaire, i. 327, 329, ii. 157, 277, 428, 469, iii. 178, 252, 368, 395.
            398, 404.

Vyaso, iii. 282.

Weeping, i. 486‐488, iii. 406.

Weighing, two ways of, ii. 227.

Whewell, ii. 323.

Wieland, i. 246, ii. 427, iii. 200.

Will, subject of, iii. 126;
  identity of subject of will and knowledge, 132;
  as the thing in itself, i. 142, ii. 407;
  contrast between will and its phenomenal appearance, i. 145, 166,
              213‐215, iii. 69‐71;
  objectification of, i. 130, 166‐168, ii. 468;
  assertion of, i. 421‐427, iii. 376‐381;
  denial of, i. 488‐514, iii. 420‐459.

Windischmann, iii. 307, 425 n.

Winkelmann, i. 289, 290, 292, 295, 309, 318, ii. 153.

Winkelried, Arnold von, ii. 134.

_Wirklichkeit_, i. 10.

Wit, i. 77, ii. 268, 277.

Wolf, i. 111, ii. 70 n., 90, 97, 102, 127, 225, 479, iii. 85.

Wordsworth, ii. 427.

Wrong, conception of, i. 431‐437.

Xenophanes, ii. 220, iii. 8.

Xenophon, i. 288.

Yama, iii. 258.

Yang, i. 187.

Yin, i. 187.

Y‐King, i. 188, 343.

Youth, i. 324, iii. 304.

Yunghahn, iii. 112.

Zaccaria, Abbé, iii. 441.

Zend Avesta, 111. 391, 446.

Zeno, i. 117 118.





CORRIGENDA AND ADDENDA IN VOL. I.


Page xxxii. _insert_

Preface to the Third Edition.

What is true and genuine would more easily gain room in the world if it
were not that those who are incapable of producing it are also sworn to
prevent it from succeeding. This fact has already hindered and retarded,
when indeed it has not choked, many a work that should have been of
benefit to the world. For me the consequence of this has been, that
although I was only thirty years old when the first edition of this work
appeared, I live to see this third edition not earlier than my seventy‐
second year. Yet for this I find comfort in the words of Petrarch: _Si
quis tota die currens, pervenit ad vesperam satis est_ (_de vera
Sapientia_, p. 140). If I also have at last arrived, and have the
satisfaction at the end of my course of seeing the beginning of my
influence, it is with the hope that, according to an old rule it will
endure long in proportion to the lateness of its beginning.

In this third edition the reader will miss nothing that was contained in
the second, but will receive considerably more, for, on account of the
additions that have been made in it, it has, with the same type, 136 pages
more than the second.

Seven years after the appearance of the second edition I published two
volumes of “Parerga and Paralipomena.” What is included under the latter
name consists of additions to the systematic exposition of my philosophy,
and would have found its right place in these volumes, but I was obliged
to find a place for it then where I could, as it was very doubtful whether
I would live to see this third edition. It will be found in the second
volume of the said “Parerga,” and will be easily recognised from the
headings of the chapters.

FRANKFORT‐ON‐THE‐MAINE,
_September 1859_.

Page  xiv. line 9, _for_ “pancorum” _read_ “paucorum.”
"    xix.  "  17, _for_ “alchemists” _read_ “adepts.”
"     xx.  "  10, _after_ “there” _insert_ “unanimous.”
"    xxi.  "   3, _for_ “will appeal to any thinking mind no matter when
            it comprehends it” _read_ “will also some time be comprehended
            by another thinking mind.”
"   xxii. last line, _after_ “not” _insert_ “in this case.”
"  xxiii. line 26, _for_ “conceptions” _read_ “conception.”
"    "     "   32, _for_ “origin” _read_ “stem.”
"   xxiv.  "   20, _for_ “a chromatic” _read_ “an achromatic.”
"      6, line 15, _for_ “universality” _read_ “common or reciprocal
            nature.”
"     21,  "   31, _for_ “Σιδωλ” _read_ “Ειδωλ.”
"     31,  "    7, _for_ “micrometre” _read_ “micrometer.”
"     41,  "   11, _for_ “θαυμαξειν” _read_ “θαυμαζειν.”
"     45,  "   22, _after_ “its” _insert_ “iron.”
"     45,  "   23, _for_ “extend to” _read_ “quench.”
"     48,  "   31, _for_ “λογιμον” _read_ “λογικον.”
"     49,  "   22, _after_ “to” _insert_ “abstract”.
"     50,  "   14, _after_ “function” _insert_ “the construction of the
            concept.”
"     62,  "   26, _for_ “Kallisthenes” _read_ “Callisthenes.”
"     75,  "    1, _for_ “fictum” _read_ “fictam.”
"     91,  "   18, _for_ “latter” _read_ “former.”
"     93, lines 8 and 33, _for_ “νουμενον” _read_ “νοουμενον.”
"     99, line 17, _for_ “42” _read_ “32.”
"    114,  "    7, _for_ “ευδαι μονειν” _read_ “ενδαιμονειν.”
"    116  note, _for_ “εφαρμοεξειν” _read_ “εφαρμοζειν.”
"    117, line, 30, _for_ “ψνχης” _read_ “ψυχης.”
"    118, lines 10, 12, _for_ “Kleanthes” _read_ “Cleanthes.”
"    119, line  7, _for_ “philospher” _read_ “philosopher.”
"    141,  "   18, _for_ “Σστιν” _read_ “Εστιν.”
"    146,  "   23, _for_ “became” _read_ “become.”
"    157, line  4, _for_ “casuality” _read_ “causality.”
"    166,  "    3, _insert_ § 25.
"    169,  "    5, _for_ “Laertes” _read_ “Laertius.”
"    172,  "   32, _for_ “casuality” _read_ “causality.”
"    182,  "    8, _for_ “quidities” _read_ “quiddities.”
"    184,  "   30, _for_ “this” _read_ “thus.”
"    205,  "   35, _for_ “casuality” _read_ “causality.”
"    220,  "   32, _for_ “ειδη” _read_ “ειδη.”
"    222,  "   24, _for_ “casuality” _read_ “causality.”
"    223, lines 4 and 33, _for_ “casuality” _read_ “causality.”
"    224, line  8, _for_ “casuality” _read_ “causality.”
"    230,  "   19, _for_ “Apollo of Belvedere” _read_ “Apollo Belvedere.”
"    231, last line, _for_ “Meus” _read_ “Mens.”

Page 247, line 17, _for_ “Great wits to madness sure are near allied”
            _read_ “Great wits are sure to madness near allied.” The lines
            are not from Pope, as Schopenhauer says, but from Dryden’s
            “Absalom and Achitophel,” Pt. i., l. 163.
"   251,  "   15, _for_ “appear” _read_ “appears.”
"   258,  "   18, _for_ “Ahrimines” _read_ “Ahriman.”
"   276, lines 9 and 11, _for_ “casuality” and “casual” _read_ “causality”
            and “causal;” line 23, _for_ “Timaus” _read_ “Timæus.”
"   382, line 32, _for_ “as” _read_ “but.”
"   396,  "    5, _for_ “αναγκη” _read_ “αναγκῃ.”
"   423,  "   35, _for_ “principiu mindividuationis” _read_ “principium
            individuationis.”
"   425,  "    7, _no comma after_ “βασιλειαν.”
"   429,  "   25, _after_ “chapter” _insert_ “of his.”
"   445, last line, _for_ “ζην” _read_ “ζῃν.”
"   453, lines 4 and 5, _for_ “παρ” _read_ “πας.”
"   455, line 10, _for_ “prineipium” _read_ “principium.”
"   463,  "   27, _for_ “ever” _read_ “every.”
"   467,  "    5, _for_ “πρως” _read_ “προς.”
"   496,  "   25, _for_ “Wiedergeborennen” _read_ “Wiedergeborenen.”
"   520,  "    9, _for_ “though this is hard to find out” _read_ “which is
            certainly hard to explain.”
"   531,  "   16, _for_ “wish to fruition” _read_ “desire to aversion.”






FOOTNOTES


    1 This chapter is connected with the last half of § 27 of the first
      volume.

    2 _De Augm. Scient._, L. vi. c. 3.

    3 This chapter is connected with § 23 of the first volume.

    4 This chapter and the following one are connected with § 28 of the
      first volume.

    5 Let me here remark in passing that, judging from the German
      literature since Kant, one would necessarily believe that Hume’s
      whole wisdom had consisted in his obviously false scepticism with
      regard to the law of causality, for this alone is everywhere
      referred to. In order to know Hume one must read his “Natural
      History of Religion” and his “Dialogues on Natural Religion.” There
      one sees him in his greatness, and these, together with Essay 21 “Of
      National Characters,” are the writings on account of which—I know of
      nothing that says more for his fame—even to the present day, he is
      everywhere hated by the English clergy.

    6 This chapter is connected with § 29 of the first volume.

    7 In the _Siècle_, 10th April 1859, there appears, very beautifully
      written, the story of a squirrel that was magically drawn by a
      serpent into its very jaws: “Un voyageur qui vient de parcourir
      plusieurs provinces de l’ile de Java cite un exemple remarqueable du
      pouvoir facinateur des serpens. Le voyageur dont il est question
      commençait à gravir Junjind, un des monts appelés par les Hollandais
      Pepergebergte. Après avoir pénétré dans une épaisse forêt, il
      aperçut sur les branches d’un kijatile un écureuil de Java à tête
      blanche, folâtrant avec la grâce et l’agilité qui distinguent cette
      charmante espèce de rongeurs. Un nid sphérique, formé de brins
      flexible et de mousse, placé dans les parties les plus élevées de
      l’arbre, a l’enfourchure de deux branches, et une cavité dans le
      tronc, semblaient les points de mire de ses jeux. A peine s’en
      était‐il éloigné qu’il y revenait avec une ardeur extrême. On était
      dans le mois de Juillet, et probablement l’écureuil avait en haut
      ses petits, et dans le bas le magasin à fruits. Bientôt il fut comme
      saisi d’effroi, ces mouvemens devinrent désordonnés, on eut dit
      qu’il cherchait toujours à mettre un obstacle entre lui et certaines
      parties de l’arbre: puis il se tapit et resta immobile entre deux
      branches. Le voyageur eut le sentiment d’un danger pour l’innocente
      bête, mais il ne pouvait deviner lequel. Il approcha, et un examen
      attentif lui fit découvrir dans un creux du tronc une couleuvre
      lieu, dardant ses yeux fixes dans la direction de l’écureuil. Notre
      voyageur trembla pour le pauvre écureuil. La couleuvre était si
      attentive à sa proie qu’elle ne semblait nullement remarquer la
      présence d’un homme. Notre voyageur, qui était armé, aurait donc
      prevenir en aide à l’infortuné rongeur en tuant le serpent. Mais la
      science l’emporta sur la pitié, et il voulut voir quelle issue
      aurait le drame. Le dénoûment fut tragique. L’écureuil ne tarda
      point à pousser un cri plaintif qui, pour tous ceux qui le
      connaissent, dénote le voisinage d’un serpent. Il avança un peu,
      essaya de reculer, revint encore en avant, tâche de retourner en
      arrière. Mais s’approcha toujours plus du reptile. La couleuvre,
      roulée en spirale, la tête au dessus des anneaux, et immobile comme
      un morceau de bois, ne le quittait pas du regard. L’écureuil, de
      branche en branche, et descendant toujours plus bas, arriva jusqu’à
      la partie nue du tronc. Alors le pauvre animal ne tenta même plus de
      fuir le danger. Attiré par une puissance invincible, et comme poussé
      par le vertige, il se précipita dans la gueule du serpent, qui
      s’ouvrit tout à coup démesurément pour le recevoir. Autant la
      couleuvre avait été inerte jusque là autant elle devint active dès
      qu’elle fut en possession de sa proie. Déroulant ses anneaux et
      prenant sa course de bas en haut avec une agilité inconcevable, sa
      reptation la porta en un clin d’œil au sommet de l’arbre, où elle
      alla sans doute digérer et dormir.”

      In this example we see what spirit animates nature, for it reveals
      itself in it, and how very true is the saying of Aristotle quoted
      above (p. 106). This story is not only important with regard to
      fascination, but also as an argument for pessimism. That an animal
      is surprised and attacked by another is bad; still we can console
      ourselves for that; but that such a poor innocent squirrel sitting
      beside its nest with its young is compelled, step by step,
      reluctantly, battling with itself and lamenting, to approach the
      wide, open jaws of the serpent and consciously throw itself into
      them is revolting and atrocious. What monstrous kind of nature is
      this to which we belong!

    8 “_Augustini de civit. Dei_,” L. xi. c. 27, deserves to be compared
      as an interesting commentary on what is said here.

    9 This chapter is connected with §§ 30‐32 of the first volume.

   10 This chapter is connected with §§ 33‐34 of the first volume.

   11 This chapter is connected with § 36 of the first volume.

   12 There is nothing else in the world but the vulgar.

   13 In Medwin’s “Conversations of Lord Byron,” p. 333.

   14 This chapter is connected with the second half of § 36 of the first
      volume.

   15 _Rgya Tcher Rol Pa, Hist. de Bouddha Chakya Mouni, trad. du
      Tibétain_, p. _Foucaux_, 1848, p. 91 et 99.

   16 In German inferiors are sometimes addressed as _Er_ instead of
      _Sie_.—_Trs._

   17 This chapter is connected with § 38 of the first volume.

   18 This chapter is connected with § 49 of the first volume.

   19 This chapter is connected with § 43 of the first volume.

   20 This chapter is connected with §§ 44‐50 of the first volume.

   21 This chapter is connected with § 51 of the first volume.

   22 Lichtenberg (“_Vermischte Schriften_,” new edition, Göttingen, 1884,
      vol. iii. p. 19) quotes Stanislaus Leszczynski as having said, “_La
      modestie devroit être la vertu de ceux, a qui les autres manquent_.”

   23 This chapter is connected with § 51 of the first volume.

   24 Let me remark in passing that from this opposition of ποιησις and
      ἱστορια the origin, and also the peculiar significance, of the first
      word comes out with more than ordinary distinctness; it signifies
      that which is made, invented, in opposition to what is discovered.

   25 This chapter is connected with § 52 of the first volume.

   26 It would be a false objection that sculpture and painting are also
      merely in space; for their works are connected, not directly, but
      yet indirectly, with time, for they represent life, movement,
      action. And it would be just as false to say that poetry, as speech,
      belongs to time alone: this is also true only indirectly of the
      words; its matter is all existent, thus spatial.

   27 This chapter is connected with § 54 of the first volume.

   28 _In gladiatoriis pugnis timidos et supplices, et, ut vivere liceat,
      obsecrantes etiam odisse solemus; fortes et animosos, et se acriter
      ipsos morti offerentes servare cupimus_ (_Cic. pro Milone_, c. 34).

   29 The suspension of the _animal_ functions is sleep, that of the
      _organic_ functions is death.

   30 There is only _one present_, and this is always: for it is the sole
      form of actual existence. One must attain to the insight that the
      _past_ is not _in itself_ different from the present, but only in
      our apprehension, which has time as its form, on account of which
      alone the present exhibits itself as different from the past. To
      assist this insight, imagine all the events and scenes of human
      life, bad and good, fortunate and unfortunate, pleasing and
      terrible, as they successively present themselves in the course of
      time and difference of places, in the most checkered
      multifariousness and variety, as _at once and together_, and always
      present in the _Nunc stans_, while it is only apparently that now
      this and now that is; then what the objectification of the will to
      live really means will be understood. Our pleasure also in _genre_
      painting depends principally upon the fact that it fixes the
      fleeting scenes of life. The dogma of metempsychosis has proceeded
      from the feeling of the truth which has just been expressed.

   31 This posthumous essay is to be found in the “Essays on Suicide and
      the Immortality of the Soul” by the late David Hume, Basil, 1799,
      sold by James Decker. By this reprint at Bâle these two works of one
      of the greatest thinkers and writers of England were rescued from
      destruction, when in their own land, in consequence of the stupid
      and utterly contemptible bigotry which prevailed, they had been
      suppressed through the influence of a powerful and insolent
      priesthood, to the lasting shame of England. They are entirely
      passionless, coldly rational investigations of the two subjects
      named.

   32 Death says: Thou art the product of an act which should not have
      been; therefore to expiate it thou must die.

   33 _Sancara, s. de theologumenis Vedanticorum_, ed. F. H. H.
      Windischmann, p. 37; “_Oupnekhat_,” vol. i. p. 387 _et_ p. 78;
      Colebrooke’s “Miscellaneous Essays,” vol. i. p. 363.

   34 The etymology of the word Nirvana is variously given. According to
      Colebrooke (“Transact. of the Royal Asiat. Soc.,” vol. i. p. 566) it
      comes from _va_, “to blow,” like the wind, and the prefixed negative
      _nir_, and thus signifies a calm, but as an adjective
      “extinguished.” Obry, also, _Du Nirvana Indien_, p. 3, says:
      “_Nirvanam en sanscrit signifie à la lettre extinction, telle que
      celle d’un feu_.” According to the “Asiatic Journal,” vol. xxiv. p.
      735, the word is really Neravana, from _nera_, “without,” and
      _vana_, “life,” and the meaning would be _annihilatio_. In “Eastern
      Monachism,” by Spence Hardy, p. 295, Nirvana is derived from _vana_,
      “sinful desires,” with the negative _nir_. J. J. Schmidt, in his
      translation of the history of the Eastern Mongolians, says that the
      Sanscrit word Nirvana is translated into Mongolian by a phrase which
      signifies “departed from misery,” “escaped from misery.” According
      to the learned lectures of the same in the St. Petersburg Academy,
      Nirvana is the opposite of Sanfara, which is the world of constant
      re‐birth, of longings and desires, of illusion of the senses and
      changing forms, of being born, growing old, becoming sick, and
      dying. In the Burmese language the word Nirvana, according to the
      analogy of other Sanscrit words, becomes transformed into Nieban,
      and is translated by “complete vanishing.” See Sangermano’s
      “Description of the Burmese Empire,” translated by Tandy, Rome,
      1833, § 27. In the first edition of 1819 I also wrote Nieban,
      because we then knew Buddhism only from meagre accounts of the
      Burmese.

   35 “_Disputatio de corporum habitudine, animæ, hujusque virium
      indice._” _Harderov._, 1789, § 9.

   36 Lichtenberg says in his miscellaneous writings (Göttingen, 1801,
      vol. ii. p. 447): “In England it was proposed to castrate thieves.
      The proposal is not bad: the punishment is very severe; it makes
      persons contemptible, and yet leaves them still fit for trades; and
      if stealing is hereditary, in this way it is not propagated.
      Moreover, the courage ceases, and since the sexual passion so
      frequently leads to thefts, this cause would also disappear. The
      remark that women would so much the more eagerly restrain their
      husbands from stealing is roguish, for as things are at present they
      risk losing them altogether.”

   37 I have not ventured to express myself distinctly here: the courteous
      reader must therefore translate the phrase into Aristophanic
      language.

   38 The fuller discussion of this subject will be found in the
      “Parerga,” vol. ii. § 92 of the first edition (second edition, pp.
      167‐170).

   39 [The appendix to this chapter was added only in the third edition of
      the German, and is meant to explain, in consistency with
      Schopenhauer’s general principles, the wide prevalence of the
      practice of pederasty, among different nations and in different
      ages. It is omitted.—_Trs._]

   40 This chapter is connected with § 60 of the first volume.

   41 This chapter is connected with §§ 56‐59 of the first volume. Also
      chapters 11 and 12 of the second volume of the “Parerga and
      Paralipomena” should be compared with it.

   42 All that we lay hold of resists us because it has its own will,
      which must be overcome.

   43 This chapter is connected with §§ 55, 62, 67 of the first volume.

   44 This chapter is connected with § 68 of the first volume. Chapter 14
      of the second volume of the Parerga should also be compared with it.

   45 If, on the contrary, asceticism is admitted, the list of the
      ultimate motives of human action, given in my prize essay on the
      foundation of morals, namely: (1) our own good, (2) the ill of
      others, and (3) the good of others, must be supplemented by a
      fourth, our own ill; which I merely mention here in passing in the
      interests of systematic consistency. In the essay referred to this
      fourth motive had to be passed over in silence, for the question
      asked was stated in the spirit of the philosophical ethics
      prevailing in Protestant Europe.

   46 _Cf._ F. H. H. Windischmann’s _Sancara, sive de theologumenis
      Vedanticorum_, pp. 116, 117, 121; and also _Oupnekhat_, vol. i. pp.
      340, 356, 360.

   47 Cf. _Die beiden Grundprobleme der Ethik_, p. 274 (second edition, p.
      271).

   48 If we keep in view the essential immanence of our knowledge and of
      all knowledge, which arises from the fact that it is a secondary
      thing which has only appeared for the ends of the will, it then
      becomes explicable to us that all mystics of all religions
      ultimately attain to a kind of ecstasy, in which all and every
      knowledge, with its whole fundamental form, object and subject,
      entirely ceases, and only in this sphere, which lies beyond all
      knowledge, do they claim to have reached their highest goal, for
      they have then attained to the sphere in which there is no longer
      any subject and object, and consequently no more knowledge, just
      because there is no more will, the service of which is the sole
      destiny of knowledge.

      Now, whoever has comprehended this will no longer regard it as
      beyond all measure extravagant that Fakirs should sit down, and,
      contemplating the tip of their nose, seek to banish all thought and
      perception, and that in many passages of the Upanischads
      instructions are given to sink oneself, silently and inwardly
      pronouncing the mysterious Oum, in the depths of one’s own being,
      where subject and object and all knowledge disappear.

   49 _S. Bonaventuræ vita S. Francisci_, ch. 8. K. Hase, “_Franz von
      Assisi_,” ch. 10. “_I cantici di S. Francesco,_” _editi da Schlosser
      e Steinle., Francoforto, s.M._, 1842.

   50 _Michælis de Molinos manuductio spiritualis; hispanice 1675, italice
      1680, latine 1687, gallice in libro non adeo raro, cui titulus:
      Recueil de diverses pièces concernant le quiétisme, ou Molinos et
      ses disciples. Amstd., 1688._

   51 Matt. xix. 11 _seq._; Luke xx. (1 Thess. iv. 3; 1 John iii. 3); Rev.
      35‐37; 1 Cor. vii. 1‐11 and 25‐40, xiv. 4.

   52 Cf. “_Ueber den Willen in der Natur_,” second edition, p. 124; third
      edition, p. 135.

   53 For example, John xii. 25, 31, xiv. 30, xv. 18, 19, xvi. 33; Col.
      ii. 20; Eph. ii. 1‐3; I John ii. 15‐17, iv. 4, 5. On this
      opportunity one may see how certain Protestant theologians, in their
      efforts to misinterpret the text of the New Testament in conformity
      with their rationalistic, optimistic, and unutterably shallow view
      of life, go so far that they actually falsify this text in their
      translations. Thus H. A. Schott, in his new version given with the
      Griesbach text of 1805, has translated the word κοσμος, John xv. 18,
      19, by _Judœi_, 1 John iv. 4, by _profani homines_; and Col. ii. 20,
      στοιχεια του κοσμον by _elementa Judaica_; while Luther everywhere
      renders the word honestly and correctly by “_Welt_” (world).

   54 _Unusquisque tantum juris habet, quantum potentiâ valet_ (_Tract.
      pol._, c. 2 § 8). _Fides alicui data tamdiu rata manet, quamdiu
      ejus, qui fidem dedit, non mutatur voluntas_ (_Ibid._, § 12).
      _Uniuscujusque jus potentiâ ejus definetur_ (_Eth._ iv., _pr._ 37,
      _schol._ 1.) Especially chap. 16 of the _Tractatus theologico‐
      politicus_ is the true compendium of the immorality of Spinoza’s
      philosophy.

   55 [In preparing this Index Frauenstädt’s _Schopenhauer‐Lexikon_ has
      been freely used.—_Trs._]